LAKE COUNTY, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-14 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 26-0048, passed 1-13-2026
State legislation current through ILCS Pamphlet 2024 #6
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
   ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR LAKE COUNTY REVISING, AMENDING,
RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE
LAKE COUNTY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of Lake County are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance
for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the County and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Illinois empower and
authorize Lake County to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Lake County Board has authorized a general compilation, revision
and codification of the ordinances of Lake County of a general and permanent
nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of Lake
County and for immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the County that this ordinance take effect at an early date.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LAKE COUNTY BOARD:
Section 1. The general ordinances of Lake County as revised, amended, restated,
codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute
the Code of Ordinances for Lake County, Illinois.
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
Title I: General Provisions
Title III: Administration
Title V: Public Works and Solid Waste
Title VII: Traffic Code
Title IX: General Regulations
Title XI: Business Regulations
Title XIII: General Offenses
Title XV: Land Usage
Title XVII: Health
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such Code; except:
   a.   Such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred
or any right established prior to the effective date of this ordinance;
   b.   Such repeal shall not affect the provision of ordinances levying taxes,
appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises,
or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements,
authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the
purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements,
plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of
streets or other public places;
   c.   Failure to include a reference to an ordinance shall not affect the
substance of any ordinance;
   d.   Such repeal shall not affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature; and
   e.   Such repeal shall not affect any ordinance, or amendment to an
ordinance, not incorporated into the Code nor pertaining to subjects not
contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Lake County Board and the Clerk of Lake County is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office
of the Clerk.
Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any notices thereof as required by
law have been given.
Section 6. This ordinance is declared necessary for the immediate preservation
of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the people of Lake County
and shall take effect in 30 days.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by Lake County, Illinois on this 13th day of January, 2015.
Staff Summary
•   For 70 plus years Lake County has been enacting codes and ordinances. Up to
this point, these codes and ordinances have been maintained by independent
departments and offices. It is common practice for governments to codify their
ordinances in an effort to make them more easily viewable to the public.
•   The purpose of codification is to compile all of the codes into one
document, adopt uniform formatting, provide referencing between complimentary
codes, and to create a digital code book that is accessible from the website
and easier for our customers to use.
•   Lake County issued an RFP and contracted with American Legal Publishing to
review codes, digitize the older paper codes, and develop a draft codified
ordinance. The draft code was then reviewed multiple times by each department,
office or agency and also by the State's Attorney's Office.
•   This action compiles existing codes and does not change the law or legal
content or effect of the existing code. This action accepts and approves the
digital code provided by American Legal, ratifies all code changes passed by
the board from May of 2014 through January of 2015, and requests American Legal
codify those codes and incorporate them into the final code to be published on
the website.
•   Here forward ordinances and amendments to ordinances will be incorporated
into the digital code within days of passage and will be incorporated into the
four printed copies a few times per year.
•   The codified ordinance can be viewed online at: <http_://www.amlegal.com/
library/il/lakecounty.shtml>
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
   
10.18   Procedure for maintenance of the code of ordinances
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for Lake County, Illinois, shall be designated as
“The Lake County Code” or “this code of ordinances” and may be so cited.
(55 ILCS 5/5-29003)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
otherwise defined in this code of ordinances. If there is a conflict in
definition between a word in any chapter or a word defined in this section, the
definition of the word in that chapter will apply.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD or COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Lake County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COUNTIES CODE. The Illinois Counties Code, 55 ILCS 5/1-1001 et seq.
   COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois.
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER. HERETO- FORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at
any time after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, city, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies
thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized
public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The area between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a
roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The county code hereby adopted, and as
hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new titles,
chapters, or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN and IN WRITING. May include printing, electronic, and any other mode
of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person
is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law,
it shall be:
      (1)   The proper handwriting of such person or, in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord”.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage.
      (2)   Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular
meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition or otherwise, shall be
construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   (1)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the
last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be
excluded.
      (2)   If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more county
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the County
Board may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, insofar as they are the same as those
of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the county shall be as set by the Time Standardization
Act (5 ILCS 440/1 et seq.).
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   To the extent possible, all provisions shall be given their full intended
application. If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of
these codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the specific
provision shall control over the general provision and the conflict shall be
construed so as to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the
question of the subject matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re- adopted as a new code of ordinances by
the Lake County Board.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section or provision of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
section or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or its application, and to this end the provisions
of this code of ordinances are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the county exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. These references
shall also include the designee or agent of the officer or office, unless the
law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
   (B)   If a prior ordinance has not been incorporated and enumerated herein,
it shall retain its full force and effect and not be deemed repealed until such
time as it is enumerated herein or otherwise repealed.
   (C)   Any ordinance specifically providing for an effective date after a
certain number of days after adoption and such term has been met prior to the
adoption of this codification shall continue in full force and effect as of the
original effective date.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the county; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Lake
County Board or a certain county officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose, effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to those technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the county. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (55 ILCS 5/5-1011)
      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The county shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances
of the county, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history
by “(1977 Code, §       )”.
§ 10.18 PROCEDURE FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Responsibility for maintenance of the Lake County Code of Ordinances
is placed within the Lake County Board Office. Books will not be given to the
individual Board members but be kept in the Lake County Board Office. The
Office of the Lake County Clerk, Office of the Lake County Administrator, and
the Lake County State’s Attorney will also receive books.
   (B)   The procedure for the maintenance of the books will be as follows.
Revisions will be typed by a secretary in the Lake County Board Office and
copies made for each book. These copies will also be sent to the Office of the
Lake County Clerk, Office of the Lake County Administrator, and the Lake County
State’s Attorney’s Office with instructions to insert the revisions in the
proper ordinance.
(1977 Code, Introductory matter)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
county for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $1,000 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty does not
restrict the imposition of civil penalties provided for failure to make returns
or pay any taxes levied by the county.
Statutory reference:
   Limitations on penalties, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1113
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COUNTY OFFICIALS AND DEPARTMENTS
      
31.   COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
33.   PURCHASING
      
34.   TAXATION
      
35.   FINANCES, FEES, AND FUNDS
      
36.   RESERVED
      
37.   COUNTY-WIDE POLICIES AND SERVICES
CHAPTER 30: COUNTY OFFICIALS AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
Lake County Board
   
30.01   Election of Board members
   
30.02   Terms of office after reapportionment
   
30.03   Voting precinct maps; boundaries
   
30.04   Appointments made by Lake County Chair and Board
   
30.05   Method of election of Board
   
30.06   Number of districts and Board members
   
30.07   Compensation
   
30.08   Districts in compliance with Counties Code; copies available
   
30.09   Method of election of Board Chair
Officials
   
30.20   Director of Finance and Administrative Services, established; duties
   
30.21   Animal Warden, established
   
30.22   Supervisor of Assessments, established
   
30.23   Lake County Clerk
   
30.24   County Engineer/Director of Transportation
County Administrator
   
30.35   Position created
   
30.36   Qualifications
   
30.37   Serving at the pleasure of the Lake County Board
   
30.38   Duties
   
30.39   Assistance
   
30.40   Restrictions on duties and authority
   
30.41   Effective date
Departments
   
30.55   Department of Public Works
   
30.56   Department of Information Technology/Map Services
   
30.57   Department of Planning, Building and Development
   
30.58   Human Resources
   
30.59   Division of Transportation
LAKE COUNTY BOARD
§ 30.01 ELECTION OF BOARD MEMBERS.
   (A)   County Board members shall be elected as set by state statute as found
in the Illinois Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.).
   (B)   The primary election for the purpose of nomination of candidates for
County Board members shall be as set by state statute as found in the Illinois
Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.).
(1977 Code, § 5:1-1) (Ord. passed 12-11-1973)
§ 30.02 TERMS OF OFFICE AFTER REAPPORTIONMENT.
   (A)   The County Board Districts shall be divided publicly by lot into three
groups as equally as possible. To wit, one group shall contain seven Districts;
a second group shall contain six Districts; and a third group shall contain six
Districts.
   (B)   (1)   Each County Board District shall be identified by its number.
Balls, inscribed with the number of each County Board District, shall be placed
in an opaque container. The container holding all of the 19 balls shall be
thoroughly mixed by the Chief Judge of the 19th Judicial Circuit. The Chief
Judge shall randomly draw out each ball from the container, one at a time.
      (2)   The group of Districts corresponding to the first seven balls drawn
shall be those Districts whose members shall be elected for successive terms of
two years, four years, and four years. The second group of Districts
corresponding to the next six balls drawn shall be those Districts whose
members shall be elected for successive terms of four years, two years, and
four years. The third group of Districts corresponding to the last six balls
drawn shall be those Districts whose members shall be elected for successive
terms of four years, four years, and two years.
   (C)   All County Board member terms established by the process cited in
subsections (A) and (B) above shall commence on December 5, 2022.
(1977 Code, § 1:8-4) (Ord. 12-0706, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 22-0970, passed 7-
12-2022)
§ 30.03 VOTING PRECINCT MAPS; BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The voting precincts in this county shall be set forth on the maps
kept available for inspection at the office of the Lake County Clerk.
   (B)   Each voting precinct in the county shall be described on a separate
list by streets and addresses. The list will be maintained by the Lake County
Clerk and kept available for inspection at the office of the Lake County Clerk.
   (C)   The Lake County Clerk shall prepare copies of the precinct maps which
are suitable for publication and arrange for wide distribution of the maps in
the various newspapers circulated in the county.
   (D)   The Lake County Clerk shall distribute appropriate precinct maps to
each Precinct Committeeperson, Party Central Committee, and other persons or
groups requesting them.
   (E)   All parts of existing ordinances or resolutions in conflict with the
provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent (and only to that
extent) of the conflict.
(1977 Code, § 5:1-2) (Ord. passed 11-12-1991)
§ 30.04 APPOINTMENTS MADE BY LAKE COUNTY CHAIR AND BOARD.
   (A)   All units of local government and agencies for which appointments are
made by the County Board Chair and County Board shall, at a minimum, provide:
      (1)   An organizational chart;
      (2)   A budget document for the current year;
      (3)   The most recently completed audited financial statements, including
internal control and management letters;
      (4)   Any required legal filings with state or regulatory agencies;
      (5)   The most recent version of all reports submitted to the governing
body of the unit of local government or agency;
      (6)   The bylaws of the unit of local government or agency;
      (7)   Employment policies, including but not limited to personnel
contracts; and
      (8)   Proof of insurance bonds for all office-holders (if required).
   (B)   The aforementioned information shall be provided to the County Board
Chair’s office no later than January 1 on an annual basis, or within 14
business days upon written request by the County Board Chair.
   (C)   All units of local government or agencies for which a majority of
member appointments are made by the County Board Chair and County Board shall,
upon discovery, immediately disclose to the County Board Chair’s office any
internal finding of non-compliance with any federal or state regulation or any
allegation of criminal activity involving the unit of local government or
agency, including allegations related to agents, officers, employees, or any
other person performing work on behalf of the unit of local government or
agency.
   (D)   Absent any policy listed above, an agency may be required to adopt as
a minimum standard the county’s policy where applicable and appropriate.
(Ord. 11-0733, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 30.05 METHOD OF ELECTION OF BOARD.
   The County Board to be elected commencing in 2022 shall be elected by single
member County Board Districts.
(1977 Code, § 1:8-2) (Ord. passed 4-10-2001; Ord. 11-0517, passed 6-14-2011;
Ord. 21-1876, passed 12-14-21)
§ 30.06 NUMBER OF DISTRICTS AND BOARD MEMBERS.
   The number of County Board Districts for the County Board to be elected
commencing in 2022 shall be 19, the boundaries of which shall be as set forth
in the apportionment plan as kept by the Lake County Clerk. The number of
County Board members to be elected from each district to be elected commencing
in 2022 shall be one.
(1977 Code, §§ 1:8-1, 1:8-2) (Ord. passed 5-14-1991; Ord. passed 4-10-2001;
Ord. 11-0517, passed 6-14-2011; Ord. 21-1876, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 30.07 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The method of compensation for the Board members shall be on an annual
basis, with the amount to be established in accordance with the applicable
provisions of state law and the resolution adopted by this County Board on
December 14, 2021.
   (B)   The compensation for the County Board Chair shall be as determined by
the County Board from time to time.
(1977 Code, §§ 1:8-1, 1:8-2) (Ord. passed 5-14-1991; Ord. passed 4-10-2001;
Ord. 11-0517, passed 6-14-2011; Ord. 21-1877, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 30.08 DISTRICTS IN COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTIES CODE; COPIES AVAILABLE.
   It is the finding and the determination of this County Board that each of
the above named districts are in compliance with the requirements set forth in
the Counties Code, which finding and determination is outlined in the
apportionment plan. A copy of the apportionment plan shall be filed with the
Lake County Clerk. The Lake County Clerk is hereby requested to forward a
certified copy of the apportionment plan to the Chair of the County Board and
to make certified copies of the apportionment plan available for distribution
free of charge to any registered voter of the county requesting a copy as is
required by the Counties Code (55 ILCS 5/2-3005).
(1977 Code, §§ 1:8-1, 1:8-2) (Ord. passed 5-14-1991; Ord. passed 4-10-2001;
Ord. 11-0517, passed 6-14-2011)
§ 30.09 METHOD OF ELECTION OF BOARD CHAIR.
   The Chair of the County Board shall be elected by the members of the County
Board.
(1977 Code, § 1:8-1) (Ord. passed 5-14-1991)
OFFICIALS
§ 30.20 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES, ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Department of Finance and Administrative Services is hereby
established.
   (B)   After screening candidates, the Financial and Administrative Committee
shall recommend and the Chair of the County Board shall appoint, subject to the
approval of the County Board, a Director of Finance and Administrative
Services, whose duties shall be as follows:
      (1)   Budget and appropriation preparation. Develop the annual budget and
appropriation ordinance for consideration by the Financial and Administrative
Committee, and prepare monthly statements reflecting the financial condition of
the county; and
      (2)   Administrative analysis. Subject to the request and approval of the
proper committees; make studies as to organization, operation, and procedural
methods; develop recommendations for greater efficiency; and assist in the
implementation of plans, operating methods, techniques, and procedures as may
be approved; and operate and maintain a public administration library.
(1977 Code, § 7:1)
   (C)   The general accounting function, including processing of all accounts
payable, payroll, IMRF, employee insurance program, and recording of all income
and receipts to the county shall be transferred from the Auditor’s Office to
the Office of the Director of Finance and Administrative Services.
(1977 Code, § 7:1)
   (D)   (1)   The Director of Finance and Administrative Services is hereby
assigned to perform those duties formerly performed by the Lake County Auditor
and any other ancillary duties that may be assigned by state law wherein the
Lake County Auditor is so referenced.
      (2)   The duties shall be accomplished in conjunction with the County
Administrator and under the supervision of the Financial and Administrative
Committee.
      (3)   The duties shall be in addition to those duties assigned to the
Director of Finance and Administrative Services by the County Board in
subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section.
(1977 Code, § 1:1-2)
(Res. passed 8-9-1960; Res. passed 12-12-1972; Res. passed 5-8-1979)
§ 30.21 ANIMAL WARDEN, ESTABLISHED.
   The Health and Community Services Committee is hereby authorized and
directed to employ an Animal Warden, and that a monthly salary range be set in
a sum as set by the County Board from time to time, effective as of September
1, 1958, and the salary shall be paid out of the Lake County Rabies Fund.
(1977 Code, § 7:1) (Res. passed 8-8-1958)
§ 30.22 SUPERVISOR OF ASSESSMENTS, ESTABLISHED.
   The Office of the Lake County Supervisor of Assessments is hereby
established, and the Lake County Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to
publish a notice of examination for the position of the Supervisor of
Assessments.
(1977 Code, § 7:1) (Res. passed 10-29-1957)
§ 30.23 LAKE COUNTY CLERK.
   Provisions concerning the Lake County Clerk in connection with the radio
communication system and the IMRF are included in §§
35.21 and
35.50.
§ 30.24 COUNTY ENGINEER/DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION.
   The Office of the Lake County Engineer/Director of Transportation is hereby
established. The chair of the County Board shall appoint the County Engineer/
Director of Transportation upon the advice and consent of the County Board. The
County Engineer/Director shall enjoy all powers and duties provided by state
statute, 605 ILCS 5/5-101 et seq.
(Res. passed 2-10-2015)
COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR
§ 30.35 POSITION CREATED.
   There is herewith created, under the Classification and Compensation
Ordinances of the county, the position which shall be known and designated as
“County Administrator”. This County Administrator shall be appointed by the
Chair of the County Board with the approval of the County Board, in accordance
with the County Board Rules.
(1977 Code, § 1:1) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 30.36 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The County Administrator shall be a person having demonstrated
administrative and executive ability as shown by at least five years of
experience in private or public employment in a responsible or executive
position requiring the planning and execution of work programs of
administrative operations, the budgeting and control of expenditures, and the
coordination of varied activities, and who shall conform substantially to the
requirements of a job description to be established under the auspices of the
County Personnel System.
(1977 Code, § 1:1) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 30.37 SERVING AT THE PLEASURE OF THE LAKE COUNTY BOARD.
   The County Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the County Board,
provided that he or she may not be removed except after at least ten days’ and
not more than 30 days’ written notice, and, if he or she requests in writing,
not until after a public hearing at a regular meeting of the County Board, in
accordance with procedures as are prescribed by the Board.
(1977 Code, § 1:1) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 30.38 DUTIES.
   (A)   The County Administrator shall generally advise, assist, act as agent
for and be responsible to the County Board for the proper and efficient
administration of those affairs of the county as are placed in his or her
charge by the County Board. He or she shall be responsible for the enforcement
of ordinances, orders, or regulations as directed by the County Board. All
appointed department heads under the jurisdiction of the County Board shall
report to the County Administrator.
   (B)   In order to serve effectively, the County Administrator shall:
      (1)   Recommend an annual county budget and exercise continuous budgetary
supervision in conjunction with the Director of Finance and Administrative
Services;
      (2)   Confer with and assist all department heads and receive reports of
the activities of the departments under the jurisdiction of the Board;
      (3)   Recommend improved or standardized forms and procedures;
      (4)   Assist in the coordination of the functions and work, of all
officers, committees, institutions, and departments of the county, and devise
ways and means whereby efficiency and economy may be secured in the operation
of all offices, institutions, departments, and their functions;
      (5)   Conduct continuous research in administrative practices;
      (6)   Represent the county in its intergovernmental relationships as
directed by the Board;
      (7)   Recommend long-term plans of capital improvement with accompanying
financial plans;
      (8)   Direct any administrative services as may be found desirable by the
County Board to be rendered centrally;
      (9)   Direct the enforcement of personnel policies and practices through
a central Human Resources Department;
      (10)   Examine regularly at periods fixed by the Board the accounts,
records, and operations of every commission, department, office, and agency
under control of the Board and report these findings to the Board. On a regular
basis, he or she shall make recommendations to the Board for action to be taken
relative to the efficient operation of the county, the betterment of public
service, and the future needs of the county;
      (11)   Direct the purchase of all property, equipment, supplies, services
and related contracts and the enforcement of the purchasing ordinance;
      (12)   Develop financial plans in which revenues and expenditures are
projected against anticipated county growth;
      (13)   Make recommendations to the Board on new and revised state
statutes which he or she considers desirable and worthy of endorsement by the
Board. The County Administrator shall also recommend to the Board the adoption
of new and revised ordinances, orders, and resolutions when in his or her
judgment these actions will promote improved county services and operations and
are in the public interest; and
      (14)   Have, with respect to the management of county-owned property and
facilities, any responsibility as the Board may from time to time direct.
(1977 Code, § 1:1) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 30.39 ASSISTANCE.
   The County Administrator may employ assistants as the Board may authorize.
(1977 Code, § 1:1) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 30.40 RESTRICTIONS ON DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   No provision of this subchapter is intended to vest in the County
Administrator any duty or grant to him or her any authority which is vested by
general law or county ordinance in or on any other county officer or employee.
No provision of this subchapter shall be construed to delegate to the County
Administrator any authority required to be performed by the Board, nor shall
the County Administrator have the power to bind, obligate, nor to commit the
county in any manner, except as provided herein or by the express grant of
authority by the Board. It is the intention of the Board in adopting this
subchapter only to create a position to which may be delegated certain
administrative duties to be performed in and under its direction.
(1977 Code, § 1:1) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 30.41 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect and be in full force on December 1, 1977.
(1977 Code, § 1:1) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
DEPARTMENTS
§ 30.55 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   There is need, and it is in the best interests of the County of
Lake, that a Department of Public Works be organized to exercise the powers and
authority prescribed by An Act in Relation to Water Supply, Drainage, Sewage,
Pollution, and Flood Control in Certain Counties (55 ILCS 5/5-15001 et seq.),
and there is hereby created the Lake County Department of Public Works, and
that the Chairman of the Board is authorized to take all necessary action as
provided by law in order to organize the Department.
      (2)   The county is hereby prohibited from levying any tax to pay for the
operation of the Department; all recipients of the services of the Department
of Public Works shall pay for the entire cost of the operation.
      (3)   The county hereby will, in a manner and to an extent consistent
with the county’s interest and responsibility, provide financial support in the
form of loans to projects which, by resolution of the Board, are deemed to be
in the best interest of the growth and development of the county.
      (4)   The Department of Public Works is hereby prohibited from exercising
its powers in any area where similar services are available from another agency
or governmental unit, unless expressly requested by that agency or governmental
unit to provide the services in that area.
      (5)   From and after this date, notice of any proposed revisions,
amendments, or alterations of this section which establishes a Department of
Public Works, shall be sent by registered mail to the presiding officer of each
incorporated municipality within the county and all township supervisors 60
days prior to consideration by the County Board.
      (6)   If and when requests for withdrawals or transfers from the County
General Corporate Fund to the Department of Public Works are proposed, all
members of the County Board shall be notified in writing ten days prior to the
meeting wherein the request is presented.
      (7)   Any and all monies advanced or transferred from the County General
Corporate Fund to the Public Works Department as established by this section
shall be repaid to the County General Corporate Fund from revenues derived from
the Department of Public Works facilities, established with financial support
from the county, as the revenues become available.
(1977 Code, § 7:1)
   (B)   Considerations and principles relating to intergovernmental agreements
for sewer and amendments to existing agreements.
      (1)   Premises.
         (a)   The County is a regional government.
         (b)   County decisions often have regional effects that should be
evaluated.
         (c)   In addition, as the primary regional government in Lake County,
the County has a special responsibility to encourage intergovernmental
cooperation.
      (2)   Decision-making process.
         (a)   In order to give appropriate consideration to intergovernmental
impacts of decisions, the external effects of decisions should be thoroughly
evaluated through consultation with affected or potentially affected
governmental units, agencies, and departments.
         (b)   Decisions should be made with due consideration to the
objectives of the County’s Framework Plan.
         (c)   Decisions should also be made giving due consideration to the
direct and indirect effects of such decisions, including the totality of the
benefits and impacts of the decision on affected governmental units, agencies,
and departments.
         (d)   Ultimately, the County as a regional government must exercise
its legislative discretion in determining what it believes is best for the
County and its residents as a whole.
      (3)   Factors to be assessed relating to sewer service decisions.
         (a)   The County is not a public utility, but it provides certain
public services with the goal of enhancing the well being of all Lake County
residents. This goal is ordinarily achieved through the use of regional
publicly owned wastewater treatment facilities.
         (b)   In making decisions related to sewer service, the County should
evaluate both direct and indirect effects from both a policy and practical
perspective. Those effects may include without limitation:
            1.   Consistency with the Framework Plan;
            2.   Impact on other affected public bodies;
            3.   Consistency with relevant municipal plans;
            4.   Fiscal and related benefits;
            5.   Available and committed capacity of system;
            6.   Level of support/opposition to proposal;
            7.   Impact on County roads and other services;
            8.   Specific environmental concerns.
         (c)   Coordination of concerns of affected governments is important to
achieve appropriate planning and wise investment of public resources. This is
increasingly important as development spreads throughout the County and actions
of one community are more likely to affect other communities.
         (d)   To better ensure that decisions are made based on understandable
parameters, sewer service agreements and amendments to such agreements should
ordinarily be based on specific limitations on the County’s obligations to
provide such services. Those limitations should be expressed in terms of
capacity and, when appropriate, the nature of the development to be served. In
addition, amendments to existing sewer service agreements should ordinarily be
considered in the context of specific developments to be served.
         (e)   Although past practices are important, the considerations and
effects of sewer decisions are ever-evolving and cannot be made based on static
models of precedent.
   (C)   Pollution policies. The following are hereby adopted as the present
policy of this Board of Supervisors of Lake County, Illinois.
      (1)   The main purpose in development of the county-wide facilities are
eventually to eliminate intolerable pollution problems, to reduce existing
problems to acceptable levels, and to prevent the formation of new problem
areas in a manner that provides adequately for the growing population.
      (2)   The County Public Works Department shall implement the provisions
of providing the proposed facilities to collect, transport and treat sanitary
wastes in accordance with said master plan and policies.
      (3)   The master plan should be implemented with negotiations with
municipalities and/or sanitary districts for the operation and maintenance of
existing treatment facilities.
      (4)   The Public Works Department will cooperate with all local, state
and federal agencies in the achievement of the goals set forth in this master
plan.
      (5)   The County Public Works Department shall implement the provision of
local sanitary sewer service in unincorporated areas of the county.
      (6)   The location of the interceptor sanitary sewers and sewage
treatment facilities shown on Plate 1 will depend and will be subject to change
based on availability of easement and land, and economic factors which can only
be determined after detailed field survey, but will as near os feasible be the
location shown.
      (7)   The proposed sewage treatment plant shall be designed to meet all
state and federal regulations and will be designed as near as practical in a
manner which will provide for improvement to full water reclamation facilities
by the year 1985. The equipment, installation and operation of the sewage
treatment facilities will be in accordance with the highest water pollution
control standards.
      (8)   The Public Works Department will complete a study on each existing
sewage plant at the proper time to determine the following:
         (a)   Whether or not to vacate or relocate the facilities;
         (b)   Whether or not to expand the present facilities and provide
additional interim capacity;
         (c)   Whether or not to utilize the facility for pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
         (d)   Whether or not to utilize the facility for treatment of storm
water flaws. Generally, the policy shall be to vacate these plants as soon as
possible except where they may be utilized for pretreatment of industrial
wastes and/or treatment of storm water flows.
      (9)   The Public Works Department should pursue all practical methods in
obtaining ways in financing the construction of the necessary facilities. The
financing of the facilities shall be by user fees and/or general taxes that
spread in the area serviced.
      (10)   Any new sewage treatment facilities or interim sewage facilities
shall be built only with the approval of the Public Works Department and
ownership will be in the County of Lake.
      (11)   The Public Works Department shall pursue through various local,
state and federal agencies a program to provide water for low flow augmentation
on the Des Planes and Fox Rivers to clean the water of these streams to good
recreational standards for the benefit of the Lake County Forest Preserve, land
owners and public use of these natural water resources.
      (12)   (a)   The priority of construction of these facilities shall be as
follows:
            1.   Priority 1: Northwest Area;
            2.   Priority 2: Southeast Area;
            3.   Priority 3: East Central Area;
            4.   Priority 4: Southwest Area;
            5.   Priority 5: Northeast Area.
         (b)   Land acquisition should be accomplished immediately for all
sewage treatment plant sites. These priorities may vary dependent upon the
financial ability of the various areas to issue revenue bonds. The entire
proposed facilities should be constructed by the year 1974.
      (13)   The Public Works Department will provide a continuing study of the
existing sanitary conditions and facilities needed for water pollution control
and abatement and will submit a written report updating the master plan every
five years to the County Board, or at any time that changes in the county
growth pattern or other planning factors would require a major revision.
      (14)   The said master plan and the policy statements contained herein
should be revised from time to time by passage of an appropriate resolution by
this Board of Supervisors.
   (D)   Master plan update. The Supplement to the 1962 Comprehensive Report
ion the Existing Sanitary Conditions and Proposed Facilities for Water
Pollution Control and Abatement, as amended December 17, 1968, is revised and
amended to show the new master plan as prepared by Consoer, Townsend &
Associates, a copy of which is attached to the resolution codified herein and
made a part hereof, shall be adopted as the Lake County master plan west of the
North Shore Sanitary District boundaries, more particularly, Plate #1 of the
said Supplement to the Comprehensive Report shall be adopted as the County
master plan.
(Res. passed 10-9-1962; Ord. 1968.12.17, passed 12-17-1968; Ord. 1971.05.27,
passed 5-10-1971; Res. 2005.04.04, passed 5-5-2005)
§ 30.56 DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY/MAP SERVICES.
   (A)   The Lake County Geographic Information System (GIS)/Mapping Division
is hereby created.
   (B)   The Office of Director of the Department is hereby created, and the
salary shall be at a rate per month as set by the County Board from time to
time, to be paid out of the Miscellaneous Contingent Fund.
   (C)   The Director is hereby directly responsible to the County Board of
this county, by and through the Financial and Administrative Services
Committee, and the Director is hereby given the authority to make
recommendations and requisitions to the Purchasing Agent of this county for any
or all equipment necessary for the Department in accordance with the rules of
this County Board governing purchases.
(1977 Code, § 7:1) (Res. passed 1-14-1941)
§ 30.57 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING, BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT.
   The Department of Planning, Building and Development is hereby established.
Within the Department, the Director of the Planning, Building and Development
Department shall be the administrative officer of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1977 Code, § 7:1) (Res. passed 7-6-1976)
§ 30.58 HUMAN RESOURCES.
   (A)   A Lake County Human Resources Department be and is hereby created to
provide a personnel service for the county.
   (B)   A Director of Human Resources shall be appointed, in accordance with
the Rules of Order pertaining to appointments of county department heads.
(1977 Code, §§ 1:3-1, 7:1) (Ord. passed 10-9-1973)
§ 30.59 DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION.
   The Lake County Division of Transportation is hereby established.
(Res. passed 2-10-2015)
CHAPTER 31: COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Reporting requirements
Miscellaneous Organizations
   
31.015   Public Building Commission
   
31.016   (Reserved)
   
31.017   Zoning Board of Appeals
Lake County Stormwater Management Commission
   
31.030   Establishment
   
31.031   County Board budget policies
   
31.032   SMC representation districts
   
31.033   Staff
   
31.034   Central services
   
31.035   Financial services
   
31.036   Legal counsel
   
31.037   Insurance
   
31.038   Name change
Workforce Investment Boardq
   
31.050   Board provisions
Lake County Sheriff’s Office Merit Commission
   
31.065   Commission created
Housing and Community Development Commission
   
31.100   Establishment of Housing and Community Development Commission
 
   
Appendix A: Lake County 9-1-1 Service Area
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All units of local government and agencies for which appointments are
made by the County Board Chair and County Board shall, at a minimum, provide:
      (1)   An organizational chart;
      (2)   A budget document for the current year;
      (3)   The most recently completed audited financial statements, including
internal control and management letters;
      (4)   Any required legal filings with state or regulatory agencies;
      (5)   The most recent version of all reports submitted to the governing
body of the unit of local government or agency;
      (6)   The bylaws of the unit of local government or agency;
      (7)   Employment policies, including, but not limited to, personnel
contracts; and
      (8)   Proof of insurance bonds for all office holders (if required).
   (B)   The aforementioned information shall be provided to the County Board
Chair’s office no later than January 1 on an annual basis, or within 14
business days upon written request by the County Board Chair.
   (C)   All units of local government or agencies for which a majority of
member appointments are made by the County Board Chair and County Board shall,
upon discovery, immediately disclose to the County Board Chair’s office any
internal finding of non- compliance with any federal or state regulation or any
allegation of criminal activity involving the unit of local government or
agency, including allegations related to agents, officers, employees, or any
other person performing work on behalf of the unit of local government or
agency.
(Ord. 11-0733, passed 9-13-2011)
MISCELLANEOUS ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.015 PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSION.
   There is need, and it is in the best interest of the public that a Public
Building Commission be organized to exercise the powers and authority
prescribed by the Public Building Commission Act (50 ILCS 20/4), enacted by the
69th General Assembly of the State of Illinois, and there is hereby created the
County Public Building Commission. The Chair of the County Board is authorized
to take all other necessary action as provided by law in order to perfect the
Commission.
(1977 Code, § 7:1) (Res. passed 2-9-1960)
§ 31.016 (RESERVED)
§ 31.017 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Creation and membership. A Zoning Board of Appeals, hereafter referred
to by the term “Zoning Board”, is hereby authorized to be established. Such
Zoning Board shall consist of seven members appointed by a Chair and confirmed
by the members of the County Board. As terms expire, each appointment shall be
for five years. Vacancies shall be filled by the Chair of the County Board for
the unexpired terms only, subject to confirmation by the County Board at its
next meeting. The Chair of the County Board shall have power to remove any
member of the Zoning Board, for cause, after a public hearing upon giving ten
days’ written notice.
   (B)   Chairman and meetings.
      (1)   The Chair of the County Board shall name one of the members of the
Zoning Board as Chair upon his appointment and, in case of vacancy, shall name
the Chair. All meetings of the Zoning Board shall be held at the call of the
Chair or any three members of the Zoning Board, at such times and places within
the county as the Zoning Board may determine. Such Chair or, in his absence,
the acting Chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the Zoning Board shall be open to the public.
      (2)   The Zoning Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and
every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Zoning Board located in the office of
the Department of Planning, Building, and Development and shall be a public
record. In the performance of its duties, the Zoning Board may incur such
expenditures as shall be authorized by the County Board. The Zoning Board shall
adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the statute of this
section.
   (C)   Bylaws. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall maintain bylaws regulating
its operation in accordance with the bylaws as approved by the County Board at
the creation of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The bylaws may only be amended
upon an affirmative vote of five members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. passed 4-25-1939)
LAKE COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT COMMISSION
§ 31.030 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The County Board hereby establishes the Lake County Stormwater
Management Planning Commission (now known as the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission; see § 31.038).
   (B)   The principal duties of the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission are to develop a stormwater management plan for presentation to and
approval by the County Board; to direct the plan’s implementation and
revisions; and to undertake any other duties as authorized in H.B. 998.
   (C)   The Lake County Stormwater Management Commission shall make periodic
reports to the County Board and to the Lake County Municipal League.
(Res. passed 12-8-1987)
§ 31.031 COUNTY BOARD BUDGET POLICIES.
   The budget, appropriation and property tax levy of the Stormwater Management
Commission (SMC) shall be accomplished in compliance with the annual budget
process of the county.
(1977 Code, § 6:2-7) (Ord. passed 6-11-1990; Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. 12-
0211, passed 3-13-2012)
§ 31.032 SMC REPRESENTATION DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The county is hereby divided into six areas, as depicted on the
Commission Representation Area Map attached to Ord. 22-0754, for the purpose of
determining representation of County Board and municipal members on the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission (“SMC representation districts”).
   (B)   For use and information in implementing these adopted SMC
representation districts, Exhibit A attached to Ord. 22-0754 provides, for each
SMC representation district, a listing of County Board districts and
municipalities with the majority of their respective population falling within
each district.
(1977 Code, § 6:2-9)
(Ord. passed 6-11-1990; Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. 12-0211, passed 3-13-2012;
Ord. 22-0754, passed 8-9-2022)
Editor’s notes:
   The map of Commissioner representation district information, including names
of district members and of mayors for the listed municipalities are available
in the Commission and county offices.
   The amendments to this section made by Ord. 22-0754 are effective December
5, 2022.
§ 31.033 STAFF.
   (A)   The SMC may hire, appraise, and dismiss personnel necessary to
implement the Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan (“Plan”).
   (B)   The SMC shall promulgate appropriate personnel management rules and
regulations for governance of SMC staff.
   (C)   All employees hired by the SMC shall be considered employees of the
county for purposes of payroll, benefits, and related insurances. (Note: The
SMC shall be responsible for purchase of appropriate property and casualty
insurance coverages, see § 31.036.) The SMC shall pay appropriate costs in this
regard as billed by the county.
(1977 Code, § 6:2-7) (Ord. passed 6-11-1990)
§ 31.034 CENTRAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Office space. The SMC may lease office space under the management of
the county. The SMC shall pay appropriate rents in this regard as billed by the
county.
   (B)   Printing/duplication.  The SMC may utilize the printing/duplication
services operated by the county. The SMC shall pay all appropriate costs in
this regard as billed by the county.
   (C)   Mail services. The SMC may utilize mail services operated by the
county. The SMC shall pay all appropriate costs in this regard as billed by the
county.
   (D)   Data processing. The SMC may utilize data processing services operated
by the county. The SMC shall pay all appropriate costs in this regard as billed
by the county.
   (E)   Telephone services. The SMC may utilize telephone services as managed
by the county. The SMC shall pay all appropriate costs in this regard as billed
by the county.
(1977 Code, § 6:2-7) (Ord. passed 6-11-1990)
§ 31.035 FINANCIAL SERVICES.
   (A)   The SMC shall promulgate appropriate guidelines for the procurement of
goods and services necessary for implementation of the Plan consistent with
generally accepted local government procurement practices and applicable state
law. From time to time, the SMC may utilize the technical procurement expertise
of and/or seek the assistance and resources of the Lake County Purchasing
Department.
   (B)   The SMC shall be part of the county financial management system. All
SMC funds shall be maintained in a separate fund and managed under the
supervision of the Lake County Treasurer, the Lake County Comptroller, and in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the SMC and the laws of
the state.
   (C)   The SMC shall undergo a regularly scheduled audit as part of the
annual county public audit process. The SMC shall pay all appropriate costs in
this regard as billed by the county.
(1977 Code, § 6:2-7) (Ord. passed 6-11-1990)
§ 31.036 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   Legal counsel for the SMC shall be appointed by the Lake County State’s
Attorney. It is recommended that the legal counsel be an attorney employed in
the practice of law in the county. The SMC shall pay all appropriate costs in
this regard.
(1977 Code, § 6:2-7) (Ord. passed 6-11-1990)
§ 31.037 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The SMC shall procure insurance for coverage against director’s and
officer’s liability; for errors and omissions liability; and for property loss
of SMC assets (i.e., for buildings, property, and equipment). The county shall
be named as an additional insured on all resultant insurance policies. The SMC
shall pay all applicable premiums in this regard.
   (B)   All other activities of the SMC shall be insured and/or self-insured
by the county under the auspices of the county’s risk care management program.
The SMC shall pay all applicable premiums in this regard as billed by the
county.
   (C)   The members of the SMC, its advisory committees, boards, and staff,
shall be covered under the county indemnification resolution of February 14,
1984.
(1977 Code, § 6:2-7) (Ord. passed 6-11-1990)
§ 31.038 NAME CHANGE.
   (A)   The County Board does hereby authorize and approve the change of name
of its Lake County Stormwater Management Planning Committee from the Lake
County Stormwater Management Planning Committee to the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission.
   (B)   Any and all resolutions or ordinances affecting or applying to the
Lake County Stormwater Management Planning Committee of and for the county,
hereinafter known as the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission, shall
remain in full force and effect and shall apply to the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission.
(1977 Code, § 6:2-8) (Ord. passed 6-10-1991)
WORKFORCE INVESTMENT BOARD
§ 31.050 BOARD PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Establishment. The County of Lake has been designated a local
workforce investment area pursuant to § 116 of the Workforce Investment Act of
1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-220). The Lake County Workforce Investment Board is
established and replaces the Lake County Private Industry Council.
   (B)   State law. The Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-220)
provides that the Workforce Investment Board will set policy for the local
workforce investment area.
   (C)   Operation. The Workforce Investment Board shall operate in compliance
with the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, or any subsequent amendment or
recodification of such Act.
   (D)   Membership. The County Board Chair shall appoint members of the Lake
County Workforce Investment Board per WIA Section 117(c)(1)(A). All appointed
members serve at the pleasure of the County Board Chair who shall retain the
power to appoint members on his own recommendation.
   (E)   Bylaws. The Workforce Investment Board shall maintain bylaws
regulating its operation consistent with the provisions and requirements of the
Workforce Investment Act and the bylaws approved by the County Board at the
creation of the Workforce Investment Board. Amendments shall not be made to any
provisions applicable to the county or the powers of the County Board chair.
(1977 Code, § 1:3-12)
(Ord. passed 4-12-1983; Res. passed 10-12-1999)
(Editor’s Note: On July 22, 2014 the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act,
P.L. 113-128 was enacted , effective July 1, 2015.)
LAKE COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE MERIT COMMISSION
§ 31.065 COMMISSION CREATED.
   (A)   Establishment of Commission. There is hereby created in the county a
Sheriff’s Office Merit Commission to be known as the “Lake County Sheriff’s
Office Merit Commission”.
   (B)   Tenure and eligibility. The Commission shall consist of five members.
By this section, the present three-member Commission is increased to a five-
member Commission. The additional members shall be appointed to serve for terms
of three and five years respectively, except as hereinafter provided. In the
office of the five-member Commission, no more than three members shall be
affiliated with the same political party. Of the initial appointments of the
two additional members, one shall be for a term of three years, and one for the
term of five years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of six
years.
   (C)   Authority and responsibility. The Merit Commission shall have duties,
powers and functions as are provided at 55 ILCS 5/3-8001 et seq., as now or
hereafter amended.
(1977 Code, §§ 3:3-1, 7:1) (Ord. passed 9-14-1965; Ord. passed 11-13-1979)
HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 31.100 ESTABLISHMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
   (A)   Creation. The county has been designated to serve as a recipient
agency for federal funds under the Housing and Community Development Act of
1974 (P.L. 93-383). The Housing and Community Development Commission (the
"Commission") is hereby created to act as a representative body of elected
officials in ascertaining facts, preparing plans and programs, coordinating
activities and undertaking such other activities as are necessary or
appropriate to accomplishing the purposes of the United States Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974.
   (B)   Members. The Commission shall consist of 17 members appointed by the
Chair of and confirmed by the members of the County Board. Appointments shall
be made in conformance with the Commission bylaws, but at a minimum, five
members shall be County Board members, five members shall be mayors, village
presidents, or township supervisors and seven members shall be representative
of the citizens of Lake County.
   (C)   Bylaws. The Commission shall maintain bylaws regulating its operation
in accordance with the bylaws as approved by the County Board at the creation
of the Commission. The bylaws may only be amended by resolution of the County
Board.
(Res. passed 1-13-1976)
APPENDIX A: LAKE COUNTY 9-1-1 SERVICE AREA
   The Lake County 9-1-1 Service Area is comprised of those areas or portions
of those jurisdictions lying wholly within the county, as follows:
the unincorporated areas within the county, and
the Village of Antioch, and
the Village of Beach Park, and
the Village of Deer Park, and
the Village of Port Barrington, and
the Village of Green Oaks, and
the Village of Hawthorn Woods, and
the Village of Indian Creek, and
the Village of Island Lake, and
the Village of Kildeer, and
the Village of Lake Barrington, and
the Village of Lake Villa, and
the Village of Lake Zurich, and
the Village of Lakemoor, and
the Village of Lindenhurst, and
the Village of Long Grove, and
the Village of Mettawa, and
the Village of North Barrington, and
the Village of Old Mill Creek, and
the City of Park City, and
the Village of Riverwoods, and
the Village of Third Lake, and
the Village of Tower Lakes, and
the Village of Volo, and
the Village of Wadsworth, and
the Village of Wauconda, and
the Village of Wheeling.
 
(1977 Code, § 3:6-7) (Ord. passed 1-9-1990; Ord. passed 5-8-1990; Ord. 18-1362,
passed 11-13-2018)
CHAPTER 32: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
32.01   Policy and procedures
   
32.02   Limitations
   
32.03   Definitions
   
32.04   Lake County Emergency Management Agency
   
32.05   Emergency management powers of the Chair of the County Board
   
32.06   Financing
   
32.07   Local disasters
   
32.08   Testing of civil defense and disaster warning devices
   
32.09   Mutual aid arrangements between political subdivisions
   
32.10   Communications
   
32.11   Immunity
   
32.12   Professions, trades, and occupations
   
32.13   Appropriations for emergency management operations
   
32.14   Authority to accept services, gifts, grants, or loans
   
32.15   Orders, rules, and regulations
   
32.16   Utilization of existing agency, facilities, and personnel
   
32.17   No private liability
   
32.18   Succession
   
32.19   Compensation
   
32.20   Emergency Management Agency personnel oath
§ 32.01 POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)    Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
significant size and destructiveness resulting from fire, flood, earthquake, or
other natural or man-made causes, and in order to ensure that this county will
be prepared to and will adequately deal with any such disasters, preserve the
lives and property of the people of this county and protect the public peace,
health, and safety in the event of a disaster, it is found and declared to be
necessary:
      (1)    To create a county Emergency Management Agency, as required by 20
ILCS 3305/10(b);
      (2)    To confer upon the Chair of the County Board the extraordinary
power necessary to preserve the public health, peace, and safety during and
after a disaster; and
      (3)    To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and
political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency management
operations.
   (B)    It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the
policy of the county that all emergency management programs of this county be
coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of the federal
and state governments, including their various departments and agencies, of
other municipalities and localities, and private agencies of every type, to the
end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of manpower,
resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.02 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
   (A)   Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute,
except that actions otherwise authorized by this chapter or other laws may be
taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to
public health or safety;
   (B)   Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but
any communications facility or organization (including but not limited to radio
and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested to
transit or print public service messages furnishing information or instructions
in connection with a disaster;
   (C)   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,
firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of any
personnel therefor, when on active duty; but state and local emergency
operations plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance
of functions related to disaster emergencies; or
   (D)   Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the Chair and the County
Board to exercise any other powers vested in them under the Constitution,
statutes, or common law of this state, independent of or in conjunction with
any positions of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   ASSISTANT MANAGER. The person assigned as the Emergency Management Assistant
Manager. The ASSISTANT MANAGER will complete within the prescribed time all
training required of an Assistant Coordinator by the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause,
including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous
materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods
of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, explosion, critical
shortages of essential fuels and energy, riot, or hostile military or
paramilitary action. DISASTER includes, but is not limited to, all occurrences
and threats thereof which are contemplated by the concept of “emergency
management operations”.
   DISASTER OPERATIONS. Functions created in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter to be performed by the county in cooperation with other political
subdivisions to alleviate the effects of disaster.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The efforts of this county to develop, plan, analyze,
conduct, implement, and maintain programs for disaster mitigation.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN. The written plan of the county describing the
organization, mission, and functions of the government and supporting services
for responding to and recovery from disasters.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The preparation for and the carrying out of functions,
other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, as
may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury
and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, earthquake, or other
man-made or natural causes. These functions include without limitation
firefighting services, police services, emergency aviation services, medical
and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications,
radiological, chemical, and other special weapons defense, evacuation of
persons from stricken areas, emergency assigned functions of plant protection,
temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related
to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or
incidental to protecting life and property.
   MANAGER. The person assigned as Emergency Management Manager with the duty
of carrying out the requirements of this chapter. The MANAGER will complete
within the prescribed time all training required of a Coordinator by the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any county, city, village, or incorporated town or
township, or other taxing body.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 17-1256, passed 11-14-
2017)
§ 32.04 LAKE COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   There is hereby created an Emergency Management Agency and a
coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency, herein called the “Manager”,
who shall be the head thereof. The Manager shall be a civilian employee
possessing the professional qualifications and expertise to perform the duties
of Manager and shall be appointed in the same manner as are the heads of
regular county governmental departments.
   (B)   The Lake County Emergency Management Agency shall obtain, with County
Board approval, technical, clerical, stenographic, and other administrative
personnel, and may make any expenditures within their appropriation therefor as
may be necessary to carry out the purpose of the chapter.
   (C)   The Manager, subject to the administrative direction of the County
Administrator, shall be the executive head of the Lake County Emergency
Management Agency, and shall be responsible under the direction of the Chair of
the County Board for carrying out the program for emergency management
operations of this county. The Manager shall coordinate the activities of all
organizations for emergency management operations within this county and shall
maintain liaison, and cooperate with the civil defense and Emergency Management
Agencies and organizations of this county, other counties and municipalities,
and the federal and state governments.
   (D)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve
by the Manager, the Assistant Manager or any persons designated by the Chair of
the County Board shall be and act as Manager until new appointment is made as
provided in this chapter. The Manager may be removed by the County
Administrator with the advice of the County Board Chair in the same manner as
other county department heads, pursuant to the Lake County Employee Policies
and Procedures Ordinance. The Lake County Emergency Management Agency shall
take an integral part in the development and revision of the local emergency
operations plan.
   (E)   In the development of the emergency operations plan, the Lake County
Emergency Management Agency shall interrelate with business, labor, industry,
agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations, and community leaders.
   (F)   The Lake County Emergency Management Agency shall:
      (1)   Determine the requirements of the county for food, clothing, and
other necessities in the event of an emergency;
      (2)   Develop an emergency operations plan that meets the standards
promulgated by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency;
      (3)   Review and revise the local emergency operations plan every other
year;
      (4)   Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills
in emergency prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery;
      (5)   Establish a register of government and private response resources
available for use in a disaster;
      (6)   Prepare, for issuance by the Chair of the County Board, ordinances,
resolutions, proclamations, and regulations as necessary or appropriate in
coping with disasters;
      (7)   Cooperate with the federal, state, and county government and any
public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this chapter and
in implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response, and
recovery;
      (8)   Initiate and coordinate planning for the establishment of an
emergency operations center, and ensure the emergency operations center is
maintained and ready for use immediately when needed;
      (9)   Develop, coordinate, and implement a plan to annually exercise the
functions of the emergency operations center; and
      (10)   Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the
implementation of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 17-1256, passed 11-14-
2017)
§ 32.05 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT POWERS OF THE CHAIR OF THE COUNTY BOARD.
   (A)   The County Administrator in coordination with the Chair of the County
Board shall have the general direction and control of the Emergency Management
Agency, and shall be responsible for the carrying out of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   In performing the duties under this chapter, the Chair is authorized
to cooperate with state and federal governments and with other municipalities
and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to emergency management
operations defined in this chapter.
   (C)   In performing the duties under this chapter, the Chair is further
authorized:
      (1)   To make, amend, and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules, and
regulations of the local disaster plan to carry out the provisions of this
chapter within the limits of the authority conferred upon him or her;
      (2)   To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the
emergency management of this county, which plan and program shall be integrated
into and coordinated with disaster plans of the state and federal governments
and of other political subdivisions, and which plan and program may include:
         (a)   Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by
disaster;
         (b)   Prompt and effective response to disaster;
         (c)   Emergency relief;
         (d)   Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
         (e)   Recommendations for zoning, building, and other land-use
controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures, and other
preventative preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters or
their impact;
         (f)   Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency
operations plans;
         (g)   Authorization and procedures for the erection or other
construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate danger,
damage or loss from flood, conflagration, or other disaster;
         (h)   Organization of county manpower and chains of command;
         (i)   Coordination of local emergency management activities; and
         (j)   Other necessary matters.
      (3)   In accordance with the plan and program for the emergency
management of this county, and out of funds appropriated for those purposes, to
procure and preposition supplies, medicines, materials, and equipment, to
institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all
other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of
emergency management organizations in advance of actual disaster, to ensure the
furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster operations;
and
      (4)   Out of funds appropriated for those purposes, to make any studies
and surveys of the industries, resources, and facilities in this county as may
be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the county for the emergency
management phases of mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery, and to
plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof.
   (D)   The Chair is authorized to designate space in a county building or
elsewhere for the Emergency Management Agency as its office.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.06 FINANCING.
   (A)   It is the intent of the County Board and declared to be the policy of
the county that every effort shall be made to provide funds for disaster
emergencies.
   (B)   It is the County Board’s intent that the first recourse shall be to
funds regularly appropriated to the agency. If the Chair finds that the demands
placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are unreasonably
great, and if the Chair finds that other sources of money to cope with the
disaster are not available or are insufficient, the Chair may issue a call for
an immediate session of the County Board for the purpose of enacting ordinances
as the Board may deem necessary to transfer and expend monies appropriated for
other purposes, to borrow monies from the United States government or other
public or private sources. If less than a quorum of the members of the Board is
capable of convening in session to enact these ordinances for the transfer,
expenditure, or loan of monies, the Chair is authorized to carry out those
decisions until such time as a quorum of the Board can convene.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the
Chair’s authority to apply for, administer, and expend grants, gifts, or
payments in aid of disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, or
recovery.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.07 LOCAL DISASTERS.
   (A)   A local disaster may be declared only by the Chair of the County Board
or the successors as described in this chapter. When declared by the Chair, any
disaster declaration shall not be continued for a period in excess of seven
days except by or with the consent of the County Board. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local disaster shall be
given prompt and general publicity, and shall be filed promptly with the Lake
County Clerk.
   (B)   The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the
response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local emergency
operations plans and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance
thereunder.
   (C)   During a local disaster, the Chair may suspend the provisions of any
county ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of county business, or
the orders, rules, and regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance
with the provisions of any ordinance, rule, or regulation would in any way
prevent, hinder, or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency, as
authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act; provided that, if
the County Board meets at that time, the Chair shall act subject to the
directions and restrictions imposed by the body.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.08 TESTING OF CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.
   The testing of disaster warning devices including outdoor warning sirens
shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at 10:00 in the morning.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.09 MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Manager for emergency management operations may, in collaboration with
other public agencies within his or her immediate vicinity, develop or cause to
be developed mutual aid arrangements with other political subdivisions,
municipal corporations, or bodies politic within this state for reciprocal
disaster response and recovery in case a disaster is too great to be dealt with
unassisted. The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and until
approved by each of the political subdivisions, municipal corporations, or
bodies of politic that are parties thereto, in the manner provided by law, and
unless and until filed with and approved in writing by the Illinois Director.
These arrangements shall be consistent with the state and local emergency
management operations plan and program, and in the event of a disaster as
described in §
32.03, it shall be the duty of each local department for emergency management
operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of the mutual
aid arrangements.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 17-1256, passed 11-14-
2017)
§ 32.10 COMMUNICATIONS.
   The Lake County Emergency Management Agency shall ascertain what means exist
for rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster emergencies. The
agency shall consider the desirability of supplementing these communications
resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or network. In
studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the
agency shall evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof for general
county and local governmental purposes. The agency shall make recommendations
to the Chair of the County Board as appropriate.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.11 IMMUNITY.
   Neither the county, the agency, or any member thereof or any person acting
at their direction, engaged in any emergency management operations or disaster
activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter or
any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, is liable for the
death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of the
activity. This section does not, however, affect the right of any person to
receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this act,
under the Worker’s Compensation Act or the Worker’s Occupational Diseases Act,
or under any pension law, and this section does not affect the right of any
person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.12 PROFESSIONS, TRADES, AND OCCUPATIONS.
   If a disaster as is described in §
32.03 occurs in this county and the services of persons who are competent to
practice any profession, trade, or occupation are required in this county to
cope with the disaster situation, and it appears that the number of persons
licensed or registered in this county to practice the profession, trade, or
occupation may be insufficient for that purpose, then any persons who are
licensed elsewhere to practice the profession, trade, or occupation may, if a
member of another political subdivision rendering aid in this county pursuant
to the order of the head of that political subdivision and upon the request of
the county, or if otherwise requested so to do by the Chair or the Manager of
this county, during the time the disaster condition continues, practice the
profession, trade, or occupation in this county without being licensed or
registered in this county.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 17-1256, passed 11-14-
2017)
§ 32.13 APPROPRIATIONS FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS.
   The County Board may make appropriations for emergency management operations
in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the ordinary
expenses of the political subdivision.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.14 AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS, OR LOANS.
   Whenever the federal or state governments, or any agency or officer thereof,
or whenever any person, firm, or corporation shall offer to the county
services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds by way of gift or grant for
purposes of emergency management, the county, acting through the Chair or
through the County Board, may accept the offer, and upon this acceptance the
Chair or the County Board may authorize any officer of the county to receive
services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds on behalf of the county.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.15 ORDERS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Chair of the County Board shall file a copy of every rule,
regulation, or order and any amendment thereof made by him or her pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter in the office of the Lake County Clerk. No such
rule, regulation, or order, or any amendment upon the declaration of a disaster
emergency by the Chair as is described in §
32.07, the provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation,
order, or amendment issued pursuant to this chapter and during the state of the
disaster emergency, is abrogated, and the rule, regulation, order, or amendment
shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the Lake County Clerk,
accompanied by a certificate stating the reason for the emergency.
   (B)   The Lake County Emergency Management Agency established pursuant to
this chapter, and the Manager thereof, shall execute and enforce orders, rules,
and regulations as may be made by the Governor under authority of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act. The Lake County Emergency Management Agency
shall have available for inspection at its office all orders, rules, and
regulations made by the Governor, or under this authority. The Illinois
Emergency Management Agency shall furnish the orders, rules, and regulations to
the agency.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 17-1256, passed 11-14-
2017)
§ 32.16 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES, AND PERSONNEL.
   In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Chair and the Manager of
the Lake County Emergency Management Agency are directed to utilize the
services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing departments, offices,
and agencies of the county to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers
and personnel of all the departments, offices, and agencies are directed, upon
request, to cooperate with and extend the services and facilities to the
Manager and the Lake County Emergency Management Agency.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 17-1256, passed 11-14-
2017)
§ 32.17 NO PRIVATE LIABILITY.
   (A)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or
otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part of parts of
the real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
actual or impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity,
together with his or her successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly
liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or
about the real estate or premises under the license, privilege, or other
permission, or for negligently causing loss of, or damage to, the property of
the person.
   (B)   Any private person, firm, or corporation and employees and agents of
the person, firm, or corporation in the performance of a contract with, and
under the direction of, the county under the provisions of the chapter, shall
not be civilly liable for causing the death of, or injury to, any person or
damage to any property except in the event of willful misconduct.
   (C)   Any private person, firm, or corporation, and any employee or agency
of the person, firm, or corporation, who renders assistance or advice at the
request of the county, shall not be civilly liable for causing the death of, or
injury to, any person or damage to any property except in the event of willful
misconduct. The immunities provided in this subsection (C) shall not apply to
any private person, firm, or corporation, or to any employee or agent of the
person, firm, or corporation whose act or omission caused in whole or in part
the actual or impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable therefor.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.18 SUCCESSION.
   In the event of the death, absence from the county or other disability of
the Chair preventing him or her from acting under this chapter or for any other
county purpose, and until the office is filled in the manner prescribed by law,
the following county officials shall succeed to the duties and responsibilities
of the Chair outlined in §§
32.05,
32.06 and
32.07:
   (A)   Vice-Chair of the County Board; and
   (B)   Chair of Financial and Administrative Committee.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007)
§ 32.19 COMPENSATION.
   The County Board, by its annual appropriations ordinance, may provide for
the payment of the salary of the Manager and any other office staff and
personnel as may be expressly provided for in this chapter. Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit any member of the agency from receiving compensation
from the Illinois Emergency Management Agency under any provisions of that
agency.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 17-1256, passed 11-14-
2017)
§ 32.20 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY PERSONNEL OATH.
   Each person, whether compensated or non-compensated, who is appointed to
serve in any capacity with the Lake County Emergency Management Agency, shall,
before entering upon his or her duties, take an oath, in writing, before the
Manager of the Lake County Emergency Management Agency or before a person
authorized to take oaths in this county, which oath shall be filed with the
Manager of the Lake County Emergency Management Agency, and which oath shall be
as delineated in 20 ILCS 3305/20.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1) (Res./Ord. passed 4-10-2007; Ord. 17-1256, passed 11-14-
2017)
CHAPTER 33: PURCHASING
COUNTY PURCHASING SUBCHAPTER
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Policies and procedures
   
33.002   Applicability
   
33.003   Public access to procurement information
   
33.004   Authorization for budgeted versus non-budgeted items
   
33.005   Definitions
   
33.006   Purchasing Agent; authority and duties
Competitive Bidding
   
33.035   General
   
33.036   Procedures
Professional Services and Competitive Sealed Proposals
   
33.050   General
   
33.051   Procedures
Purchases Exempt from Bidding and Competitive Sealed Proposals, Emergencies
   
33.065   General
   
33.066   Bid exemption
   
33.067   Emergency procurement
   
33.068   Departmental procurement
   
33.069   Procedures
   
33.070   Grant programs
Contract Administration and Contract Term
   
33.080   General provisions
   
33.081   Contract term
   
33.082   Change orders and contract modifications
Appeals and Remedies for Vendors; Debarment
   
33.095   General
   
33.096   Bid protests
   
33.097   Contract disputes
   
33.098   Remedies for solicitations or awards in violation of law
   
33.099   Elected county officials
Cooperative Joint Purchasing
   
33.115   Cooperative joint purchasing authorized
   
33.116   Sale, acquisition, or use of goods
   
33.117   Cooperative use of goods and services
   
33.118   Joint use of facilities
Debarment
   
33.125   Authority to debar
   
33.126   Decision to debar
Ethics in Public Purchasing/Contracting
   
33.130   Statement of policy
   
33.131   Applicability
   
33.132   General ethical standards
   
33.133   Employee conflict of interest/bias
   
33.134   Gifts or financial gain
   
33.135   Confidentiality
   
33.136   Duty to report
   
33.137   Sanctions; penalties
Real Property Leases
   
33.138   Statement of policy
MOTOR VEHICLE PURCHASING SUBCHAPTER
Motor Vehicle Purchasing
   
33.150   Purpose
   
33.151   Authority
   
33.152   Vehicle maintenance
   
33.153   Vehicle specifications
   
33.154   New vehicle purchase and resale
   
33.155   Notice for inspections
   
33.156   User guidelines
   
33.157   Budget
   
Appendix A: Reserved
   
Appendix B: Motor Vehicle User Guidelines
COUNTY PURCHASING SUBCHAPTER
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   The policy of the county is to enter into contracts for goods, services,
construction, and professional services at fair and reasonable compensation for
the work performed. The county shall develop procedures to (1) manage the
procurement process in accordance with the law; (2) spend the taxpayers’ money
wisely and fairly; (3) protect against fraud and favoritism; (4) encourage
participation by county businesses and promote equality of opportunity for
minority- and women-owned businesses; and (5) best meet the needs of Lake
County’s various departments through continuous improvement of the county’s
purchasing systems and procedures.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 1-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.002 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to contracts to procure goods, services,
construction, and professional services entered into by Lake County and its
applicable agencies. It shall apply to every expenditure of public funds by a
county agency for public purchasing irrespective of the funding source, except
as otherwise provided by state law, state regulation, county ordinance, or
administrative policy.
   This chapter does not apply to purchases by elected officials or county
agencies not statutorily required to purchase in compliance with county
policies or for whom purchases are not made by the county. But, if an elected
official or county agency not otherwise required to comply with this chapter
chooses to make any purchase with the assistance of the Purchasing Division,
this chapter shall apply.
   When the procurement involves spending state or federal money, then any
applicable mandatory state and federal laws shall be followed. Nothing in this
subchapter shall prevent any county agency from complying with the terms and
conditions of any grant, gift, bequest, or cooperative purchasing agreement
that is otherwise consistent with law. This subchapter does not apply to the
procurement of legal services.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 1-102, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.003 PUBLIC ACCESS TO PROCUREMENT INFORMATION.
   Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in
the Illinois Freedom of Information Act, being 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq., and shall
be available to the public as provided by the Freedom of Information Act.
   If a bidder or proposer believes a bid, proposal, offer, specifications or
protest submitted to the county contains either trade secrets or proprietary
information a statement should be included in the submission that describes and
supports their claim. The statement must specifically identify which part of
the submission must be considered confidential and explain why.
   Entire bid submissions or proposals may not be labeled confidential
material. Trade secrets or proprietary information are exempt from inspection
and copying under the Illinois Freedom of Information Act, and the Act
ultimately governs what information can be withheld from the public.
   Bidders and proposers assume the risk that an administrative agency or a
court may conclude that the information contained in their bids or proposals is
not exempt from disclosure under the Act. The county can thus not guarantee
that submissions will ultimately be free from disclosure, and the statement a
bidder or proposer submits to the county should clearly articulate why
nondisclosure should apply.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 1-103, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.004 AUTHORIZATION FOR BUDGETED VERSUS NON-BUDGETED ITEMS.
   (A)   Budgeted items, or items that fall within a budget category. For
purchases that are either explicitly incorporated into an agency or
department's budget, or purchases that are encompassed within a defined budget
category, a department or agency head (or that person's designee) shall forward
requisitions or a request to advertise to the Purchasing Division for the
purchase of goods, services, construction, and professional services. The
Purchasing Agent may issue bids or other solicitations for any goods, service,
construction, or professional service for which funds have been budgeted.
   (B)   Non-budgeted purchases. For goods, services, construction, or
professional services that are not explicitly incorporated into an agency or
department's budget, an agency or department must first receive the written
approval of the County Administrator prior to any solicitation. The County
Administrator may designate this authority to the Chief Financial Officer.
   (C)   Inapplicability. This section does not apply to departmental
procurement (see § 33.068).
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 1-104, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.005 DEFINITIONS.
   The words defined in this §
33.005 shall apply throughout this chapter, and to county regulations that
relate to this chapter.
   AGENCY. Any county agency requiring goods, services, construction, or
professional services procured pursuant to this subchapter.
   BID TAB. A bid tabulation (“BID TAB”) shows each bidder's bid amount for
each pay item in a contract. They are posted as soon as the authorized buyer
certifies that a bid tab accurately reflects the bids received and publicly
opened.
   BID SECURITY. A monetary payment that the bidder must make to ensure that
the bidder agrees to enter into a contract if it is awarded within the
specified period of time; and which the bidder agrees to forfeit if, the
contract is not so consummated.
   CHANGE ORDER. A written order signed and issued by authorized individuals of
the county directing the contractor to make changes to the original contract
specifications.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Any information that is available to an employee
only because of that person’s status as an employee of the county or its
agencies and not otherwise a matter of public  knowledge or available to the
public through a Illinois Freedom of Information Act request (5 ILCS 140/1 et
seq.).
   CONSTRUCTION. The process of building, altering, demolishing, structurally
repairing or otherwise making capital improvements to public real property.
   CONTRACT. All types of county agreements, regardless of what they may be
called, for the procurement of goods, services, construction, or professional
services.
   CONTRACT EXTENSION. A contract provision that provides the county the option
of continuing a contract after its stated expiration date.
   CONTRACT FILE. The record maintained in the Purchasing Division for a
particular contract, which may include payment vouchers, requisitions, purchase
orders, contract documents, maintenance contracts, service contracts, systems
contracts and correspondence.
   CONTRACT RENEWAL. Continuation of a contract for an additional set period of
time, under the original terms and conditions, when allowed bya contract’s
terms providing for renewal, which were included in any original bid document.
If the bid document does not include provisions for renewal, any continuation
of the contract would be considered a new contract and therefore must be rebid.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person having a contract with the county or one of the
county’s affiliated entities, such as its departments, agencies, or elected
officials.
   COOPERATIVE JOINT PURCHASING. Purchasing conducted by or on behalf of more
than one public procurement unit (as defined below).
   DEPARTMENT PURCHASE ORDER. A written order signed and issued by a county
department head, agency head, and/or elected official directing a business to
provide goods, services, construction, or professional services on behalf of
the county.
   DIRECT OR INDIRECT PARTICIPATION. Involvement, through decision, approval,
disapproval,  recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request,
influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering
of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL. For the purpose of this Ordinance, Elected Officials
includes, but is not limited to: Clerk of the Circuit Court, County Clerk,
County Coroner, County Treasurer, County Recorder of Deeds, Regional
Superintendent of Schools, County Sheriff and State's Attorney.
   EMERGENCY PURCHASE. Procurements obtained in circumstances which include,
without limitation, situations where: (1) public health or safety is
threatened, and where immediate repairs to county property are necessary to
prevent or stop continuing loss or damage; (2) immediate action is needed to
prevent or minimize disruption to county services; (3) immediate action is
required to ensure the integrity of county records; (4) immediate action is
necessary to avoid a lapse or loss of federal, state or donated funds.
   FAMILIAL RELATIONSHIP. Relationship to a county employee which includes
spouse (including civil partner), child, stepchild, parent, stepparent,
grandparent, in-laws (including parent, grandparent, sibling, or child),
relatives and non- relatives living in the same residence, and offspring born
to any aforementioned persons.
   FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE. The Committee established by the
County Board to review and recommend annual budgets and expenditures for all
county affiliated entities.
   FINANCIAL INTEREST. To hold a “FINANCIAL INTEREST” in an entity means any of
the following:
      (1)   Ownership of any interest in an entity or involvement in any
relationship from which, an individual within the past year has received, or is
currently or in the future entitled to receive, more than $1,200 per year, or
its equivalent;
      (2)   Ownership of 5% of any property or business; or
      (3)   Holding a position in a business involved in contracting with the
county, such as officer, director, trustee, partner, employee, or holding any
other management position in the business.
   GOODS. All maintenance, repair and operating supplies, and equipment
necessary to sustain day-to-day county operations.
   GRATUITY. A payment, loan, subscription, advance, monetary deposit, service,
or anything of more than nominal value, presently given or promised, unless
consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received.
   INVITATION FOR BIDS. An advertised, open, competitive solicitation for
prices, which culminates in all received bids being opened publicly.
   INVOICE. A bill for goods or services furnished by a seller to a buyer
specifying one price and terms of sale.
   NOMINAL GIFT. Any item given to an individual with a value of less than $75.
   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, business, union, firm,
corporation, trustee, partnership, association, joint venture, committee, club,
or other entity.
   PROCUREMENT. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise
acquiring of any goods, services, construction, or professional services. It
also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any goods,
service, construction, or professional services, including description of
requirements, selection, and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of
contract, and all phases of contract administration.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICE. Services that require a high degree of intellectual
skill, and through which the county’s best interests are served by a unique
combination of specialized knowledge, experience, and expertise.
   PUBLIC PROCUREMENT UNIT. The State of Illinois, any county, municipality,
and any other  subdivision of the state, or public agency of any such
subdivision, public authority, educational, health, or other institution, any
agency of the United States, and to the extent provided by law, any other
entity that expends public funds for the procurement of goods, services,
construction, and professional services.
   PURCHASE ORDER. A written order signed and issued by the Purchasing Division
that directs a business to provide goods, services, construction or
professional services on behalf of the county.
   PURCHASING AGENT. The person employed by Lake County as the head of its
Purchasing Division (and whose title at the adoption of this chapter is
“Purchasing Manager”). or any staff member of the County’s Purchasing Division
authorized to administer the county’s purchasing process.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. A formal request to prospective vendors that solicits
proposals for professional services and contains, (or incorporates by
reference), the specifications or scope of work and all contractual terms and
conditions. Vendor proposals are submitted in sealed envelope and opened
privately. Vendors are selected based on a qualification-based evaluation.
   REQUISITION. An electronic request issued by a county department heads or
their designee against available and approved funds, which will authorize the
Purchasing Division to issue a purchase order on the department’s behalf.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR OFFEROR.
      (1)   (a)   A person (firm) who has the capability in all respects to
perform fully the Public Works contract requirements, and the experience,
personnel, integrity, reliability, facilities capacity, equipment, acceptable
past performance and credit which will assure good faith performance.
         (b)   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER FOR CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS means a bidder for
Public Works construction contracts advertised, awarded, and financed, in whole
or in part, with county public funds, who meets all of the job specifications,
including the following applicable criteria, and submits evidence of such
compliance:
            1.   All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in
Illinois, and all local ordinances, and not in conflict with any federal law.
            2.   Evidence of compliance with:
               A.    Federal Employer Tax Identification Number or Social
Security Number (for individuals).
               B.    Provision of Section 2000(e) of Chapter 21, Title 42 of
the United States Code and Federal Executive Order No. 11246 as amended by
Executive Order No. 11375 (known as the Equal Opportunity Employer provisions).
               C.    Certificates of insurance indicating the following
coverages: general liability, workers' compensation, completed operations, and
automobile.
               D.    Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing
Wage Act, including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement
for those trades covered in the Act.
               E.    Disclosure of the name and address of each subcontractor
from whom the contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part
of the project prior to the subcontractor commencing work on the project.
               F.   The bidder and all bidder's sub-contractors must
participate in active apprenticeship and training programs approved and
registered with the U.S. Department of Labor's Office of Apprenticeship for
each of the trades of work contemplated under the awarded contract.
               G.   All contractors and sub-contractors are required to turn in
certified payrolls as specified in Illinois Public Act 94-0515, and follow all
provisions of the Employee Classification Act, 820 ILCS 185/1 et seq.
               H.   All bidders must provide three projects of a similar nature
as being performed in the immediate past five years with the name, address and
telephone number of the contact person having knowledge of the project or three
references (name, address, and telephone number) with knowledge of the
integrity and business practices of the contractor.
            3.   For purposes of this definition, PUBLIC WORKS is defined as
set forth in the Employee Classification Act, 820 ILCS 185/1 et seq.
      (2)   The provisions contained in division (1)(b) of this definition
shall not apply to federally funded construction projects if such application
would jeopardize the receipt or use of federal funds in support of such a
project. Division of Transportation projects shall be exempt from provisions
contained in division (1)(b) of this definition that are not in concurrence
with Illinois Department of Transportation rules.
   RESPONSIVE BIDDER. A person who has submitted a bid that conforms in all
material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.
   REVERSE AUCTIONS. A real time bidding process taking place at a scheduled
time and internet location, in which multiple suppliers, anonymous to each
other, submit bids to provide the designated goods and services specified in
the invitation to bid.
   SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are
merely incidental to the required performance.
   SMALL PURCHASE. Purchase of goods, services, construction or professional
services by a department in an amount less than the applicable statutory
minimum for competitive sealed bids and also less than this chapter’s
requirements for competitive sealed proposals.
   SPECIFICATION. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics
or of the nature of a good, service, construction item, or professional
service. A SPECIFICATION may include a description of any requirement for
inspecting, testing, or preparing a good, service, or construction item for
delivery, or of a professional service.
   STANDING COMMITTEE. Any committee that the County Board establishes that
meets regularly and has specific responsibilities.
   SURPLUS PROPERTY. Property in excess of the needs of the county and not
required for its foreseeable need or no longer having any use to the county.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 1-105, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 19-1384, passed 11-12-2019; Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.006 PURCHASING AGENT; AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Principal public purchasing official. The Purchasing Agent shall serve
as the principal public purchasing official for the county, and shall be
responsible for the procurement of goods, supplies, equipment, services,
construction, and professional services, in accordance with this subchapter, as
well as the management and disposal of surplus property.
   (B)   Duties. In accordance with this subchapter, and subject to the
supervision of the County Board, the Financial and Administrative Committee,
and the County Administrator, the Purchasing Agent shall:
      (1)   Procure or supervise the procurement of all goods, supplies,
equipment, services, construction, and professional services needed by the
county, with the exception of policies as determined by Illinois Department of
Transportation for the Lake County Division of Transportation. In doing so, the
Purchasing Agent shall:
         (a)   Work cooperatively with departments and county agencies in
determining what to purchase;
         (b)   Receive suggested specifications for goods, supplies, equipment,
services, construction, and professional services. The Purchasing Agent shall
finalize, revise, issue, maintain, and monitor the use of specifications
required by the county, except that specifications for any public works project
involving professional engineering shall be prepared by a professional
engineer. Specifications for construction and maintenance of highways, bridges,
and culverts shall be prepared by the Lake County Director of Transportation/
County Engineer. All specifications, including those prepared for the county by
architects, engineers, designers, and draftsmen, shall be drafted so as to
promote overall economy for the purposes intended and to encourage competition
in satisfying the county’s needs;
         (c)   Obtain expert advice and assistance from personnel of user
departments in the development of specifications and may delegate in writing to
a user department to prepare and utilize its own specifications; and
         (d)   Have discretion to select the appropriate method of construction
contracting management for a particular project. In determining which method to
use, the Purchasing Agent shall consider compliance with applicable county and
state laws, the county’s requirements, its resources, and the potential
contractor’s capabilities. For construction projects, the Purchasing Agent
shall include in the contract file a memorandum that sets forth the
considerations that led to the selection of the particular construction
management method that the County employed.
      (2)   Execute contracts and purchase orders based upon open competition
for all goods, services, construction, and professional services needed by the
county; and
      (3)   Establish a contract administration system to monitor compliance
and payments with specifications developed in cooperation with the agencies
using the goods, services, construction, and professional services; and
      (4)   Exercise general supervision over inventories of goods belonging to
the county:
         (a)   Establishing a surplus policy for the county to manage, sell,
trade, transfer, or otherwise dispose of surplus county property; and
         (b)   Allocating net proceeds from the sale, lease, or disposal of
surplus goods back to the appropriate fund.
   (C)   Purchasing regulations and operational procedures. Consistent with
this subchapter, and with the approval of the Financial and Administrative
Committee of the County Board, the Purchasing Agent may adopt purchasing
regulations and operational procedures relating to the execution of his or her
duties and may also suggest amendments to the Lake County Purchasing Ordinance
(codified as §§ 33.001 through 33.137), as necessary.
   (D)   Purchasing determinations. The Purchasing Agent shall work
cooperatively with departments in making determinations relative to the
purchase of goods, services, construction, and professional services.
   (E)   Authorization fo the use of electronic transmissions. The use of
electronic media for all procurement procedures, including acceptance of
electronic signatures, is authorized consistent with Illinois law for use of
such media. The Purchasing Agent shall determine which solicitations are
suitable for electronic transmissions.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 2-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
COMPETITIVE BIDDING
§ 33.035 GENERAL.
   An openly publicized competitive process is the most effective means of
determining the lowest cost from a responsible source, and such a process shall
be utilized whenever possible when procuring goods, services, construction, and
professional services. Competitive sealed bidding is required for the following
categories of goods and services:
   (A)   $30,000.
      (1)   For purchases of goods, services, and construction in excess of
$30,000 or for multiple purchases of the same item that will cumulatively
exceed $30,000 or for purchases with a single vendor within a fiscal year are
likely to exceed $30,000.
      (2)   If a contract with a vendor is for less than $30,000 (“Contract
1"), but a department or agency seeks to use that same vendor again within the
same budgetary year for a different contract (“Contract 2"), and Contract 1 and
Contract 2 will cumulatively exceed the $30,000 threshold, then the Purchasing
Agent shall first determine whether the two contracts are independent from one
another and not being used with the intent to evade the county’s bidding
requirements. The determination shall be made in writing and kept in the
contract file.
   (B)   $35,000. For data processing equipment (computers), software, or
services and telecommunications and inter-connect equipment, software, and
services: contracts in excess of $35,000.
   (C)   For professional services contracts, refer to §
33.050.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 4-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.036 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Invitation for bids.  An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall
include specifications, and all material contractual terms and conditions
applicable to the procurement.
   (B)   Public notice. Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be
given, and the notice shall set a date for the opening of bids that is at least
ten days afte rht notice is made public. The notice shall include publication
in a newspaper of general circulation within the county and internet posting on
the county website. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of
bid opening and specifications for the invitation to bid or request for
proposal.
   (C)   Standard clauses and their modification. The Purchasing Agent, after
consultation with the State’s Attorney, may establish standard contract clauses
for use in county contracts.
   (D)   Bid security and performance and payment bonds on goods or service
contracts.
      (1)   Bid and performance bonds or other security shall be requested for
public contracts when provided by statute. Bid and performance bonds or other
security for supply and service contracts may be requested as the Purchasing
Agent deems advisable to protect the county’s interests. Any such bonding
requirements for supply and service contracts shall be set forth in the
invitation to bid or request for proposal as established by the Purchasing
Agent.
      (2)   Acceptable forms of security which may be submitted are: an
executed surety bond issued by a company or companies qualified to do business
in the State of Illinois with an A.M. Best Rating of at least A-; cash,
certified check or cashier’s check made payable to Lake County; an irrevocable
letter of credit; or any other form of deposit issued by a financial
institution and acceptable to the county. Personal or company checks are not
acceptable.
      (3)   Bid security shall be in an amount not to exceed 10% of the amount
of the bid/offer.
      (4)   Contract performance and payment bonds: upon receipt of the award
letter the required performance bonds or payment bonds shall be delivered to
the county and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the
contract.
   (E)   Insurance requirements on goods or service contracts. The Purchasing
Agent shall determine, in consultation with the risk manager, whether insurance
coverage by the contractor shall be required, and, if so, the types and amounts
of coverage that shall be required. The contractor shall have the county named
as an additional insured as its interest may appear and furnish the Purchasing
Agent with satisfactory evidence of the insurance.
   (F)   Contractor record retention. The Illinois Prevailing Wage Act imposes
recordkeeping requirements on contractors, 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq. For all
contracts awarded for public works construction, the contractor and all sub-
contractors shall be required to maintain adequate records appropriate to the
type of contract, to retain such records for a minimum of five years from final
payment, unless otherwise specified in the solicitation, and to make such
records available for the county’s inspection upon reasonable terms and
consistent with state law. To receive payment for contracts subject to the
Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, the contractor shall also be required to submit
confirmation from the Illinois Department of Labor that they have met the
filing requirements for certified payroll.
   (G)   Cancellation or rejection of invitations for bids or requests. An
invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or any other solicitation may be
canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part
as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the
best interests of the county. The reasons for the cancellation or rejection
shall be made part of the contract file and shall be provided to bidders or
offerors upon request.
   (H)   Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or
more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the Purchasing Agent
deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded on a
bid tab. The bid tab shall be made available to the public.
   (I)   Late bids. No bids received after the time specified in the invitation
for bids will be considered. All bids received after the specified time will be
returned unopened to the bidder.
   (J)   Correction or withdrawal of bids: cancellation of awards. Correction
or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be
permitted where appropriate. Mistakes that a bidder be corrected or the bid may
be withdrawn before bid opening may be withdrawn by written notice received in
the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for the
bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only to
the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a
mistake of a non-judgmental character was made, the nature of
the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes
in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the
county or fair competition shall be permitted.
      (1)   In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake
of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
         (a)   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document,
but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
         (b)   The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that a mistake was made.
      (2)   All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to
cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a
written determination made by the Purchasing Agent.
      (3)   In the event of a discrepancy between the unit price and the
extended total, the unit price bid shall prevail.
   (K)   Bid evaluation. Consistent with the provisions of 55 ILCS 5/5-1022,
bids shall be evaluated based on their responsiveness to the requirements set
forth in the invitation for bids, and the demonstrated responsibility of the
bidder, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as
inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, experience, past performance,
financial stability, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. The
invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No
criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the invitation
for bids. Alternative bids may be considered and accepted provided they are
specifically provided for in the invitation for bids and meet the evaluation
criteria set forth therein and are in the best interest of the county.
   (L)   Tie bids. If two or more bids meeting the specifications and other
requirements of the bid information are tied for low price, the bids will be
treated as follows.
      (1)   If there is significant difference in the responsibility of the
bidders (including ability to deliver in the quantity and at the time
required), the award will be made to the bidder who is deemed to be the most
responsible.
      (2)   If there is no significant difference in the responsibility of the
bidders, but there is difference in the quality of the commodities or services
offered, the bid offering the best quality will be accepted.
      (3)   If there is no significant difference in the responsibility of the
bidders and no difference in the quality of the items or services offered, the
bid offering the earliest delivery time will be accepted if delivery as early
as possible was a bid criteria. In all other cases, delivery time will not be
considered in making awards so long as the bidder states that delivery will
occur not later than the time specified in the bid information as the latest
acceptable delivery time.
      (4)   If the bids quoting the same price are equal in every respect, then
the Purchasing Agent may make the award based on their determination of what is
in the best interest of the county or otherwise by lot.
   (M)   Determination of non-responsibility of bidder and offerors.
Determinations of non-responsibility shall be made by the Purchasing Agent and
the bases for such determinations can include, but are not limited to: failure
to satisfy one or more of the criteria set forth in the definition of
“responsible bidder or offeror”contained in § 33.005, failure to perform or
unsatisfactory performance documented on one or more prior county contracts;
unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply information or
samples in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility; or
debarment by the State of Illinois or the United States of America. If a bidder
or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found non-
responsible, then the Purchasing Agent will make a written determination of
non-responsibility that sets forth the basis of the finding. A copy of the
determination shall be sent promptly to the non-responsible bidder or offeror,
and the final determination will be made part of the contract file.
   (N)   Award. The contract shall be awarded by appropriate written notice to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, if the bid is within the amount
of funds appropriated. The Purchasing Agent is authorized to negotiate an
adjustment in the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder,
without changing the specifications of the bid.
      (1)   Prior to award, for contracts in excess of $100,000, the Purchasing
Agent shall request that the State’s Attorney review prior to award all
contracts in excess of $100,000. This threshold amount is for annual contract
value for reoccuring operating costs and the full contract value if services
extend more than one year. This review shall not be required when the form and
content of the contract documents have previously been approved by the State’s
Attorney.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (N)(3) below, the standing
committee in charge of the contracting department or agency and the Financial
and Administrative Committee shall, by resolution, jointly submit their
recommendation about the award of a contract above $30,000 or more for goods or
capital equipment and contracts of $35,000 or more for data processing and
telecommunications equipment, services and software, and submit the
recommendation for consideration at a regularly scheduled County Board meeting.
After award by the County Board, contracts shall be signed by the Purchasing
Agent.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (N)(2) above, the
Purchasing Agent is authorized to award and to sign contracts, other than sole
source or emergency contracts, for the purchase of goods or capital equipment
within the amount specifically authorized in the budget, without submitting
these contracts for committee and County Board approval.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (N)(2) above,
department heads are authorized to award and sign professional services
contracts, less than $50,000 pursuant to §§ 33.050 and 33.051, of less than
$50,000.
      (5)   Consistent with 55 ILCS 5/5-1130 and in addition to the authority
in subsection (N)(3) above, the Purchasing Agent is authorized to award and to
sign contracts that extend for five years for existing data processing and
telecommunications equipment, services and software that has been specifically
authorized in the budget without submitting these contracts for Committee and
County Board approval. This authority does not include renewals that contain
implementation services.
   (O)   Right to inspect plant. The county may, at reasonable times, inspect
the part of the plant, place of business, or worksite of a contractor or
subcontractor at any tier which is pertinent to the performance of any contract
awarded or to be awarded by the county.
   (P)   Right to audit records.
      (1)   Audit of contract costs. The county may, at reasonable times and
places, audit the books and records of any contractor to the extent that the
books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to a county contract. Any
person or entity contracting with the county, shall maintain the books,
documents, papers, and records related to a county contract for three years
from the date of final payment. Language shall be included in the county’s
invitation to bid and its contract to ensure enforceability of this subsection.
      (2)   Contract audit. The county shall be entitled to audit the books and
records of a contractor or a subcontractor at any tier under any negotiated
contract or subcontract other than a firm fixed price contract to the extent
that the books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to the performance
of the contract or subcontract. The books and records shall be maintained by
the contractor or subcontractor for a period of three years from the date of
final payment.
   (Q)   Reporting of anti-competitive practices. When collusion or other
anticompetitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice
of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the State’s Attorney.
   (R)   County procurement records.
      (1)   Contract file. All determinations and other written records
pertaining to the solicitation, award, and performance of a contract shall be
maintained for the county in a contract file in the Purchasing Division.
      (2)   Retention of procurement records. All procurement records shall be
retained and disposed of by the county in accordance with records retention
guidelines and schedules approved by the Illinois Local Records Commission.
   (S)   Multi-step sealed bidding.
      (1)   When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase
description to support an award based on price, a multi-step sealed bid may be
used if the Purchasing Agent determines the following:
         (a)   Available specifications or purchase descriptions are not
sufficiently complete to permit full competition without technical evaluations
and discussions to ensure mutual understanding between the bidder and the
county;
         (b)   Definite criteria exist for evaluation of technical offers;
         (c)   More than one technically qualified source is expected to be
available; and
         (d)   A fixed unit price contract will be used.
      (2)   Multi-step sealed bidding shall be conducted in two phases: first,
non-priced technical offers shall be evaluated; second, priced bids shall be
considered, but only from those bidders whose non- priced technical offers were
found unacceptable under the first step. Non-priced technical offers shall be
evaluated solely in accordance with the criteria set forth in the invitation to
submit technical offers and shall be determined to be either acceptable or
potentially acceptable for further consideration or unacceptable.
Determinations that a non-priced technical proposal is unacceptable shall be in
writing and state the basis of the determination. The determination shall be
retained in the procurement file, and the bidder shall be notified that it will
not be afforded an opportunity to amend its technical offer.
      (3)   Upon completion of step one, an invitation to bid shall be issued
under the provisions of §§
33.035 and
33.036; except that, the invitation for bid shall be issued only to bidders
whose technical offers were determined to be acceptable in step one.
   (T)   Electronic reverse auctions. The Purchasing Agent may procure
materials, equipment, and services with an electronic reverse auction company,
in accordance with the Local Government Electronic Reverse Auction Act(50 ILCS
530/1 et seq.), if the Purchasing Agent determines that such a process will
provide the best value to the county (or that all purchasing methods provide
equal value). Vendors interested in participating in the reverse auction shall
be pre-qualified to meet the specifications and must agree to the county’s
terms and conditions for the bid prior to the start of the auction. During the
auction, a bidder’s price shall be disclosed to other bidders and those
participating bidders shall have an opportunity to reduce their bid prices
during the auction. At the conclusion of the auction, the record of the bid
prices received, and the name of each bidder shall be open to public
inspection.
   (U)   Multiple source contracting.
      (1)   Multiple source contracting involves awarding to more than one
bidder a contract for an indefinite quantity for one or more similar supplies
or services. A multiple source award may be made when the Purchasing Agent
determines that it is in the county’s best interest that two or more bidders be
awarded a contract for similar products or services of an indefinite quantity.
      (2)   Multiple source awards shall not be made when a single award will
meet the county’s needs without sacrificing economy or service. Multiple source
awards shall not be made solely for the purpose of dividing the business among
suppliers or resolving tie bids. Multiple source awards shall be limited to the
least number of suppliers necessary to meet the county’s requirements without
sacrificing economy and service.
   (V)   Bid addenda and questions. Once bid document has been issued, all
questions regarding the document shall be submitted in writing to the
Purchasing Division. All addenda shall be issued by the Purchasing Division
pursuant to specifications in the bid document. If it is determined that a
bidder received an unfair advantage from information obtained through other
departments or agencies, the bid may be canceled.
   (W)   Communication with bidders. Consistent with the Lake County Ethics
Ordinance and the statute on Public Contracts in the Illinois Criminal Code
(720 ILCS 5/33E-6), county officers and employees shall limit communications
with bidders during the solicitation process so that the integrity of the
competitive solicitation process is maintained. If it is determined that a
bidder received unfair advantage from information obtained from prohibited
sources or under prohibited circumstances, the solicitation may be canceled, or
the bidder disqualified from participation in that solicitation request.
   (X)   Accepting single bid received. If only one responsive bid is received
after a competitive solicitation, the county may, after determining whether the
bidder is responsible, accept the bid.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 4-102, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Res. passed 2-10-2015; Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AND COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS
§ 33.050 GENERAL.
   (A)   Department heads, agencies and/or elected officials shall have the
authority to award professional services contracts of less than $50,000 and may
determine, in their discretion, whether such contracts will be awarded on the
basis of competitive sealed proposals. Professional services contracts for
$50,000 or greater or where multiple professional services contracts for the
same item and/or with a single vendor within a fiscal year are likely to exceed
$50,000 will be subject to the competitive sealed proposals provisions pursuant
to §
33.051, unless they meet one of the exceptions and/or requirements enumerated
in §§
33.065 through
33.069, or unless they fall within the scope of subsection (C) below. All
contracts that fall within the scope of subsection (C) below shall be awarded
on the basis of qualification-based factors rather than price and will follow
the statement of interest procedures according to the Local Government
Professional Services Selection Act (50 ILCS 510/1 et seq.) rather than a
competitive bid or a competitive sealed proposal.
   (B)   For professional services contracts for $50,000 or greater, the
respective department head and the Purchasing Agent shall present a joint
recommendation to the County Board for consideration and approval.
   (C)   All professional services contracts relative to engineering,
architectural and land surveying services will be governed by the requirements
of the Local Government Professional Services Selection Act (50 ILCS 510/1 et
seq.). In the event the county does not have a satisfactory relationship with
one or more firms, a statement of interest shall be issued for the initial
selection of engineering, architectural, or land surveying services with
evaluation based on qualifications such as ability of professional personnel,
past record and experience, performance data on file, willingness to meet
requirements, location, workload of the firm, work on similar projects, past
performance and other applicable qualification-based factors, but excluding
consideration of price or compensation. Responders are then ranked in order of
preference and contract negotiations are initiated with the firms individually
in order of preference. A request for statement of interest is not required for
contracts up to $25,000 regardless of the existence or non-existence of a
satisfactory relationship with one or more firms. In all cases, a written
description of scope of services to be provided shall be prepared and used as
the basis of contract negotiations.
   (D)   Contracts, other than professional services contracts, in which the
Purchasing Agent determines that competitive sealed bidding is neither
practical nor advantageous, may be entered into by a competitive sealed
proposal.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 5-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
§ 33.051 PROCEDURES.
   Competitive sealed requests for proposals (RFP) shall be initiated and
created in accordance with the procedures for competitive sealed bidding as
enumerated in §§
33.035 and
33.036 except as follows.
   (A)   Proposals shall not be publicly opened, and the register of proposals
shall be available for public inspection only after contract execution.
   (B)   Fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for
discussion and revision of proposals and any revisions may be permitted after
submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final
offers.
   (C)   RFP addenda and questions. Once the RFP document has been issued, all
questions regarding the document shall be submitted in writing to the
Purchasing Division. Any and all addenda shall be issued by the Purchasing
Division and pursuant to specifications in the RFP document. If it is
determined that a bidder received an unfair advantage from information obtained
through other departments or agencies, the RFP may be canceled.
   (D)   Communication with proposers. County officers and employees shall take
care to limit communication with proposers during the solicitation process so
that the integrity of the competitive solicitation process is maintained. All
representatives of the county shall avoid any vendor contact that would
constitute interference with contract submission and award under the Criminal
Code, 720 ILCS 5/33E-6. If it is determined that a proposer received unfair
advantage from information obtained from prohibited sources or under prohibited
circumstances, the solicitation may be canceled, or the proposer disqualified
from participation in the solicitation request.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 5-102, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
PURCHASES EXEMPT FROM BIDDING AND COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS
§ 33.065 GENERAL.
   This section applies to and details the requirements for purchases that, for
various reasons, may be exempt from the competitive sealed bid process. Despite
the exemptions, competitive pricing shall be encouraged and/or a cost or price
analysis shall be conducted prior to award of contracts under this section
whenever possible.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 6-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
§ 33.066 BID EXEMPTION.
   (A)   If a department head conducts a good faith review of available sources
and determines that the contract by its very nature is not suitable to
competitive bids or proposals, he or she shall forward an exemption request to
the Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent will review and approve all
exemption requests. The Purchasing Agent may consult with ad hoc groups of
county staff in making his or her determination with regard to a particular
procurement. If the Purchasing Agent reviews and approves the department head’s
recommendation that the procurement is exempt from competitive bids or
proposals, the department is not required to employ the competitive proposal or
bidding process to enter into a contract. A written determination for the basis
for the bid exemption shall be made by the Purchasing Agent and included in the
contract file.
   (B)   Examples of contracts that may not be suitable for competitive bids or
proposals fall into the following categories:
      (1)   Single source. There is only one source for the required goods,
service, or construction item;
      (2)   Professional services. There exists a long-standing, successful
relationship for professional services, and the knowledge gained through this
relationship adds value integral to the services provided;
      (3)   Trail use or testing. A sole- supplier’s item is needed for trial
use or testing;
      (4)   Used equipment. The purchase is for used equipment; and
      (5)   Auctions. The purchase is made at auctions.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 6-102, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.067 EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT.
   An emergency justifying a departure from the standard rules set forth in
this chapter shall be deemed to exist when there arises a threat to the public
health, welfare, or safety, or there is a need to prevent or minimize serious
disruption of government services. Emergency procurements shall be made with
any competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written
determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the
particular contractor shall be certified by the appropriate department head,
forwarded to the Purchasing Agent, and included in the contract file. A
confirming resolution, along with the written determination, shall be submitted
to the County Board for all emergency procurements of greater than $30,000 for
goods, equipment and services; or greater than $35,000 for data processing and
telecommunications equipment, software and services; and greater than $50,000
for professional services.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 6-103, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.068 DEPARTMENTAL PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   Departmental procurements shall be made in accordance with the county
or other government contracts whenever possible. For non-contract purchases,
department heads or their designees are encouraged to obtain competitive
quotations for purchases of goods, services or construction up to $5,000, or up
to $50,000 for professional services, are encouraged by the department head or
their designee to determine the source that is in the county’s best interests.
   (B)   For purchases between $5,000 to $30,000 (or $35,000 for data
processing and telecommunications equipment, software and services), the
Purchasing Agent or the agent’s designee shall document quotations from at
least three vendors whenever feasible.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 6-104, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.069 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Solicitation factors. Three quotations shall be received whenever
possible prior to the contract. Circumstances may exist where the Purchasing
Agent or the agent’s designee determines that it is not feasible to secure
three quotations. In other situations, the Purchasing Agent or the agent’s
designee may determine that it is in the best interests of the county to
consider only one supplier who has previous expertise relative to a
procurement. Whenever the Purchasing Agent or the Agent’s designee determines
that it is not feasible, or is not in the county’s best interests, to satisfy
the minimum quotation requirements of this section, the reason for this
determination shall be indicated in writing and retained in the contract file.
The department or agency head shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to
price, delivery, and terms.
   (B)   Evaluation factors. Evaluation factors that may justify an award to a
vendor who has not provided the lowest quotation include, without limitation,
delivery requirements, quantity requirements, quality, and past vendor
performance. Whenever the Purchasing Agent or the Agent’s designee determines
that it is in the county’s best interests to award a small purchase contract to
a vendor who did not submit the lowest quote, the reason for this determination
shall be indicated in writing and retained in the contract file.
   (C)   Contract administration. Adequate records to document the competition
solicited and award determination made shall be retained in the contract file
managed by the department or agency. A quote that exceeds the applicable bid
limit ($30,000, $35,000 or $50,000, as the case may be) shall not be eligible
for award under this section. In a situation where all responsible quotations
exceed the bid limit, all quotes shall be rejected, and formal bidding
procedures shall be followed.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 6-105, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.070 GRANT PROGRAMS.
   Under certain grant programs, the county acts as a third-party administrator
of local, state or federal funds and does not procure goods and services for
the county. Requisitions processed for grants are processed so as to facilitate
the method of payment and do not require any of the normal procedures or
approvals under this chapter, unless stipulated by the grant.
(Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION AND CONTRACT TERM
§ 33.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   A system for contract administration is designed to ensure that the
contractor is performing in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
contract. Contract administration results may be used by the Purchasing Agent
for vendor evaluation.
   (A)   The department or agency involved in the contract is responsible for
matching contract terms and prices with invoices, and to otherwise monitor
compliance with the contract terms. The department or agency is also
responsible for determining the need for any change orders where appropriate,
and for starting the process to obtain such an order.
   (B)   The Purchasing Division will maintain a database of executed contracts
and work with departments and agencies to monitor renewal options, the
contractor’s compliance with terms and conditions and the parties’ satisfaction
with overall contract performance.
   (C)   Departments and agencies experiencing difficulty in contract
performance shall submit a written request to the Purchasing Agent to evaluate
the parties’ compliance with the contract terms and conditions. The Purchasing
Agent or the agent’s designee shall communicate with the vendor and assist in
negotiating a resolution to whatever barriers to contract performance exist.
   (D)   Invoices must be identified to an existing contract or purchase order
before payment is issued.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 7-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.081 CONTRACT TERM.
   (A)   Specified period. Unless otherwise provided by statute, a contract for
goods or services may generally only extend for two years, provided the term of
the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in
the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the
time of contracting. As a matter of policy, contracts may contain automatic
renewal provisions if it is in the best interest of the county, but for any
renewal period beyond two years (or any applicable statutory timeframe that is
longer than two years), the County Board must have the ability to terminate the
contract within a time not to exceed 90 days after the renewal period begins.
The total contract term for any contract, including the time periods by which
the contract is extended due to renewal, shall not exceed five years, unless a
unique capital investment or other extenuating factors necessitate a longer
contract period and it is approved by Board resolution.
   (B)   Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in succeeding fiscal
periods. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support
continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall
be canceled.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 7-102, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.082 CHANGE ORDERS AND CONTRACT MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   When the total of change orders, contract modifications, or price
adjustments on any contract approved by resolution of the County Board exceeds
10% of the original contract amount, approval of the standing committee in
charge of the contracting department or agency and the Financial and
Administrative Committee is required.
   (B)   When a change order or series of change orders authorize or
necessitate an increase or decrease in either the cost of a contract by a total
of $10,000 or more, or the time of completion by a total of 30 days or more,
the authorized employee or official shall make a determination in writing that:
      (1)   The circumstances giving rise to the change in performance were not
reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was signed;
      (2)   The change is germane to the original contract as signed; or
      (3)   The change order is in the best interests of the county and
authorized by law.
   (C)   The written determination and the written change order resulting from
that determination shall be retained in the contract file which shall be open
to the public for inspection.
   (D)   (1)   The Purchasing Agent is authorized to sign all change orders and
to consent to contract assignments.
      (2)   Additionally, the County Engineer is authorized to sign change
orders for projects relating to planning, design, construction, and maintenance
of highways, bridges, and culverts.
      (3)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to sign change
orders relating to planning, design, construction, and maintenance of water and
sewer projects.
      (4)   The Director of Facilities and Construction Services is authorized
to sign change orders relating to planning and design (those relating to
services provided by engineers, architects and land surveyors under the Local
Government Professional Services Selection Act (50 ILCS 510/1 et seq.) and on
such other projects that the County Administrator has designated to the
Director of Facilities and Construction Services.
      (5)   As required by the Public Works Contract Change Order Act (50 ILCS
525/1 et seq.), when a change order for any public works contract necessitates
any increase in the contract price that is 50% or more of the original contract
price or that authorizes or necessitates any increase in the price of a
subcontract under the contract that is 50% or more of the original subcontract
price, then the portion of the contact that is covered by the change order must
be resubmitted for bidding in the same manner in which the original contract
was bid.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 8-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
APPEALS AND REMEDIES FOR VENDORS; DEBARMENT
§ 33.095 GENERAL.
   This section provides a forum for bidders or offerors who seek a contract
with the county, and believe that a contract has been or is about to be awarded
in violation of the Lake County Purchasing Ordinance. Remedies are also
provided for vendors who have been contracted by the county to dispute contract
claims.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 9-105, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.096 BID PROTESTS.
   (A)   Right to protest; timeframe. Any actual or prospective bidder,
offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or
award of a contract may protest to the Purchasing Agent. Protests must be
submitted in writing within ten calendar days of when either the solicitation,
addendum, notice of award, or other written decision by the Purchasing Division
was issued.
   (B)   Procurement process during pendency of the bid protest. In the event
of a timely protest , the Purchasing Agent, in consultation with the State’s
Attorney, shall determine whether it is in the best interest of the county to
proceed with any ongoing solicitation or award process.
   (C)   Authority.
      (1)   The Purchasing Agent may attempt to settle a bid protest regarding
the solicitation or award of a county contract. If the bid protest is not
resolved by mutual agreement, the Purchasing Agent shall promptly issue a
written decision which shall be transmitted to the protestor either
electronically or via U.S. mail.
      (2)   The decision shall state the reasons for the decision reached and
shall inform the protestor of his or her appeal rights under subsection (D)
below.
      (3)   If the Purchasing Agent does not issue a written decision regarding
the bid protest on or before the ten-day deadline, or within such longer period
mutually agreed to by the parties, then the protestor may proceed as if an
adverse written decision had been received.
   (D)   Purchasing Agent decision final and protestor’s right to appeal. The
Purchasing Agent’s decision shall be final and conclusive unless, within ten
calendar days from the date that the protestor receives the written decision,
the Chair of the Financial and Administrative Committee receives a written
appeal from the protestor.
   (E)   Appeal. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or contractor may
appeal a decision of the Purchasing Agent to the Financial and Administrative
Committee. The appeal shall be made in writing no later than ten calendar days
from the date the protestor receives the written decision from the Purchasing
Agent. The Financial and Administrative Committee will hear the appeal at its
next scheduled meeting and the protestor shall be notified of the meeting and
be afforded a reasonable opportunity to state his or her position. Any party
whose interest may be adversely affected by a protest or appeal shall also be
notified and have the right to appear for the purpose of protecting those
interests.
      (1)   Decision. After hearing the appeal, the Financial and
Administrative Committee shall promptly issue a decision. If the decision
occurs prior to the contract’s award, then the decision shall be referenced
with a resolution for award of the contract to the County Board for its
consideration. If the decision has occurred after the award of the contract,
the decision of the Financial and Administrative Committee shall be final.
      (2)   Entitlement to costs. If the contract has already been awarded but
the bid protest is sustained and it is determined that the protesting bidder
should have been awarded the contract under the solicitation but was not, then
the protesting bidder shall be entitled to only their reasonable bid
preparation and response costs, excluding attorneys’ fees.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 9-105, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.097 CONTRACT DISPUTES.
   (A)   Right to dispute. All claims by a contractor against the county
relating to an existing contract, except bid protests (see §
33.096), shall be submitted in writing to the Purchasing Agent. The contractor
may request a conference with the Purchasing Agent on the claim. Claims
include, but are not limited to, disputes arising from such issues as breach of
contract, mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract modification
and revision.
   (B)   Authority. The Purchasing Agent is authorized to attempt to settle any
dispute. If the dispute or claim is not resolved by mutual agreement, the
Purchasing Agent shall promptly issue a decision in writing and it shall be
immediately transmitted electronically and/or sent via U.S. mail to the
disputing party.
   (C)   Purchasing agent’s decision final; right to appeal. The Purchasing
Agent’s decision shall be final and conclusive unless, within ten calendar days
from the date of the written decision (or such other date to which the parties
mutually agree), the Chairman of the appropriate standing committee of the
County Board, receives a written appeal from the disputing contractor.
   (D)   Appeal; settlement of monetary claim. The disputing contractor’s
appeal will be heard at the next scheduled meeting of the Financial and
Administrative Committee at which the disputing contractor will be given a
reasonable opportunity to present his or her position. The Purchasing Agent,
after consulting with the State’s Attorney and the Director of Finance and
Administrative Services, is authorized to make recommendations on the
settlement of any monetary claim to the Financial and Administrative Committee.
   (E)   Decision. Any and all decisions made by either the standing committee
and/or Financial and Administrative Committee shall be issued promptly and be
final and conclusive.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 9-105, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.098 REMEDIES FOR SOLICITATIONS OR AWARDS IN VIOLATION OF LAW.
   If, after an award, the Purchasing Agent, after consultation with the
State’s Attorney, determines that a solicitation or award of a contract was in
violation of applicable law, then:
   (A)   The contract may be modified to comply with the law, provided it is
determined that doing so is in the best interests of the county; or
   (B)   The contract may be terminated and the contractor shall be compensated
for the actual costs reasonably incurred under the contract prior to
notification.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 9-105, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
§ 33.099 ELECTED COUNTY OFFICIALS.
   Decisions and determinations made under §§
33.096 through
33.098, if applicable, are subject to the review and approval of elected county
officials as provided by Illinois statutes.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 9-105, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
COOPERATIVE JOINT PURCHASING
§ 33.115 COOPERATIVE JOINT PURCHASING AUTHORIZED.
   Subject to applicable state statutes, the county may either participate in,
sponsor, conduct, or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the
procurement of goods, services, construction, or professional services with one
or more public procurement units in accordance with an agreement between those
units to do so. This cooperative purchasing may include, without limitation,
joint or multi-party contracts between public procurement units and open-ended
state public procurement unit contracts, which are made available to other
public procurement units.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 10-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.116 SALE, ACQUISITION, OR USE OF GOODS.
   The county may sell to, acquire from, or use any goods belonging to another
public procurement unit independent of the requirements stated in this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 10-102, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.117 COOPERATIVE USE OF GOODS AND SERVICES.
   The county may enter into an agreement independent of the requirements
stated in this chapter with any other public procurement unit for the
cooperative use of goods or services under the terms agreed upon between the
parties.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 10-103, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.118 JOINT USE OF FACILITIES.
   The county may enter into agreements for the common use or lease of
warehousing facilities, capital equipment, and other facilities with another
public procurement unit under the terms agreed upon between the parties.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 10-104, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
DEBARMENT
§ 33.125 AUTHORITY TO DEBAR.
   (A)   (1)   After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable
opportunity for that person to be heard, the Purchasing Agent, after consulting
with the State’s Attorney, is authorized to debar a person for cause from
consideration for award of contracts.
      (2)   The debarment shall be for a period of not more than three years.
   (B)   The causes for debarment include:
      (1)   Criminal conviction for an incident related to obtaining or
attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the
performance of the contract or subcontract;
      (2)   State or federal conviction for embezzlement, theft, forgery,
bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or
any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty
which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a county
contractor;
      (3)   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of
the submission of bid or proposals;
      (4)   Violation of contract provisions, of a character which is regarded
by the Purchasing Agent to be so serious as to justify debarment actions as
follows:
         (a)   Deliberate failure to perform the specifications of or within
the time limit provided in the contract; or
         (b)   A recent record of failure to perform or to unsatisfactorily
perform the terms of one or more contracts, excluding situations in which the
lack of performance is caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor.
      (5)   Any other cause the Purchasing Agent determines to be so serious
and compelling as to affect responsibility as a county contractor, including
debarment by any other governmental entity for any cause listed in this
chapter; and
      (6)   For violation of the ethical standards set forth in §§
33.130 through
33.137.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 11-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
§ 33.126 DECISION TO DEBAR.
   (A)   The Purchasing Agent shall issue a written decision to debar.
   (B)   The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform
the debarred person involved of his or her rights concerning administrative
review, and:
      (1)   A copy of the decision required by this section shall be mailed or
otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred person; and
      (2)   A decision to debar under this subchapter shall be final. The
debarred person has ten calendar days after receipt of the decision to submit a
written appeal to the Chairman of the Financial and Administrative Committee
for consideration by the full committee.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 11-102, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
ETHICS IN PUBLIC PURCHASING/CONTRACTING
§ 33.130 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (A)   Public employment is a public trust. Proper conduct by the county
officers and employees inspires confidence in the work of the county. County
officers and employees involved directly or indirectly in the county’s various
procurement activities have a responsibility to perform their duties in a
manner that will ensure the integrity of the county’s purchasing transactions.
   (B)   This subchapter is intended to provide principles and guidelines to
maintain the highest ethical standards in the county’s purchasing/ contracting
policies, procedures, and systems.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 12-101, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
§ 33.131 APPLICABILITY.
   The policies and guidelines expressed in this subchapter shall apply to all
employees, officers, and agents of the county involved in any procurement
procedure with or on behalf of the county or any of its divisions or
departments, excepting in those sections which expressly state to whom the
section applies.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 12-102, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
§ 33.132 GENERAL ETHICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   It shall be unethical for individuals and organizations to use their
positions to manipulate the county’s purchasing/contracting ordinance,
policies, and procedures for personal gain or profit.
   (B)   It shall be unethical for an individual to attempt to influence any
involved individual or organization to violate the ethical standards for the
county purchasing/contracting activities.
   (C)   Individuals involved in the county’s purchasing/contracting activities
shall conduct their activities in good faith and shall use the resources,
property, and funds under their control wisely and in accordance with ethical
standards and legal requirements.
      (1)   All county employees and officers shall, at all times, comply with
any and all rules and regulations enacted by the county as defined in the
county ethics ordinance. With respect to any provisions of this subsection (C)
(1) which overlap and/or conflict with the above described ordinance, the
stricter of the two provisions shall govern.
      (2)   To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct
set forth in this subchapter constitute violations of state statutes, they
shall be prosecuted and punishable as provided therein. The penalties shall be
in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in this subchapter. Criminal,
civil, and administrative sanctions against individuals, which are in existence
on the effective date of this chapter shall not be impaired.
   (D)   Individuals involved in the county’s purchasing/contracting activities
shall conduct their activities to avoid the appearance of attempting to
influence others or of being influenced by others to violate the ethical and
legal standards for the county’s purchasing/contracting standards.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 12-103, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.133 EMPLOYEE CONFLICT OF INTEREST/BIAS.
   (A)   County employees shall not participate directly or indirectly or
influence or attempt to influence any procurement, contract, purchase order, or
invoice decision when the county employee knows or has reason to know that:
      (1)   The county employee or any individual with whom that employee has a
familial relationship has a financial interest related to the procurement,
contract, purchase order or invoice, decision, or activity; or
      (2)   The county employee or any individual with whom that employee has a
familial relationship is negotiating for or already has an arrangement
concerning employment with an individual or organization involved in the
procurement, decision, or activity.
   (B)   County employees who discover an actual or potential conflict of
interest, relative to a procurement, contract, purchase order, or invoice
decision shall immediately disclose the conflict and file a written statement
of disqualification with their department head or the Purchasing Agent and
shall withdraw from further participation in the transaction.
   (C)   County employees involved directly or indirectly in the procurement
process shall not become contemporaneous employees of any person or
organization with whom the county is contracting.
   (D)   The Financial and Administrative Committee may grant a waiver from the
employee conflict of interest provision of subsection (B) above, or the
contemporaneous employment provision of subsection (C) above upon making a
written determination that:
      (1)   The contemporaneous employment or financial interest of the county
employee has been publicly disclosed; and
      (2)   The county employee will be able to perform his or her procurement
functions without actual or apparent bias or favoritism; and
      (3)   The award will be in the best interests of the county.
   (E)   Individuals shall not engage in unlawful discrimination or prejudice
based on race, religion, national origin, language, gender, political
affiliation, disability, or age when involved in a procurement, contract,
purchase order, or invoice decision.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 12-104, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 33.134 GIFTS OR FINANCIAL GAIN.
   (A)   Individuals involved either directly or indirectly in the procurement
process are prohibited from the following activities:
      (1)   Accepting financial gratuities, gifts, offers of employment
expense-paid trips, private vacations, or other special financial treatment and
favors from any person or organization in connection with any direct or
indirect involvement in a procurement activity or decision, excluding the
acceptance of nominal gifts, including but not limited to advertising samples;
      (2)   Participating in or allowing situations in which any form of
payment, gratuity, or offer of employment is made by or on behalf of any
contractor or subcontractor in an effort to influence the award of a contract
with the county; and
      (3)   Accepting a commission, percentage, or brokerage or contingent fee
in exchange for assisting individuals or organizations to secure a county
contract, purchase, or invoice.
   (B)   Individuals involved either directly or indirectly in the procurement
process are not prohibited from the following activities:
      (1)   Accepting food or refreshment not exceeding $75 per person on a
single calendar day in the course of conducting business with an individual or
organization with whom the county is involved in business activities, provided:
         (a)   The food or refreshment is consumed on the premises from which
it was purchased or prepared; or
         (b)   If it is catered.
      (2)   Accepting only nominal gifts similar to advertising samples, from
an individual or organization with whom the county is involved in procurement
activities; or
      (3)   Attending conferences, trainings, or professional events at the
expense of an individual or organization with whom the county is involved in
procurement activities to which all customers or suppliers and/or the general
public is also invited.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 12-105, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
§ 33.135 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   Individuals are prohibited from using confidential or proprietary
information received in the course of their jobs to give any other individual
or organization unfair advantage in the county’s procurement process.
   (B)   Individuals are prohibited from using confidential information
received in the course of their procurement-related duties for personal gain,
including but not limited to financial gain.
   (C)   Individuals have a duty to protect confidential information, gained
through procurement activities, from being disclosed to other parties.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 12-106, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 33.136 DUTY TO REPORT.
   (A)   An employee shall immediately report to his or her supervisor or
department head any attempt by any other individual or organization to induce
him or her to violate any of the ethical principles and guidelines in this
subchapter.
   (B)   A non-employee shall immediately report to the Purchasing Agent any
attempt by any other individual or organization to induce him or her to violate
any of the ethical principles and guidelines in this subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 12-107, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
§ 33.137 SANCTIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   An employee who violates the ethical principles and guidelines of this
subchapter may be subject to discipline up to and including the termination of
employment pursuant to the Lake County Employee Policies and Procedures
Ordinance. Employees may also be subject to sanctions under the Lake County
Ethics Ordinance.
   (B)   A non-employee, non-officer who violates the ethical principles and
guidelines is subject to the applicable state statutes and the following
penalties as determined by the Financial and Administrative Committee after
consulting with the Purchasing Agent:
      (1)   Written warning or reprimand;
      (2)   Termination of contract;
      (3)   Determination as a non-responsible contract bidder; or
      (4)   Recovery by the county of the value of anything given or received
in violation of the ethical principles and guidelines of this subchapter,
including but not limited to monetary gifts, gratuities, and kickbacks.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-1) (Ord., § 12-108, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2013)
REAL PROPERTY LEASES
§ 33.138 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (A)   For real property leases, the Purchasing Division in conjunction with
Facilities and Construction Services shall, on request, assist county
officeholders, agencies, or department heads with locating suitable space for
lease or with lease renewals. Such leases may extend for a maximum of 20 years
under 55 ILCS 5/5-1083.
   (B)   Requests for real property leases shall be accompanied by the
following information:
      (1)   A general description of the geographic location desired (e.g.,
“Waukegan,” or “northwestern Lake County”); and
      (2)   The minimum square footage required; and
      (3)   Property amenities (operational needs) that are (1) critical, and
(2) not critical, but desired; and
      (4)   Any information on the amount budgeted for the lease.
   (C)   A real estate broker or other professional may be engaged to provide a
market analysis on pricing for space in the requested location.
   (D)   Upon identifying suitable space, the Purchasing Division may assist
the requestor with entering into a lease agreement. After securing the lease,
the Purchasing Division shall turn over any management or other issues related
to the lease to Facilities and Construction Services.
(Ord. 21-0923, passed 10-12-2021)
MOTOR VEHICLE PURCHASING SUBCHAPTER
MOTOR VEHICLE PURCHASING
§ 33.150 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is intended to provide county- wide coordination of the
purchase and maintenance of all county motor vehicles.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 33.151 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter will be administered by the Lake County Division of
Transportation.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 33.152 VEHICLE MAINTENANCE.
   The Lake County Division of Transportation will authorize, schedule, assign,
identify and document repair work for all county vehicles.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 33.153 VEHICLE SPECIFICATIONS.
   The Lake County Division of Transportation in conjunction with purchasing
will determine specifications for new vehicles based on type of use by
departments and historical replacement costs.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 33.154 NEW VEHICLE PURCHASE AND RESALE.
   The Lake County Division of Transportation will determine optimum time for
replacing county vehicles; the replacement factor will be based on vehicle’s
service life record, resale value, and mileage rates.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 33.155 NOTICE FOR INSPECTIONS.
   Inspection dates for new vehicles will be determined according to a
predetermined maintenance schedule, as prescribed by the Lake County Division
of Transportation.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 33.156 USER GUIDELINES.
   This subchapter will be implemented and enforced in accordance with the
Motor Vehicle User Guidelines codified as
Appendix B to this chapter, and any procedures that may be required by the Lake
County Division of Transportation from time to time.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
§ 33.157 BUDGET.
   The Division of Transportation will make annual recommendations to each
department on the amounts to budget in their funds for vehicles and fuel
expense.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977; Ord. passed 2-12-2013; Res.
passed 2-10-2015)
APPENDIX A: RESERVED
 
APPENDIX B: MOTOR VEHICLE USER GUIDELINES
I. Purchasing Policy.
   The following guidelines shall apply to all contracts let by the county for
the purchase of motor vehicles:
   (A)   Coordination by the Lake County Purchasing Agent with the Lake County
Division of Transportation for new vehicle purchase requests;
   (B)   An annual review by the Lake County Division of Transportation of each
county vehicle, based on mileage life and type of use, to determine new or used
vehicle purchases;
   (C)   The Lake County Division of Transportation will have full authority to
determine replacement of county vehicles; and
   (D)   Purchasing Department will review contracts for conformance to the
purchasing ordinance [§§
33.150 through
33.157], and shall conduct all bid lettings.
II. Maintenance Policy.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the maintenance of all motor
vehicles owned by the county. All normal maintenance is to be done at county
highway facilities. Any required warranty and/or “call back” work is to be done
at the dealership where the new vehicle was purchased and all required
maintenance is to be done according to the inspection schedules below.
   (A)   Lake County Division of Transportation inspections; sedans, wagons,
pickups, and vans.
      (1)   Six thousand mile/six-month inspection:
         (a)   Change oil; and
         (b)   Change oil filter.
      (2)   April inspection: put on street tires;
      (3)   October inspection:
         (a)   Check wiper blades;
         (b)   Put on snow tires; and
         (c)   Check anti-freeze.
      (4)   Twenty-four thousand mile/24-month inspection:
         (a)   Change air cleaner;
         (b)   Check brakes;
         (c)   Check tires;
         (d)   Tune-up; and
         (e)   Crank case vent filter.
      (5)   Forty-eight thousand miles/48-month inspection:
         (a)   Change transmission fluid;
         (b)   Check U-joints; and
         (c)   Change coolant.
   (B)   Lake County Division of Transportation inspections; dump trucks and
semis.
      (1)   Trucks, 6,000-mile/four-month inspection:
         (a)   Oil change; and
         (b)   Check fluid levels.
      (2)   Twelve thousand mile/12-month inspection:
         (a)   Check rear axle;
         (b)   Change oil filters; and
         (c)   Check air filters.
      (3)   Twenty-four thousand mile/24-month inspection:
         (a)   Wheel bearings;
         (b)   Brakes;
         (c)   Tune-ups; and
         (d)   Change air filter.
      (4)   October inspection:
         (a)   Check wiper blades; and
         (b)   Check anti-freeze.
   (C)   Lake County Division of Transportation inspections; graders.
      (1)   Complete service in November and February; and
      (2)   Change oil and oil filter.
   (D)   Lake County Division of Transportation inspections; mower tractors.
      (1)   Change air cleaner monthly (summer only);
      (2)   Brakes (every 24 months);
      (3)   One-hundred hour inspection:
         (a)   Oil change; and
         (b)   Oil filter change.
      (4)   October inspection: coolant.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-3) (Ord. passed 10-11-1977)
CHAPTER 34: TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Determination of costs of collecting on behalf of taxing districts
Taxes and Surcharges
   
34.15   Lake County 9-1-1 Service Area surcharge
   
34.16   Fee paid to taxing bodies
   
34.17   Tax on real estate property transfer
Hotel Operator’s Tax
   
34.35   Imposition
   
34.36   Definitions
   
34.37   Collection
   
34.38   Payment
   
34.39   Disposition of proceeds
   
34.40   Reimbursement
   
34.41   Interest penalties
   
34.42   Effective date
   
34.43   Enforcement
Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
34.55   Tax imposed; rate
   
34.56   Collection of tax by retailers
   
34.57   Severability
   
34.58   Effective date
Cross-reference:
   Solid waste management tax, see
Ch. 50
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 DETERMINATION OF COSTS OF COLLECTING ON BEHALF OF TAXING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The County Collector is hereby authorized to determine the total
actual costs to the county of extending and collecting taxes on behalf of
taxing districts within the county and charge each taxing district its
proportionate share of the costs. The proportionate share of a taxing district
shall be determined by applying the same percentage to the actual total cost of
extension (as determined by cost analysis by an independent auditing firm) as
its extension (dollar amount) bears to the total extension (dollar amount). The
resultant amount shall be billed to each taxing district after tax collections
have been distributed to all taxing districts within the county. Lake County is
to be included as a “taxing district”.
   (B)   This section shall be in full force and effect commencing October 1,
1974.
(1977 Code, § 5:2-2) (Ord. passed 9-10-1974)
TAXES AND SURCHARGES
§ 34.15 LAKE COUNTY 9-1-1 SERVICE AREA SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Pursuant to referendum voted in favor thereof, a surcharge is hereby
imposed on monthly billed subscribers of telecommunication carriers residing
within the Lake County 9-1-1 Service Area at a rate of $0.75 per month per
network connection, as hereinafter defined, for the purpose of funding a 9-1-
1 emergency telephone system as provided by the Emergency Telephone System Act
(“Act”).
   (B)   A monthly billed subscriber shall be deemed to reside within the Lake
County 9-1-1 Service Area if the service address, as hereinafter defined, is
located within the Lake County 9-1-1 Service Area.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
      NETWORK CONNECTION. The number of voice grade communication channels
directly between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier’s public
switched network without the intervention of any other telecommunications
carriers switched network which would be required to carry the subscriber’s
inter- premises traffic.
      SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of the subscriber’s telecommunications
facilities accessing the network connection or connections that are subject to
the surcharge. If this is not a defined location, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean
the location of a subscriber’s primary use of the network connection as defined
by telephone number, authorization code, or location in this state where bills
are sent.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court,
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity.
   (D)   The County Administrator shall provide any telecommunication carrier
collecting the surcharge with a certified list of those network connections
assigned to the county to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge. The
certified list may be revised by the County Administrator on 60 days’ prior
written notice provided to the telecommunication carriers.
   (E)   The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the month following
the expiration of 90 days from the date the Lake County Clerk certifies to any
of the telecommunication carriers who are required to collect the surcharge
that the referendum referred to in subsection (A) above has passed.
   (F)   Each telecommunication carrier is hereby authorized and instructed to
deduct 3% from the gross amount of surcharge collected prior to remittance
under subsection (G) of this section in reimbursement for the expense of
accounting and collecting the surcharge.
   (G)   Every telecommunication carrier shall remit to the Lake County
Treasurer the amount of surcharge collected for each calendar month within 30
days following expiration of each month to which the surcharge applies, net of
any network or other “9-1-1” or sophisticated “9-1-1” system charge then due to
the particular telecommunication carrier as shown on an itemized bill and the
3% accounting and collection charge described in subsection (F) above.
   (H)   Simultaneously with the remittance described in subsection (G) above,
each telecommunication carrier shall make a return to the Lake County Treasurer
for the period to which the remittance applies stating as follows:
      (1)   The name of the telecommunication carrier;
      (2)   The telecommunication carrier’s principal place of business and the
location to which inquiries may be directed;
      (3)   The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies;
      (4)   The gross amount of surcharge collected, and the net amount
remitted; and
      (5)   Any other reasonable and related information as may be required by
the county and/or the Emergency Telephone System Board to be established for
the Lake County 9-1-1 Service Area.
   (I)   If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was
not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be credited against
any surcharge due, or to become due, under this section; provided that no
amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited. Ninety days’ prior notice shall be given to the
Emergency Telephone System Board established by the county on any credit
against a surcharge due.
   (J)   No action to recover any amount of surcharge due under the provisions
of this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
the amount.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-6) (Ord. passed 11-14-1989)
§ 34.16 FEE PAID TO TAXING BODIES.
   The $0.07 fee for each extension of taxes shall not be retained by the Lake
County Treasurer nor by the Lake County Clerk, but the fee shall be paid to the
taxing bodies of the county.
(1977 Code, § 5:2-1) (Ord. passed 5-8-1973)
§ 34.17 TAX ON REAL ESTATE PROPERTY TRANSFER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
      BENEFICIAL INTEREST. Any interest, regardless of how small or minimal the
interest may be, in a land trust, held by a trustee for the benefit of
beneficiaries of the land trust.
      LAND TRUST. Any express agreement or arrangement whereby a use,
confidence, or trust is declared of any land, or of any charge upon land, for
the use or benefit of any beneficiary, under which the legal title to real
property is held by a trustee, which may be enforced by the beneficiaries who
have the exclusive right to manage and control the real estate, to have the
possession thereof, to receive the net proceeds from the rental, sale,
hypothecation, or other disposition thereof, and under which the interest of
the beneficiary is personal property only.
      PERSON. A natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor,
trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court.
      RECORDATION. Includes the issuance of certificates of title by registrars
of title under An Act Concerning Land Titles, approved May 1, 1897, as amended,
pursuant to the filing of deeds for that purpose, as well as the recording of
deeds by Recorders of Deeds.
      TRUST DOCUMENT. A document required to be recorded under the Land Trust
Recordation and Transfer Act.
      VALUE. The amount of the full actual consideration thereof, including the
amount of any lien or liens assumed by the buyer.
   (B)   (1)   A tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring title to real
estate, as represented by the deed that is filed for recordation, and on the
privilege of transferring a beneficial interest in real property which is the
subject of a land trust or represented by the trust document that is filed for
recordation, at the rate of $0.25 for each $500 of value or fraction thereof
stated in the declaration provided for in subsection (C) of this section. If,
however, the real estate is transferred subject to a mortgage, the amount of
the mortgage remaining outstanding at the time of transfer shall not be
included in the basis of computing the tax.
      (2)   The taxes shall be collected by the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar
of Titles through the sale of revenue stamps whose design, denominations, and
form shall be prescribed by a resolution of the County Board, and the Recorder
of Deeds or Registrar of Titles shall sell the revenue stamps at a rate of
$0.25 per $500 of value or fraction thereof. Provided, however, that until such
a time as the County Board has prescribed the design, denominations, and form
of county revenue stamps and provided the stamps to the Recorder of Deeds, the
Recorder of Deeds may continue to issue state real estate transfer tax stamps
indicating payment of $0.50 per $500 of value or fraction thereof, one-half of
which will evidence collection of the county real estate transfer tax. Except
as provided in subsection (D) of this section, no deed or trust document shall
be accepted for filing by the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Title unless
county revenue stamps in the required amount have been purchased from the
Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles. The revenue stamp shall be affixed to
the deed or trust document by the Recorder of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles
either before or after recording as requested by the grantee or the trustee of
a land trust. A person using or affixing a revenue stamp shall cancel it and so
deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by marking it with his or her
initials and the day, month, and year when the affixing occurred. The markings
shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a
machine or punch. However, the revenue stamp shall not be so defaced as to
prevent ready determination of its denomination and genuineness.
   (C)   At the time that the taxes levied by this amended section are paid,
there shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles a
fully executed and completed copy of the “Real Estate Transfer Declaration”
required by provisions of the Real Estate Transfer Tax Act, approved July 17,
1967, as amended; or in the case of a transfer of beneficial interest under a
land trust, a fully executed and completed copy of any instrument or facsimile
thereof which transfers the beneficial interest under a land trust shall be
filed with the Recorder of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles pursuant to the
Land Trust Recordation and Transfer Tax Act.
   (D)   All deeds or trust documents exempted in § 4 of the Real Estate
Transfer Tax Act, approved July 17, 1967, as amended, shall also be exempt from
any taxes imposed pursuant to this amended section.
   (E)   All proceeds resulting from the collection of the taxes imposed by
this amended section shall be paid to the Lake County Treasurer.
   (F)   The taxes herein imposed shall be in addition to all other occupation
or privilege taxes imposed by the state or by any municipal corporation or
political subdivision hereof.
(1977 Code, § 5:2-3) (Ord. passed 1-14-1986)
HOTEL OPERATOR’S TAX
§ 34.35 IMPOSITION.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting,
leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel which is not located within a city,
village, or incorporated town in the county at the rate of 5% of the gross
rental receipts from the renting, leasing, or letting, excluding, however, from
gross rental receipts, the proceeds of renting, leasing, or letting to
permanent residents of that hotel.
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 34.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   HOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping, or housekeeping
accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses, and apartment houses.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or
possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations
accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms.
   OPERATOR. Any person operating a hotel.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupies or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor,
trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   RENT or RENTAL. The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash receipts,
cash, credits, and property or services of any land or nature.
   ROOM or ROOMS. Any living quarters, sleeping, or housekeeping
accommodations.
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 34.37 COLLECTION.
   The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the Lake County
Treasurer. The Treasurer shall have the full power to administer and enforce
the provisions of 55 ILCS 5/5-1030 and this subchapter, as amended.
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 34.38 PAYMENT.
   Every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or letting rooms
in a hotel which is not located within a city, village, or incorporated town in
the county shall file with the Lake County Treasurer, on or before the last day
of each calendar month, the report to the Illinois Department of Revenue
required by § 6 of the Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 145/6)
approved July 6, 1961, as amended. At the time a copy of the report is filed
with the Lake County Treasurer the person operating the hotel shall pay the
amount of tax required by §
34.35, as amended.
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 34.39 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds from the tax hereby imposed shall be placed in a separate
account by the Lake County Treasurer. Sixty percent, 80%, and 100% of the
proceeds collected from the tax hereby imposed shall be allocated by the county
to the Lake County Convention and Visitor’s Bureau for the county fiscal years
2002, 2003, and 2004 and subsequent fiscal years, respectively, and 40%, 20%,
and 0% of the proceeds shall be allocated by the county to the Lake County
Partnership for Economic Development, Inc. for the corresponding years,
respectively. This allocation process shall be in accordance with the county
budget policies and the Financial and Administrative Policies and Procedures
Manual. All expenditures of the proceeds shall be made solely to promote
tourism; conventions; expositions; theatrical, sports, and cultural activities
within the county; or otherwise to attract non-resident overnight visitors to
the county.
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 34.40 REIMBURSEMENT.
   Persons subject to the tax imposed hereby may reimburse themselves for their
tax liability for the tax by separately stating the tax as an additional
charge, which charge may be stated in combination in a single amount with state
tax imposed under the Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 145).
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 34.41 INTEREST PENALTIES.
   In the event a person required to pay the tax imposed hereby shall fail to
remit the tax within 15 days after the same is due, the person shall be
required to pay interest at the rate of 1% per month for each month the tax, or
any amount thereof, remains unpaid. Each and every late payment for the month
in which a tax is due shall be considered a separate offense.
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 34.42 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective March 1, 1986 and thereafter the Lake
County Treasurer shall proceed to administer and enforce this subchapter and
any subsequent amendments as authorized by the Lake County Board.
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 34.43 ENFORCEMENT.
   Within 15 days after passage and adoption of this subchapter or any
subsequent amendments thereto, the Lake County Treasurer shall proceed to
administer and enforce the provisions of 55 ILCS 5/5-1030 or this subchapter,
as amended, on behalf of the county as of the effective date cited in §
34.42, or as cited in subsequent amendatory documentation.
(1977 Code, § 1:9-2) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 34.55 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail locations in the county on the
gross receipts from these sales at the following rates:
      (1)   3.75% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business in unincorporated areas of Lake County; and
      (2)   3.00% of the gross receipts of sales made in a municipality located
in Lake County; and
   (B)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of the
County Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax Law (55 ILCS 5/5-1006.8) (the "Act").
(Ord. 19-1525, passed 10-8-2019)
§ 34.56 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A) The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue (the "Department"). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this subchapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
   (B)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department. The
Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Act.
(Ord. 19-1525, passed 10-8-2019)
§ 34.57 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions and sections of this subchapter shall be deemed separable and
the invalidity of any portion of this subchapter shall not affect the validity
of the remainder.
(Ord. 19-1525, passed 10-8-2019)
§ 34.58 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval and publication as required by law, provided, however, that the
tax provided for herein shall take effect for all sales on the first day of
January, 2020, or thereafter in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Copies of Ord. 19-1525 shall be certified and sent to the Illinois Department
of Revenue immediately upon effect.
(Ord. 19-1525, passed 10-8-2019)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCES, FEES, AND FUNDS
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Election not to be subject to certain statutes
Fees
   
35.15   Criminal, traffic and civil fees
   
35.16   Therapeutic Intensive Monitoring Court fee
   
35.17   (Reserved)
   
35.18   Vital records automation fee
   
35.19   (Reserved)
   
35.20   Mandatory drug and alcohol testing expenses; electronic monitoring
costs for probation or conditional discharge
   
35.21   Radio communication system fees
   
35.22   (Reserved)
   
35.23   (Reserved)
   
35.24   Electronic monitoring for periodic imprisonment
   
35.25   Fees for attendants of grand jury and petit jury
   
35.26   Electric vehicle charging station fee
Lake County Sheriff’s Fees
   
35.35   Judicial sales fees
   
35.36   Fees for services performed by Lake County Sheriff’s Office
   
35.37   Administrative fee for impounded vehicles
Funds
   
35.50   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
   
Appendix A: Ability to Pay Table
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 ELECTION NOT TO BE SUBJECT TO CERTAIN STATUTES.
   (A)   The County Board of Lake County, Illinois, hereby elects not to be
subject to 705 ILCS 105/27.5, which section was added by S.B. 907 (P.A. 87-
670). The County Board does hereby elect not to be subject to 705 ILCS 105/
27.6, said section having been added by H.B. 3884 (P.A. 87-1229).
   (B)   This section shall be effective January 1, 1992.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-10) (Ord. passed 12-10-1991)
Editor’s note:
   705 ILCS 105//27.5 and 27.6 were repealed by repealed by P.A. 100-987
FEES
§ 35.15 CRIMINAL, TRAFFIC AND CIVIL FEES.
   Civil fees and criminal assessments. Civil fees and criminal assessments
shall meet the requirements of Section 27.1b of the Clerks of Courts Act, 705
ILCS 105/27.1b, and the Criminal and Traffic Assessment Act, 705 ILCS 135/1-
1 et seq.
   (A)   Civil fees.
      (1)   Fees in civil matters shall be assessed and distributed as set
forth herein, in compliance with Section 27.1b of the Clerks of Courts Act, 705
ILCS 105/27.1b.
      (2)   The fees for filing a complaint, petition or other pleading
initiating a civil action shall be as set forth in the schedules below in
accordance with case categories established by the Illinois Supreme Court.
         (a)   SCHEDULE 1: $314 to be divided as follows:
            1.   $45 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
deposited as follows:
               A.   Court Automation Fund - $20.
               B.   Court Document Storage Fund - $20.
               C.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Account -
$5.
            2.   $19 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and deposited as
follows:
               A.   Mandatory Arbitration Fund - $8.
               B.   Access to Justice Fund - $2.
               C.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
            3.   $250 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and deposited as
follows:
               A.   General Fund (Circuit Clerk) - $184.
               B.   General Fund (Court Security) - $40.
               C.   Neutral Site Exchange Fund - $10.
               D.   Children's Waiting Room Fund - $11.
               E.   Law Library Fund - $5.
         (b)   SCHEDULE 2: $264 to be divided as follows:
            1.   $45 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
deposited as follows:
               A.   Court Automation Fund - $20.
               B.   Court Document Storage Fund - $20.
               C.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Account -
$5.
            2.   $19 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
               A.   Mandatory Arbitration Fund - $8.
               B.   Access to Justice Fund - $2.
               C.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
            3.   $200 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
               A.   General Fund (Circuit Clerk) - $134.
               B.   General Fund (Court Security) - $40.
               C.   Neutral Site Exchange Fund - $10.
               D.   Children's Waiting Room Fund - $11.
               E.   Law Library Fund - $5.
         (c)   SCHEDULE 3: $89 to be divided as follows:
            1.   $22 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
deposited as follows:
               A.   Court Automation Fund - $10.
               B.   Court Document Storage Fund - $10.
               C.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Account -
$2.
            2.   $11 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
               A.   Access to Justice Fund - $2.
               B.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
            3.   $56 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
               A.   General Fund (Circuit Clerk) - $30.
               B.   General Fund (Court Security) - $10.
               C.   Neutral Site Exchange Fund - $6.
               D.   Children's Waiting Room Fund - $7.
               E.   Law Library Fund - $3.
         (d)   SCHEDULE 4: $0.
      (3)   The fees for filing an appearance in a civil action shall be as set
forth in the schedules below in accordance with case categories established by
the Illinois Supreme Court:
         (a)   SCHEDULE 1: $189 to be divided as follows:
            1.   $45 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
distributed as follows:
               A.   Court Automation Fund - $20.
               B.   Court Document Storage Fund - $20.
               C.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Account -
$5.
            2.   $19 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
               A.   Mandatory Arbitration Fund - $8.
               B.   Access to Justice Fund - $2.
               C.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
            3.   $125 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
               A.   General Fund (Circuit Clerk) - $60.
               B.   General Fund (Court Security) - $39.
               C.   Neutral Site Exchange Fund - $10.
               D.   Children's Waiting Room Fund - $11.
               E.   Law Library Fund - $5.
         (b)   SCHEDULE 2: $109 to be divided as follows:
            1.   $10 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court follows:
               A.   Court Automation Fund - $5.
               B.   Court Document Storage Fund - $5.
               C.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Account -
$0.
            2.   $9 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
               A.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
            3.   $90 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
               A.   General Fund (Circuit Clerk) - $38.
               B.   General Fund (Court Security) - $28.
               C.   Neutral Site Exchange Fund - $10.
               D.   Children's Waiting Room Fund - $10.
               E.   Law Library Fund - $5.
      (4)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, the following
miscellaneous fees are to be deposited in the County General Fund to be used
for purposes related to the operation of the court system in the County:
         (a)   Alias summons or citation: $5.
         (b)   Jury services: $212.
         (c)   Change of venue: $40.
         (d)   Petition to vacate or modify:
            1.   If filed within 30 days: $50.
            2.   If filed after 30 days: $75.
            3.   Motion to vacate or amend a final order, motion to vacate ex
parte judgment, judgment of forfeiture, or failure to appear, notices sent to
Secretary of State: $40.
         (e)   Appeals preparation:
            1.   If record is 100 pages or less: $50.
            2.   If record is between 100 and 200 pages: $100.
            3.   If record is 200 pages or more: additional fee of $0.25 per
page.
         (f)   1.   Garnishment, wage deduction, and citation proceedings:
               A.   Amount in controversy $1,000 or less: $15.
               B.   Amount in controversy greater than $1,000 and not more than
$5,000: $30.
               C.   Amount in controversy greater than $5,000: $50.
            2.   Debt collection. In any proceeding to collect a debt subject
to the exception in division (A)(4)(r)1. below, the circuit court shall order,
and the Clerk shall collect from each judgment debtor a fee of:
               A.   $35 if the amount in controversy in the proceeding is not
more than $1,000;
               B.   $45 if the amount in controversy in the proceeding is
greater than $1,000 and not more than $5,000; and
               C.   $65 if the amount in controversy in the proceeding is
greater than $5,000.
         (g)   Collections:
            1.   All collections (except state and county and maintenance and
child support cases): 2.5% of the amount collected and turned over.
            2.   In child support and maintenance cases: $36 annually to be
deposited in the Child Support Maintenance Fund.
            3.   Certifications to Secretary of State pursuant to Section 7-703
of the Family Financial Responsibility Law: $5.
            4.   The State 's Attorney shall receive a 10% fee from the sale of
real estate sold in a proceeding for foreclosure of a lien on delinquent real
estate taxes. The Circuit Clerk shall collect the fee from the total amount
realized from the sale and remit to the County Treasurer. The County Treasurer
will credit the earnings to the Office of the State's Attorney.
         (h)   Mailing: $10 plus the cost of postage.
         (i)   For each certified copy of a judgment, following the first copy:
$6.
         (j)   Certification, authentication, and reproduction:
            1.   Each certification or authentication for taking
acknowledgement of a deed or other instrument in writing with the seal of
office: $6.
            2.   Reproduction of any document contained in the Clerk's files:
               A.   $0.25 per page.
         (k)   For each record search, within a division or municipal district:
$6 for each year searched.
         (l)   For each page of hard copy print output, when case records are
maintained on an automated medium: $0.25.
         (m)   Performing a marriage in court: $10.
         (n)   For filing each deed of voluntary assignment: $20; for recording
a deed of voluntary assignment: $0.50 for each 100 words.
         (o)   Expungement petition: $60 and an additional fee of $4 for each
certified copy of an order to expunge arrest records.
            1.   The total fee for filing and expungement petition shall not
exceed 152 with the itemized breakdown as follows:
               A.   Expungement petition: $60;
               B.   Certified copy ($4 each, three required): $12;
               C.   Clerk Operation and Administrative Fund: $10;
               D.   Mailing fees: $10;
               E.   Illinois State Police expungement fee: $60.
         (p)   Probate filings:
            1.   For each account (other than one final account) filed in the
estate of a decedent or ward: $25.
            2.   Filing a claim:
               A.   Amount claimed greater than $150 and not more than $500:
$20.
               B.   Amount claimed greater than $500 and not more than $10,000:
$40.
               C.   Amount claimed greater than $10,000: $60.
            3.   For filing a claim, petition, or supplemental proceeding based
upon an action seeking equitable relief: $60.
            4.   For a jury demand: $137.
            5.   For each certified copy of letters of office, of court orders
or other certifications: $2 per page.
            6.   For each exemplification: $2 plus the fee for certification.
         (q)   For correction of the case number, case title, or attorney
computer identification number, if required by rule of court, on any document
filed in the Clerk's Office: $25.
         (r)   Miscellaneous.
            1.   Interest earned on any fees collected by the Clerk shall be
turned over to the county General Fund as an earning of the office.
            2.   For any check, draft, or other bank instrument returned to the
Clerk for non-sufficient funds, account closed, or payment stopped, the Clerk
shall collect a fee of $25.
         (s)   Other fees.
            1.   Any fees not covered in this section shall be set by rule or
administrative order of the circuit court with the approval of the
Administrative Office of the Illinois Courts. The clerk of the circuit court
may provide services in connection with the operation of the clerk's office,
other than those services mentioned in this section, as may be requested by the
public and agreed to by the clerk and approved by the Chief Judge. Any charges
for additional services shall be as agreed to between the clerk and the party
making the request and approved by the Chief Judge. Nothing in this division
(A)(3)(s) shall be construed to require any clerk to provide any service not
otherwise required by law.
         (t)   Exceptions.
            1.   No fee authorized by this section shall apply to:
               A.   Police departments or other law enforcement agencies. In
this section, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means: an agency of the state or agency of
a unit of local government which is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to
maintain public order and to enforce criminal laws or ordinances; the Attorney
General; or any state's Attorney;
               B.   Any unit of local government or school district, except in
counties having a population of 500,000 or more the County Board may by
resolution set fees for units of local government or school districts no
greater than the minimum fees applicable in counties with a population less
than 3,000,000 ; provided however, no fee may be charged to any unit of local
government or school district in connection with any action which, in whole or
in part, is: (i) to enforce an ordinance; (ii) to collect a debt; or (iii)
under the Administrative Review Law;
               C.   Any action instituted by the corporate authority of a
municipality with more than 1,000,000 inhabitants under Section 11-31-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-31-1) and any action instituted under
subsection (b) of Section 11-31-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-
31-1(b)) by a private owner or tenant of real property within 1,200 feet of a
dangerous or unsafe building seeking an order compelling the owner or owners of
the building to take any of the actions authorized under that subsection;
               D.   Any commitment petition or petition for an order
authorizing the administration of psychotropic medication or electroconvulsive
therapy under the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code;
               E.   A petitioner in any order of protection proceeding,
including, but not limited to, fees for filing, modifying, withdrawing,
certifying, or photocopying petitions for orders of protection, issuing alias
summons, any related filing service, or certifying, modifying, vacating, or
photocopying any orders of protection; or
               F.   Proceedings for the appointment of a confidential
intermediary under the Adoption Act.
            2.   No fee other than the filing fee contained in the applicable
schedule in this division (A) shall be charged to any person in connection with
an adoption proceeding.
            3.   Upon good cause shown, the court may waive any fees associated
with a special needs' adoption. The term SPECIAL NEEDS ADOPTION has the meaning
provided by the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services.
      (5)   Unpaid fees.
         (a)   Unless a court ordered payment schedule is implemented or the
fee requirements of this section are waived by court order, the clerk is
authorized to add to any unpaid fees and costs a delinquency amount equal to
15% of the unpaid fees that remain unpaid after 90 days.
         (b)   Delinquency amounts collected pursuant to this provision shall
be deposited into the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Account
to defray additional administrative costs incurred by the clerk in collecting
unpaid fees and costs.
   (B)   Criminal assessments.
      (1)   Assessments shall be imposed in criminal, traffic, conservation and
non-traffic matters in accordance with the schedules set forth in the Criminal
and Traffic Assessment Act, 705 ILCS 135/1-5 et seq., and shall be distributed
as set forth herein.
      (2)   Schedules.
         (a)   SCHEDULE 1: Generic Felony Offenses. The Clerk shall collect
$549 and remit as follows:
            1.   $354 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $255 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $160.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $35.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $20.
               E.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Account.
               F.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund.
               G.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund.
               H.   $20 to the General Fund (County Jail Medical Costs).
               I.   $20 to the General Fund (Probation and Court Services).
            2.   $195 to the State Treasurer.
         (b)   SCHEDULE 2: Felony DUI Offenses. The Clerk shall collect $1,709
and remit as follows:
            1.   $399 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund.
               D.   $300 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $205.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $35.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $20.
                  (v)   $10 to the General Fund (Child Advocacy Center).
                  (vi)   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund.
                  (vii)   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund.
                  (viii)   $20 to the General Fund (County Jail Medical Costs).
                  (ix)   $20 to the General Fund (Probation and Court
Services).
            2.   $1,110 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $200 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (c)   SCHEDULE 3: Felony Drug Offenses. The Clerk shall collect $2,215
and remit as follows:
            1.   $354 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $255 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $160.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $35.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Court): $20.
               E.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Account.
               F.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund.
               G.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund.
               H.   $20 to the General Fund (County Jail Medical).
               I.   $20 to the General Fund (Probation and Court Services).
            2.   $1,861 to the State Treasurer.
         (d)   SCHEDULE 4: Felony Sex Offenses. The Clerk shall collect $1,314
and remit as follows:
            1.   $354 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund.
               D.   $255 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $160.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $35.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $20.
               E.   $10 to the General Fund (Child Advocacy Center).
               F.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund.
               G.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund.
               H.   $20 to the General Fund (County Jail Medical Costs).
               I.   $20 to the General Fund (Probation and Court Services).
            2.   $960 to the State Treasurer.
         (e)   SCHEDULE 5: Generic Misdemeanor Offenses. The Clerk shall
collect $439 and remit as follows:
            1.   $282 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $185 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $110.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $15.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $20.
               F.   $10 to the General Fund (Child Advocacy Center).
               G.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund.
               H.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund.
               I.   $10 to the General Fund (County Jail Medical Costs).
               J.   $20 to the General Fund (Probation and Court Services).
            2.   $155 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $2 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (f)   SCHEDULE 6: Misdemeanor DUI Offenses. The Clerk shall collect
$1,381 and remit as follows:
            1.   $322 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $225 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $150.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $15.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $20.
               F.   $10 to the General Fund (Child Advocacy Center).
               G.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund.
               H.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund.
               I.   $10 to the General Fund (County Jail Medical Costs).
               J.   $20 to the General Fund (Probation and Court Services).
            2.   $707 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $352 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (g)   SCHEDULE 7: Misdemeanor Drug Offenses. The Clerk shall collect
$905 and remit as follows:
            1.   $282 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $185 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $110.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $15.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $20.
               F.   $10 to the General Fund (Child Advocacy Center).
               G.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund.
               H.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund.
               I.   $10 to the General Fund (County Jail Medical Costs).
               J.   $20 to the General Fund (Probation and Court Services).
            2.   $621 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $2 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (h)   SCHEDULE 8: Misdemeanor Sex Offenses. The Clerk shall collect
$1,184 and remit as follows:
            1.   $282 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $185 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $110.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $15.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $20.
               F.   $10 to the General Fund (Child Advocacy Center).
               G.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund.
               H.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund.
               I.   $10 to the General Fund (County Jail Medical Costs).
               J.   $20 to the General Fund (Probation and Court Services).
            2.   $900 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $2 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (i)   SCHEDULE 9: Major Traffic Offenses. The Clerk shall collect $325
and remit as follows:
            1.   $203 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $150 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $75.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $15.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $20.
            2.   $97 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $25 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (j)   SCHEDULE 10: Minor Traffic Offenses. The Clerk shall collect
$226 and remit as follows:
            1.   $168 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $115 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $55.
                  (ii)   General Fund (State's Attorney): $15.
                  (iii)   General Fund (Court Security): $40.
                  (iv)   General Fund (Specialty Courts): $5.
            2.   $46 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $12 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (k)   SCHEDULE 10.5: Truck Weight and Load Offenses. The Clerk shall
collect $260 and remit as follows:
            1.   $168 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $115 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $105.
                  (ii)   General Fund (Court Security): $10.
            2.   $92 to the State Treasurer.
         (l)   SCHEDULE 11: Conservation Offenses. The Clerk shall collect $195
and remit as follows:
            1.   $168 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $115 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $105.
                  (ii)   General Fund (Court Security): $10.
            2.   $25 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $2 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (m)   SCHEDULE 12: Dispositions under Supreme Court Rule 529 (No Court
Appearance Required Traffic Offenses). The Clerk shall collect $164 and remit
as follows:
            1.   $100 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $47 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $37.
                  (ii)   General Fund (Court Security): $10.
            2.   $14 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $50 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
         (n)   SCHEDULE 13: Petty Offense, Business Offense, or Non-Traffic
Ordinance Violation. The Clerk shall collect $100 and remit as follows:
            1.   $75 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Court Automation Fund.
               B.   $20 to the Court Document Storage Fund.
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Account.
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund.
               E.   $22 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  (i)   General Fund (Circuit Clerk): $12.
                  (ii)   General Fund (Court Security): $10.
            2.   $25 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
   (C)   Unpaid assessments.
      (1)   Unless a court ordered payment, schedule is implemented or the
assessment requirements of this section are waived by court order, the Clerk is
authorized to add to any unpaid assessments a delinquency amount equal to 15%
of the unpaid assessments that remain unpaid after 90 days.
      (2)   Delinquency amounts collected pursuant to this provision shall be
deposited into the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Account to
defray additional administrative costs incurred by the Clerk in collecting
unpaid assessments.
(Ord. 19-0948, passed 6-11-2019; Ord. 20-0982, passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 23-0860,
passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 25-0885, passed 8-8-2025; Ord. 25-0887, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 35.16 THERAPEUTIC INTENSIVE MONITORING COURT FEE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 730 ILCS 5/5-6-3(g), costs of mandatory drug or alcohol
testing shall be assessed against each offender sentenced in the Therapeutic
Intensive Monitoring Court (TIM Court), at the time of sentencing, as provided
in the following fee schedule:
      (1)   For urine drug screening tests, a flat fee of $300 for each
offender sentenced in TIM Court; and
      (2)   The fee shall be assessed in accordance with the offender’s ability
to pay.
   (B)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court of the county is hereby authorized and
directed to collect fees in accordance with subsection (A) above.
   (C)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court shall remit the fees referenced in
subsection (A) above to the Lake County Treasurer who is authorized and
directed to deposit to the fees in the Lake County working cash fund for
general corporate purposes.
   (D)   The fees referenced in subsection (A) above shall be used to finance
the costs of drug and alcohol testing for offenders in the TIM Court program.
   (E)   This section shall take effect on August 1, 2005.
   (F)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court shall commence collection of the fees
referenced in subsection (A) above on August 1, 2005.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-15) (Ord. passed 7-12-2005)
§ 35.17 (RESERVED).
§ 35.18 VITAL RECORDS AUTOMATION FEE.
   (A)   The Lake County Clerk is hereby authorized to charge and collect and
to continue to charge and collect the Lake County Clerk automation fee of an
additional $2 for certified copies of vital records as authorized by § 4-4001
of the Counties Code, 55 ILCS 5/4-4001 for the purpose of defraying the
expenses of converting the Lake County Clerk’s document storage system for
vital records (as defined in § 1 of the Vital Records Act, 410 ILCS 535/1) to
computers or micrographs and for maintaining an automated vital records
recordkeeping system in the Lake County Clerk’s office.
   (B)   The Lake County Treasurer is authorized to establish a special Lake
County Clerk Automation Fund in which these funds shall be deposited, and which
funds the Lake County Clerk is authorized to expend for payment of any cost
related to the automation system for vital records.
(1977 Code, § 5:2-5) (Res./Ord. passed 5-9-1995)
§ 35.19 (RESERVED).
§ 35.20 MANDATORY DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING EXPENSES; ELECTRONIC MONITORING
COSTS FOR PROBATION OR CONDITIONAL DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 730 ILCS 5/5-6-3(g), an offender sentenced to probation or
conditional discharge who is ordered to undergo mandatory drug or alcohol
testing, or both, or who is assigned to be placed on an approved electronic
monitoring device during these relative periods, shall pay the costs incidental
to the mandatory drug or alcohol testing, or both, and costs incidental to the
approved electronic monitoring in accordance with the fee schedule cited in
subsection (C) below.
   (B)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court of Lake County, Illinois, is hereby
authorized and directed to collect fees in accordance with the schedule cited
in subsection (C) below. The Clerk shall pay these fees to the County Treasurer
who shall deposit the fees in the county’s working cash fund for general
corporate purposes. Moneys collected from these fees shall be used to defray
the costs of drug and alcohol testing (730 ILCS 5/5-6-3(g)).
   (C)   The following schedule of reasonable fees, based on the person’s
ability to pay, is hereby established to reflect the cost of maintenance,
testing, and incidental expenses related to mandatory drug and alcohol testing
and all costs incidental to approved electronic monitoring:
      (1)   Schedule:
 
(a) Urine drug screening tests for felony and misdemeanor Flat fee of $125
probationers
(b) Urine drug screening tests for intensive probationers Flat fee of $150
(c) Electronic monitoring                                 $10 per day
 
      (2)   Ability to pay: The fees shall be assessed in accordance with the
defendant’s ability to pay.
   (D)   The County Board of Lake County, Illinois does herewith request the
concurrence of the Chief Judge of the 19th Judicial Circuit in the rate
schedule cited in subsection (C) above. Pursuant to law, the concurrence shall
be in the form of an administrative order.
   (E)   The proceeds from all fees imposed by this section shall be remitted
by the Clerk of the Circuit Court to the Lake County Treasurer, who shall cause
to be deposited all such funds remitted to him or her into the county’s working
cash fund for general corporate purposes.
   (F)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court shall commence collection of the fees
cited in subsection (C) of this section on January 1, 2001.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-8) (Ord. passed 11-20-1990; Ord. passed 11-14-2000; Ord.
passed 4-11-2011)
§ 35.21 RADIO COMMUNICATION SYSTEM FEES.
   (A)   The Lake County Clerk is hereby directed to keep the accounts and
correspondence relating to the business of the Lake County Radio System.
   (B)   Any municipality or public body desiring connection of their
facilities with the Lake County Radio System will petition the County Board for
same in writing over the signature of their mayor, village president, or person
or persons empowered by law to enter into contract for the municipality or
public body, who, in turn, will submit the petition to the County Board through
its Law and Judicial Committee.
   (C)   After the petition has been approved by the Board, the Lake County
Clerk will be directed to notify the petitioners who will then enter into
contract with the county through the Lake County Clerk and the Chair of the
County Board.
   (D)   Only after the petition has been approved and the contract has been
properly executed shall the equipment be installed.
   (E)   The Radio Technician is directed to keep the Lake County Clerk
informed and up to date on all installations, changes, alterations and
discontinuances which affect the accounting and billing.
   (F)   (1)   Starting with December 1950, and with each successive year, the
Lake County Clerk will prepare for the County Board for its December meeting a
report showing a summary of the ledger account, but detailing in particular any
arrears in payments by any of the contracting parties.
      (2)   He or she will furnish a copy of this report to the Chair of this
Board, the County Auditor, and the Chair of the Financial and Administrative
Services Committee and the Law and Judicial Committee.
   (G)   (1)   The dates for billing by the county will be determined in the
following manner:
         (a)   Installations prior to the fifteenth day of the month to be
billed for on the basis of a full month; and
         (b)   Installations on and after the fifteenth of the month to be
omitted from billing for that month.
      (2)   (a)   On December 1, 1950, the Lake County Clerk will forward to
each contracting party a bill for all accumulated services to that date which
remain unpaid. With the same bill he or she will also mail them an advance bill
for the 12 months ending November 30, 1951, for the equipment then in use,
giving them 60 days in which to pay the advance bill.
         (b)   This procedure will be followed from year to year.
   (H)   Checks shall be made payable to the Lake County Treasurer, but will be
forwarded to the Lake County Clerk, who after entering a credit to the payer’s
account will turn them over to the Lake County Treasurer for deposit.
(1977 Code, § 7:1) (Res. passed 9-12-1950)
§ 35.22 (RESERVED).
§ 35.23 (RESERVED).
§ 35.24 ELECTRONIC MONITORING FOR PERIODIC IMPRISONMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to 730 ILCS 5/5-7-3 every offender who is sentenced to
periodic imprisonment and who is placed on approved electronic monitoring shall
pay a fee of $10 per day unless, after determining the inability of the person
to pay, the court assesses a lower fee.
   (B)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court of Lake County, Illinois is hereby
authorized and directed to collect fees in accordance with this section.
   (C)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court shall pay all moneys collected from
these fees to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the fees collected into
the county's working cash fund and who shall use the moneys collected to defray
the cost of electronic monitoring.
(Ord. passed 5-10-2005)
§ 35.25 FEES FOR ATTENDANTS OF GRAND JURY AND PETIT JURY.
   Jurors shall be compensated as follows:
   (A)   Five dollars for days one and two of attending jury service;
   (B)   Seven dollars and fifty cents for days three, four and five of
attending jury service;
   (C)   Ten dollars for each day of attending jury service beyond the fifth
day; plus
   (D)   Five dollars toward meal cost for each full day of attending jury
service; plus
   (E)   Travel expense to the county courthouse for each day of attending jury
service in an amount not less than $4 nor more than $10, to be paid based upon
the juror’s residential zip code.
(Ord. 16-1096, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 35.26 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION FEE.
   (A)   As part of its electric vehicle pilot program in which a study of the
economic, environmental and employee benefits of using all-electric vehicles is
being conducted, the county is installing three charging stations to be used by
staff as well as visitors and may, in the future, install additional electric
vehicle charging stations at other county parking lots and facilities.
   (B)   Pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-11004, the county is empowered to charge a
reasonable rate for the use of its parking facilities.
   (C)   The County Board authorizes that a reasonable fee be charged for the
use of electric vehicle charging stations located on county property.
   (D)   This section sets such fee at $.00 per kilowatt hour and may be
periodically amended by County Board resolution.
(Res. passed 9-8-2015)
LAKE COUNTY SHERIFF’S FEES
§ 35.35 JUDICIAL SALES FEES.
   (A)   The Lake County Sheriff’s fee for conducting a judicial sale shall be
$600, except in the case of unimproved real estate which sells for $10,000 or
less where the fee shall be $150. This fee shall be paid in advance of the sale
by the party obtaining the sale. The fee to cancel a judicial sale, identified
as the Foreclosure Cancellation Fee, is $300 per property per occurrence. If a
sale is to be rescheduled, this fee shall be paid in advance of rescheduling by
the party obtaining the cancellation and re-scheduling of said judicial sale.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the judgment order from a plaintiff-lender requesting
a judicial sale, the Judicial Sales Division shall:
      (1)   Schedule a sale date to be held after the expiration of the
redemption period;
      (2)   Give notice of sale to the public via the website;
      (3)   Obtain the publication certificate;
      (4)   Conduct a public auction;
      (5)   Make a report of sale to the Court;
      (6)   Issue the deed of sale after the Court confirms the sale; and
      (7)   Publish sale results on the Lake County Sheriff’s website.
   (C)   If the plaintiff-lender intends to make an opening bid, the plaintiff
shall submit to the Judicial Sales Division its opening bid at least two days
in advance of the date of sale. If the plaintiff does not make an opening bid,
then the sale shall be rescheduled, unless the court order or judgment ordering
the sale specifies otherwise. Notice of the date of all rescheduled sales shall
be provided to the public via the Lake County Sheriff’s website.
   (D)   The Judicial Sales Division shall maintain a registry of properties
that are scheduled for judicial sale, which shall include relevant information
regarding the property including the property index number, plus the
plaintiff’s opening bid, if any.
   (E)   The Judicial Sales Division shall work in cooperation with the
county’s Information Technology Department to implement a program for
dissemination of the information on the registry of properties via the
internet, and to provide appropriate links from the Lake County Sheriff’s
website registry to other agencies and departments providing information about
the real estate to be sold (the Chief County Assessor’s Office, Maps
Department, and the like).
   (F)   The Lake County Sheriff is authorized to staff the Judicial Sales
Division with two Grade 8 Foreclosure Specialists effective immediately, and to
add an additional Grade 10 Foreclosure Supervisor as workload permits and with
agreement of the Lake County Administrator.
(Res./Ord. 09-1623, passed 6-9-2009; Ord. 17-0901, passed 11-14-2017)
§ 35.36 FEES FOR SERVICES PERFORMED BY LAKE COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE.
   (A)   The Lake County Sheriff shall charge the fees as established by the
County Board.
   (B)   The fees shall be effective December 1, 2025.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-12) (Ord. passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 17-0900, passed 11-14-2017;
Ord. 25-0952, passed 8-12-2025)
§ 35.37 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Administrative fee.
      (1)   The registered owner, or its agent, of a vehicle impounded for a
violation identified in division (B), shall pay to the Lake County Sheriff’s
Office an administrative fee of $250 for the administrative and processing
costs associated with the investigation, arrest and detention of an offender,
or the removal, impoundment, storage and release of the vehicle.
      (2)   The administrative fee shall be waived by the Sheriff’s Office upon
verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time the vehicle was
impounded.
      (3)   This administrative fee is in addition to any fees charged for the
towing and storage of an impounded vehicle owed to the towing company.
   (B)   Applicability. The administrative fee shall be imposed prior to the
release of any vehicle, as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 ILCS 5/1-
217, properly impounded for any of the following violations:
      (1)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to 720 ILCS 5/36-1;
      (2)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
625 ILCS 5/11-501;
      (3)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, on in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act (if the
possession of cannabis is more than ten grams);
      (4)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act;
      (5)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1 (Unlawful Use of
Weapons), 720 ILCS 5/24-1.5 (Reckless Discharge of a Firearm), or 720 ILCS 5/
24-3.1 (Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm Ammunition);
      (6)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-303; except that
vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is
for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with
emission testing;
      (7)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing,
or attempting to solicit or possess more than ten grams of cannabis or a
controlled substance, as defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act;
      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated 625 ILCS 5/6-101, 5/6-303, or 5/11-501; or
      (9)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 ILCS 5/16 (Theft and Related
Offenses), or 720 ILCS 5/16A (Retail Theft).
   (C)   Notice of impoundment and seizure.
      (1)   Whenever the Sheriff or his designee has cause to believe that a
motor vehicle is subject to impoundment, the Sheriff or his designee shall
provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the Sheriff.
      (2)   At the time the vehicle is towed, the Sheriff’s Office shall notify
or make a reasonable attempt to notify the registered owner, lessee, or person
identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any
person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
offense, of the fact of the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's
right to an administrative hearing.
      (3)   The Sheriff’s Office shall provide notice that the motor vehicle
will remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing,
unless the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle or lienholder posts with
the Sheriff’s Office a bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by this
section and pays for all towing and storage charges.
   (D)   Collection of administrative fees. The following shall apply to any
fees imposed pursuant to division (B) of this section:
      (1)   All administrative fees shall be imposed on the registered owner/
lessee of the motor vehicle or the agent of that owner. The registered owner/
lessee shall be the recorded title holder to a motor vehicle as registered with
the Illinois Secretary of State or any other applicable governmental agency.
      (2)   The administrative fee shall be in addition to:
         (a)   Any other penalties which may be assessed by a court for the
underlying violations; and
         (b)   Any towing or storage fee, or both, charged by the tow service.
      (3)   The fee is non-negotiable.
      (4)   The fees shall be uniform for all similarly situated vehicles.
      (5)   The registered owner/lessee may pay the specified fine amount and
waive the right to an administrative hearing pursuant to division (F).
      (6)   The administrative fee shall be collected at the Lake County
Sheriff s Office payable to Lake County;
         (a)   Monies collected shall be placed into a Lake County Sheriff’s
Office account specifically designated for this section.
         (b)   Monies collected shall be used to reimburse and compensate the
Lake County Sheriff’s Office for the administrative costs and fees incurred as
a result of violation of offenses identified in division (B) of this section.
      (7)   The tow and/or storage fee shall be collected by and paid to the
person, firm, or entity which towed and stores the impounded vehicle.
   (E)   Notice of hearing. The registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and
any lienholder of record shall be provided with a notice of hearing. The notice
shall:
      (1)   Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record
either by personal service or by first class mail to the registered owner or
lessee's address as registered with the Secretary of State;
      (2)   Be served upon the registered owner or lessee within ten days after
a vehicle is impounded by the Sheriff; and
      (3)   Contain the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing.
An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than 45 days after
the date of mailing of the notice of administrative hearing.
   (F)   Waiver of hearing and vehicle release. The registered owner, lessee,
and any lienholder of record for the impounded vehicle has the option to waive
his or her right to an administrative hearing and pay the administrative fee
for the release of the vehicle.
      (1)   The waiver shall be in writing on the approved Sheriff s Office
document and signed by the registered owner, lessee, or lienholder.
      (2)   Upon payment of the administrative fee, the registered owner,
lessee, or lienholder will be provided with a payment receipt and a release
authorization allowing the tow company to release the vehicle.
      (3)   The registered owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record shall
still be responsible for all towing and storage fees which shall be payable to
the person, firm, or entity which towed and stores the impounded vehicle.
   (G)   Administrative hearing.
      (1)   The Hearing Officer shall determine whether or not the vehicle was
impounded in accordance with this section and either sustain or overrule the
impoundment.
      (2)   The Administrative hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer
in conformance with the procedures set forth in §§
94.53 and
94.56 through
94.59.
      (3)   The Hearing Officer may not change the amount of the Administrative
Fee.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the Hearing
Officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the
vehicle impoundment.
         (a)   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
Hearing Officer, the administrative bond posted to secure the release of the
vehicle shall be forfeited to the county;
         (b)   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is overruled by the
Hearing Officer, the administrative bond posted to secure the release of the
vehicle shall be forfeited by the county and returned to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder within 35 days of the decision.
   (H)   Vehicle release - after hearing.
      (1)   No towing company shall release any vehicle towed at the request of
the Sheriff or his designee to any person, unless that person first provides
either:
         (a)   A receipt to the towing company demonstrating that all
administrative fees imposed pursuant to this section have been paid in full; or
         (b)   An order from the Hearing Officer finding that the vehicle
impoundment was overruled.
      (2)   In spite of the decision of the Hearing Officer, Lake County is not
responsible for any fees charged for the towing and storage of an impounded
vehicle owed to the towing company.
   (I)   Unclaimed vehicles. Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or
storage facility within 35 days after the hearing officer issues a written
decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of 625 ILCS 5/4-201 (Abandoned, Lost, Stolen or Unclaimed Vehicles).
   (J)   Unpaid fine, penalty, or administrative fee's. Unless stayed by a
court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty, or administrative fee
imposed under this section which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the
expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the Administrative
Review Law may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
   (K)   Applicability of other laws. This section is in addition to and shall
not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal laws or any
ordinance that relates to the seizure or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any
fee provided for in this section shall be in addition to any and all penalties
that may be assessed or imposed by a court for any criminal charges.
   (L)   Administrative review.
      (1)   Any owner of record, lien holder or other person with a legal
interest in the motor vehicle, shall have the right to appeal the decision of
the Hearing Officer to the 19th Judicial Circuit Court, pursuant to the
Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101, as amended, and §
94.60.
      (2)   Any owner of record, lien holder or other person with a legal
interest in the motor vehicle (respondent), seeking review of a final decision
shall be required to reimburse Lake County for the costs of preparing and
certifying the record of proceedings. Failure of the respondent to reimburse
Lake County shall be grounds for the dismissal of a complaint for
administrative review pursuant to 735 ILCS 5/3-109.
      (3)   Any administrative fee posted with Lake County to secure the
release of a motor vehicle prior to a hearing shall be held by Lake County
until the Hearing Officer issues a decision or, if there is a judicial review
of the Hearing Officer's decision, until a reviewing court issues a final
decision.
   (M)   Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff
or his or her designee(s) and, at his or her discretion through administrative
adjudication pursuant to the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance
(§§
94.50 through
94.66).
   (N)   Effective date. This section takes effect on April 1, 2018 after
adoption by the County Board.
(Ord. 17-0902, passed 11-14-2017)
Editor’s note:
   720 ILCS 5/16A was repealed by P.A. 97-597
FUNDS
§ 35.50 ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.
   The Lake County Clerk is hereby appointed custodian of the Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund for the county, with full power and authority to
receive the same, to keep the proper records thereof, and to make the necessary
returns and disbursements thereof as provided by law.
(1977 Code, § 7:1) (Res. passed - -)
APPENDIX A: ABILITY TO PAY TABLE
   The following is the County Ability to Pay Scale for urine testing and
electronic monitoring fees as outlined in subsection (C)(1) of §
35.20.
Ability to Pay Scale for Urine Testing and Electronic Monitoring
(Based on Percent of Fee)
Income Family Size
       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 or More
Ability to Pay Scale for Urine Testing and Electronic Monitoring
(Based on Percent of Fee)
Income            Family Size
                  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8 or More
Under   - $5,980  0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0
$5,981  - $6,999  10  0   0   0   0   0   0   0
$7,000  - $7,999  20  0   0   0   0   0   0   0
$8,000  - $8,999  35  0   0   0   0   0   0   0
$9,000  - $9,999  45  10  0   0   0   0   0   0
$10,000 - $10,999 55  20  0   0   0   0   0   0
$11,000 - $11,999 65  35  10  0   0   0   0   0
$12,000 - $12.999 75  45  20  0   0   0   0   0
$13,000 - $13,999 90  55  35  10  0   0   0   0
$14,000 - $14,999 100 65  45  20  0   0   0   0
$15,000 - $15,999 100 75  55  35  10  0   0   0
$16,000 - $16,999 100 90  65  45  20  0   0   0
$17,000 - $17,999 100 100 75  55  35  10  0   0
$18,000 - $18,999 100 100 90  65  45  20  0   0
$19,000 - $19,999 100 100 100 75  55  35  10  0
$20,000 - $20,999 100 100 100 90  65  45  20  0
$21,000 - $21,999 100 100 100 100 75  55  35  10
$22,000 - $22.999 100 100 100 100 90  65  45  20
$23,000 - $23,999 100 100 100 100 100 75  55  35
$24,000 - $24,999 100 100 100 100 100 90  65  45
$25,000 - $25.999 100 100 100 100 100 100 75  55
$26,000 - $26,999 100 100 100 100 100 100 90  65
$27,000 - $27,999 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 75
$28,000 - $28,999 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 90
$29,000 and over  100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
 
SOURCE:
Based on U.S. Department of Health and Human Services poverty levels for July
1, 1989 – June 30, 1990 and the Bureau of Labor Statistic’s lower standard of
living budget for the Chicago metropolitan area.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-8) (Ord. passed 11-20-1990)
CHAPTER 36: RESERVED
CHAPTER 37: COUNTY-WIDE POLICIES AND SERVICES
Section
Adopt-A-Highway Program
   
37.001   Title and purpose
   
37.002   Definitions
   
37.003   Administrative provisions
   
37.004   Powers and duties: Lake County Public Works and Transportation
Committee; County Engineer and Lake County Division of Transportation
   
37.005   Participation in program generally
   
37.006   Applications
   
37.007   Application form for participation
   
37.008   Open application time periods
   
37.009   Division of Transportation review
   
37.010   General criteria for processing
   
37.011   Division of Transportation report
   
37.012   Consideration of the Public Works and Transportation Committee
   
37.013   Accepted applications
   
37.014   Agreement provisions
   
37.015   Signs
   
37.016   Safety training
   
37.017   Materials provided
   
37.018   Litter removal
   
37.019   Termination or suspension
Rules and Regulations Governing Public Buildings and Grounds
   
37.030   Title
   
37.031   Authority
   
37.032   Applicability
   
37.033   Admission to property
   
37.034   Preservation of property
   
37.035   Conformity with signs and directions
   
37.036   Disturbances
   
37.037   Alcoholic beverages and controlled substances
   
37.038   Soliciting, vending, and debt collection
   
37.039   Distribution of handbills
   
37.040   Photographs for news, advertising, or commercial purposes
   
37.041   Dogs and other animals
   
37.042   Vehicular and pedestrian traffic
   
37.043   Weapons and explosives
   
37.044   Non-discrimination
   
37.045   Authority of Buildings Manager
Procedure for the Management and Disposition of Real Estate and Tax
Certificates
Acquired by the County of Lake, as Trustee, for the Respective Taxing Districts
Through the Tax Sale
   
37.047   Background
   
37.048   Definitions
   
37.049   Administration of certificates of sale before a court has granted the
county’s application for an order directing a tax deed
   
37.050   Administration of certificates of sale after a court has granted the
county’s application for an order directing a tax deed
   
37.051   Sale of property
   
37.052   Terms and conditions of sale to an eligible municipality, other taxing
body or an affordable housing organization
   
37.053   Terms and conditions of sale
   
37.054   Payment policy
   
37.055   Disposition of parcels not bid
   
37.056   Disposition of proceeds
   
37.057   Property management
   
37.058   Effect of other laws or ordinances
   
37.059   Effective date
Occasional Use of Public Areas in Public Buildings
   
37.060   Scope and purpose
   
37.061   Definitions
   
37.062   Permits
   
37.063   Alternative permit issuance
   
37.064   Disapproval of application or cancellation of permit
   
37.065   Appeals from disapproval of application, cancellation of permit, or
alternative permit notification
   
37.066   Schedule of use
   
37.067   Services and costs
   
37.068   [Reserved]
   
37.069   Posting of notices and information bulletins
   
37.070   Non-affiliation with the county
Admissions to Winchester House
   
37.086   Definitions
   
37.087   Eligibility requirements and admissions priority
   
37.088   Charges for services
   
37.089   Severability
Clinics
   
37.100   Lake County Health Clinics, formerly TB Sanitarium
Home Health Service
   
37.115   Definitions
   
37.116   Authorization to collect fees
   
37.117   Fee schedule
   
37.118   Gifts and bequests
Rules for Neutral Site Custody Exchange
   
37.130   Purpose
   
37.131   Letter of agreement
   
37.132   No fee or charge
   
37.133   Records
   
37.134   Language interpreters
   
37.135   Written request and budget
   
37.136   Security for participants
   
37.137   Reporting procedures; client compliance
   
Appendix A: Adopt-a-Highway Program Agreement
ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM
§ 37.001 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Title. This subchapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the
“Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Ordinance” or “this chapter”, and the program it
establishes may be referred to as the “Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program”.
   (B)   Purpose. The Lake County Adopt-A- Highway Ordinance establishes a
program that allows private citizens to support the Lake County Division of
Transportation’s anti-litter efforts by allowing groups to adopt a section of
county highway for the purpose of litter collection. The following sections set
forth the uniform guidelines and requirements for the administration of the
Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to define words, terms, and
phrases contained in this subchapter.
   (B)   General word usage.    For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following provisions shall be observed and applied except when unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.
      (1)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other
tenses and derivative forms.
      (2)   Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular.
      (3)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine
gender shall include the masculine.
      (4)   The word “shall” is mandatory.
      (5)   The word “must” is mandatory.
      (6)   The word “may” is permissive.
      (7)   The word “should” is advisory.
   (C)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined
and shall be interpreted as such throughout this subchapter.
      ADOPTED SECTION. A length of county highway right-of-way approved by the
Public Works and Transportation Committee for adoption by a group. Sections of
rights-of-way may be determined inappropriate by the County Engineer for
adoption for safety reasons.
      APPLICATION FORM FOR PARTICIPATION. The form or forms developed by the
County Engineer in accordance with §
37.007 on which groups may apply for participation in the Lake County Adopt-A-
Highway Program.
      COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois.
      COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Lake County, Illinois.
      COUNTY ENGINEER. The County Engineer of Lake County, Illinois.
      COUNTY HIGHWAY. A public road as defined by the Illinois Highway Code as
part of the county highway system.
      DIRECTOR. The designee or designees for the county who has responsibility
for the administration of the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program. For the Lake
County Adopt-A-Highway Program, the DIRECTOR shall be the County Engineer.
      DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION. The County Engineer of this county.
      FRONTAGE. The front property boundary line of a lot or parcel of land at
the right-of-way line of a county highway.
      GROUP. Single- or multi-family members, volunteers, or employees of civic
or not-for-profit organizations, and commercial or private enterprises.
      GROUP COORDINATOR. The individual selected by a group to serve as its
liaison with the Lake County Division of Transportation.
      GROUP PRESIDENT. The individual who is the recognized leader, president,
or chairman for the group.
      HIGHWAY. Any public way as defined by the Illinois Highway Code.
      HIGHWAY SECTION. A length of county highway.
      ILLINOIS ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY ACT. P.A. 87-1118, 605 ILCS 120/1 et seq., as
amended.
      ILLINOIS HIGHWAY CODE. The laws of this state relating to roads, streets
and highways.
      LAKE COUNTY DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION. The Department of this county
charged with the management of the County Highway System by and through the
County Engineer.
      LITTER. Any unsightly or offensive matter that may include but is not
limited to disposable packaging, containers, cans, bottles, paper, ashes, and
cigar and cigarette butts. LITTER does not include hazardous, heavy, large
items, or carcasses.
      OPEN APPLICATION TIME PERIOD. The time period during which application
forms for participation in the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program will be
processed.
      PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANS- PORTATION COMMITTEE. The Public Works and
Transportation Committee of the County Board, or its successor committee.
      RENEWAL. The replacement of an existing Lake County Adopt-A-Highway
Program Agreement upon its termination with a new agreement with the same group
for the same section of county highway.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied for
public roadway purposes.
      SPONSORING JURISDICTION. The County of Lake, Illinois.
      STATE HIGHWAY. A public road as defined by the Illinois Highway Code as
part of the state highway system.
      STATE’S ATTORNEY. The State’s Attorney of Lake County, Illinois.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.003 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   This section sets forth the administrative provisions for this subchapter.
   (A)   Authority. The Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, provide for the
County Board and the County Engineer to have authority over and supervision of
county highways. The Illinois Compiled Statutes (Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act,
605 ILCS 120/1 et seq.), as amended, sets forth the authority for the County
Board to establish the terms, requirements, and procedures that groups must
follow in applying for participation, and participating in, the Lake County
Adopt-A-Highway Program. Such terms, requirements and procedures contained
herein are not inconsistent with the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. This subchapter shall apply to the right-of-way of any
county highway after the enactment of this subchapter by the County Board.
      (1)   The terms and conditions of this subchapter shall apply to all
rights-of-way of county highways in any township or municipality located
partially or entirely within the county.
      (2)   This subchapter shall not be construed in any manner or form
whatsoever to limit or restrict the power or authority of the county or the
County Engineer to maintain, operate, improve, supervise, construct,
reconstruct, widen or perform any other work on any county highway as is best
determined as provided for by this or other county ordinance and as provided
for by law.
   (C)   Enactment. This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and
after its date of passage by the County Board.
   (D)   Interpretation and separability.
      (1)   Interpretation. The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall
render any interpretations of this subchapter which are necessary to promote
efficient administration of its powers and duties under this subchapter. The
County Engineer may also render any interpretations of this subchapter which
are necessary to promote efficient administration of the County Engineer’s
powers and duties under this subchapter. Whenever any provision of this
subchapter overlaps, contradicts, or covers the same subject matter as any
other provision of this subchapter or any other county ordinance regulation or
rule, the more restrictive or higher standard shall control.
      (2)   Separability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase,
word, provision, term and condition or restriction established by this
subchapter or any amendments thereto are hereby declared to be separable and
independent, in accordance with the following.
         (a)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this subchapter to be invalid, that judgment shall not affect any
remaining provision of this subchapter not specifically included in the
judgment.
         (b)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this subchapter to a particular group, that
judgment shall not affect the application of the provisions to groups not
specifically included in the judgment.
   (E)   Amendments. This subchapter may be amended from time to time by the
County Board.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.004 POWERS AND DUTIES: LAKE COUNTY PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANSPORTATION
COMMITTEE; COUNTY ENGINEER AND LAKE COUNTY DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION.
   By authority of the County Board and adoption of this subchapter, through
powers vested through the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, and other
applicable laws, statutes, orders, and regulations of this state and this
county, the County Board of this county hereby grants to the Public Works and
Transportation Committee, the County Engineer and the Lake County Division of
Transportation the following powers and responsibilities regarding this
subchapter.
   (A)   Public Works and Transportation Committee. The Public Works and
Transportation Committee shall have the powers and duties as assigned to it
throughout this subchapter.
   (B)   County Engineer and Lake County Division of Transportation. The County
Engineer and the Lake County Division of Transportation shall have the powers
and duties as assigned to it throughout this subchapter and in addition shall
have the following powers and duties.
      (1)   The County Engineer is hereby designated the Director as set forth
in § 10 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act (605 ILCS 120/1 et seq.), as
amended, who has the responsibility to administer the Lake County Adopt-A-
Highway Program. The County Engineer may appoint designees to assist in its
administration.
      (2)   The County Engineer shall have the authority to have developed and
to distribute an informational brochure about the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway
Program.
      (3)   The County Engineer may have maps prepared showing the sections of
county highways in the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program.
      (4)   The County Engineer is authorized to have printed copies of the
Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Ordinance, as revised.
      (5)   The County Engineer shall have developed the application form for
participation and have the application form amended from time to time.
      (6)   The County Engineer may coordinate the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway
Program with other jurisdictions and agencies.
      (7)   The County Engineer may develop and have distributed postcards and
other materials suitable to provide for the administration of the litter pickup
provisions of the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program Agreement.
      (8)   The County Engineer may develop and have distributed participation
plaques for members or employees of groups when parking on county highways.
      (9)   The County Engineer may have developed and distributed appropriate
plaques/ certificates of appreciation to be presented to various groups having
participated in the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program.
      (10)   The County Engineer shall have developed, as authorized by the
Illinois Department of Transportation, an aesthetic sign for use in the Lake
County Adopt-A-Highway Program.
      (11)   The County Engineer is authorized to extend, for a short period of
time for good cause, the effective date of the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway
Program Agreements for approved groups. This extension shall not act to extend
the duration of the agreement beyond two years of the effective date listed in
§
37.008.
      (12)   The County Engineer shall keep suitable records of the notice
submitted by groups on their litter collection efforts and the actual removal
of filled trash bags and receptacles.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.005 PARTICIPATION IN PROGRAM GENERALLY.
   The following terms, requirements and procedures shall govern the
participation of groups in the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.006 APPLICATIONS.
   Any group may apply for consideration for participation in the Lake County
Adopt-A-Highway Program by completely filling out an application form for
participation and submitting it to the Lake County Division of Transportation
for highway sections as defined in §
37.010(B) that may become available. Applications will only be processed during
the open application time periods as defined by §
37.008.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.007 APPLICATION FORM FOR PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   The application form for participation shall be the form or forms
developed by the County Engineer for the efficient administration and review of
groups applying for consideration for participation in the Lake County Adopt-A-
Highway Program.
   (B)   The form shall contain, as a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   Information to be supplied by the group:
         (a)   Name of the group;
         (b)   Address of the group;
         (c)   Name of the group president;
         (d)   Name, mailing address, email address, and phone number of the
group coordinator;
         (e)   Dated certification by the group coordinator regarding
correctness of submitted information and conformance to the subchapter
requirements;
         (f)   Identification of the group as one of the following types:
            1.   Civic group;
            2.   Single- or multi-family group;
            3.   Not-for-profit group; and
            4.   Private enterprise/commercial group.
         (g)   Indication if the group has a financial interest in property
fronting on their primary or secondary choices for adopting a highway section;
         (h)   Indication if the application is for renewal of a Lake County
Adopt-A-Highway Program Agreement;
         (i)   The group’s primary choice for a highway section to adopt;
         (j)   The group’s secondary choice, if any, for a highway section to
adopt;
         (k)   An indication if the group would be willing to consider another
section determined by the county if their primary and secondary choices are not
available;
         (l)   The name or acronym of the group desired to be placed upon their
Adopt-A-Highway sign that would fit in the size available as determined by the
County Engineer. No logos or graphic depictions will be allowed. If the group
is single- or multi- family, the last name of any family member who currently
holds, or intends to run for, any county, municipal, state, township or
otherwise elected official position during the duration of the contractual
agreement will not be allowed on the sign. If the last name of a single- or
multi-family group is depicted on the sign and a member of the family places
his or her name on an official ballot for the county, municipal, state,
township or otherwise elected position during the duration of the contractual
agreement, the sign shall be removed; and
         (m)   The approximate number of eligible participant members.
      (2)   Information to be supplied by the Lake County Division of
Transportation for the submitted applications:
         (a)   Date received;
         (b)   An indication if the primary and secondary choices for sections
to adopt are appropriately described or not;
         (c)   An indication if the primary or secondary choices have been
determined inappropriate by the County Engineer for adoption for safety
reasons;
         (d)   An indication if the application has been judged by the Lake
County Division of Transportation to be complete;
         (e)   An indication if the primary or secondary choices are
unavailable due to being an adopted section by another group;
         (f)   An indication if the primary or secondary choices are
unavailable due to conflicting ongoing or pending highway maintenance or
construction, or to conflicting ongoing or pending utility maintenance or
construction; and
         (g)   An indication when records show a lack of performance of litter
pickup for a group seeking renewal.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.008 OPEN APPLICATION TIME PERIODS.
   Applications and renewals can be submitted at any time but will only be
processed twice a year in accordance with the following schedules.
   (A)   Spring schedule.
      (1)   Beginning date for reviewing submitted applications: January 2.
      (2)   Ending date for reviewing submitted applications: last Friday in
January.
      (3)   Ending date for staff review: February 8.
      (4)   Effective date for approved agreements: April 1.
   (B)   Fall schedule.
      (1)   Beginning date for reviewing submitted applications: August 1.
      (2)   Ending date for reviewing submitted applications: last Friday in
August.
      (3)   Ending date for staff review: September 13.
      (4)   Effective date for approved agreements: November 1.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000v)
§ 37.009 DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION REVIEW.
   The County Engineer, or designees, shall have the sole authority to
determine if applications received for participation in the Lake County Adopt-
A-Highway Program are complete. Only complete applications shall be further
processed.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.010 GENERAL CRITERIA FOR PROCESSING.
   In addition to being judged complete, applications shall meet the following
criteria to be further processed.
   (A)   Renewals shall be granted for additional terms, unless a group has not
met the terms, requirements, and procedures of this subchapter.
   (B)   The sections of county highways available for adoption shall be
determined by the County Engineer and shall be the lengths of county highways
as defined below:
      (1)   Lengths between adjacent intersections of county highways with
other county highways, streets, or roads, or state highways, provided that
lengths should not be over two miles in distance and shall not be less than
one-half mile in distance;
      (2)   Lengths not including sections of county highways determined by the
County Engineer to not be appropriate for adoption for safety reasons;
      (3)   Lengths that are determined to be shorter than that required by
subsection (B)(1) above should end at intersections where possible;
      (4)   Lengths not to be made available due to conflicting or ongoing or
pending road maintenance or construction, or to conflicting ongoing or pending
utility maintenance or construction as determined by the County Engineer; and
      (5)   Lengths not already adopted.
   (C)   Only one application from each individual group shall be processed.
The County Engineer shall determine which one of any multiple applications that
may have been submitted by the same group shall be further processed.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.011 DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION REPORT.
   Applications that are complete shall be reviewed and a staff report prepared
for the Public Works and Transportation Committee and presented by the County
Engineer showing the following:
   (A)   The names of the groups desiring to adopt each available section of
county highway for their primary choice, ranked in the following order:
      (1)   Groups desiring to have a renewal of the section they currently
have adopted and that meet the requirements of §
37.010(A). Renewals shall only be considered in the applicable application
cycle;
      (2)   Groups having a financial relationship to property frontage along
the section (sorted by lottery, if necessary);
      (3)   Civic groups (sorted by lottery, if necessary);
      (4)   Single- or multi-family groups (sorted by lottery, if necessary);
      (5)   Not-for-profit groups (sorted by lottery, if necessary); and
      (6)   Private enterprise/commercial groups (sorted by lottery, if
necessary).
   (B)   Any relevant review by the State’s Attorney’s Office requested by the
County Engineer;
   (C)   The name, or acronym, of the group, as submitted to be placed upon the
Adopt-A-Highway sign;
   (D)   The names of those groups assigned to their second choice highway
sections also ranked in accordance with subsection (A) above;
   (E)   Recommendations on offers to suggest to be made to particular groups
regarding their assignment to other available highway sections, if the groups
are not ranked at the top of the list for their primary or secondary choice;
and
   (F)   Identification of the group as a civic, single- or multi-family, not-
for-profit, or private enterprise/commercial group in a consistent manner.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.012 CONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE.
   (A)   (1)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall consider the
report of the County Engineer prepared in accordance with §
37.011. The Public Works and Transportation Committee may also request, for its
consideration, a relevant review by the State’s Attorney’s Office.
      (2)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall have the sole
responsibility, and complete discretion, in determining whether a completed
application is rejected or accepted, and shall endeavor to act to reject or
accept all completed applications as reported in the report of the County
Engineer within two weeks after the ending date for staff review as set forth
in §
37.008 as its regular meeting schedules shall allow.
   (B)   Variations.
      (1)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall have the
authority to grant any variations to this subchapter that it deems necessary
and appropriate to further the purposes of this subchapter, including but not
limited to the following general provisions of §
37.010.
         (a)   Number of renewal terms (§
37.010(A)).
         (b)   More than one section per applicant if the section is otherwise
available.
      (2)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall not have the
authority to grant any variances to this subchapter and thereby accept any
application that would violate any of the following provisions of this
subchapter:
         (a)   Sections not to be made available for safety reasons (§§
37.002(C) and
37.010(B)(2));
         (b)   Section lengths less than one-half mile (§
37.010(B)(1));
         (c)   Sections unavailable due to maintenance or construction
conflicts (§
37.010(B)(4)); and
         (d)   Adopt-A-Highway Program Agreements not in accordance with
Appendix A, subsection (D)(3) below and §
37.014.
   (C)   Alternate sections. The Public Works and Transportation Committee may
authorize the County Engineer to offer to groups not receiving approval of
their primary choice or secondary choice one alternate section that is
otherwise available. The offer may be either as contained in the County
Engineer’s report or as revised by the Public Works and Transportation
Committee.
   (D)   Notification.
      (1)   The County Engineer shall prepare a listing showing the final
action of the Public Works and Transportation Committee regarding the completed
applications. The listing shall show the following:
         (a)   The groups for the approved sections;
         (b)   The groups not approved for their primary section applied for;
         (c)   The groups approved for their secondary choice of sections;
         (d)   The groups not approved for their secondary choice of sections;
         (e)   The sections that are offered to each group otherwise not
approved;
         (f)   The groups whose applications were not approved; and
         (g)   The name, or acronym, of the group for the approved sections
that would appear on the Adopt-A-Highway signs.
      (2)   The action of the Public Works and Transportation Committee shall
be final.
      (3)   The County Engineer shall request those groups that were approved
to sign and return the Adopt-A-Highway Program Agreement. The agreement shall
be as contained in
Appendix A to this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.013 ACCEPTED APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   For those applications approved by the Public Works and Transportation
Committee in accordance with §
37.012, the County Engineer is authorized, and hereby directed, to execute on
behalf of this county, the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program Agreement with
that group as contained in
Appendix A, with the intent that the signed agreement is received by the Lake
County Division of Transportation prior to the effective date of §
37.008. If an alternate section is approved by the Public Works and
Transportation Committee, the County Engineer is authorized, and hereby
directed, to execute the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway Program Agreement with
that group as contained in
Appendix A, with the intent that a completed application form for the alternate
section and the signed agreement are received by the Division of Transportation
prior to the effective date of §
37.008.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the groups to submit the signed agreements
to the County Engineer prior to the time required based upon the notice of §
37.012(D).
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.014 AGREEMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Generally. The agreement contained in
Appendix A  to this chapter shall be the agreement used for all approved
applications. The terms of the agreement shall cover a two-year time period
beginning from the effective date as set forth in §
37.008 and the minimum number of times to pick up litter shall be twice a year.
   (B)   Group address changes. The group shall provide written notification to
the County Engineer of any change in address as it appears on the executed
agreement.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.015 SIGNS.
   The sign adopted by the Illinois Department of Transportation and as created
by the County Engineer in accordance with § 35 of the Illinois Adopt-A- Highway
Act, as amended (605 ILCS 120/35), shall be used to mark the beginning point of
the approved section in each direction of travel. No signs shall be used to
mark the ending of the approved section. The placement of the signs shall be as
determined by the County Engineer or designee and shall be generally on the
departure legs of intersections. The name, or acronym, of the group that is
placed on the sign shall be that approved by the Public Works and
Transportation Committee in accordance with §
37.012. Signs shall be removed for terminated sections and may be removed for
the duration of suspended sections.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.016 SAFETY TRAINING.
   The County Engineer is authorized to have developed a video for the safety
training of group coordinators for approved sections and to distribute copies
to them. This shall fulfill the county’s and County Engineer’s responsibilities
under § 40 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act, as amended (605 ILCS 120/40).
The group coordinator shall sign a receipt for having received a copy of the
video and a statement that the group members participating will view the video
prior to beginning litter collection activities.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.017 MATERIALS PROVIDED.
   The Division of Transportation is authorized to provide any items listed in
§ 30 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act, as amended (605 ILCS 120/30), to the
group coordinators on approved sections.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.018 LITTER REMOVAL.
   The Lake County Division of Transportation shall, as soon as is practical,
upon notification from the group coordinators as specified in the Adopt-A-
Highway Program Agreement, remove filled garbage bags from an adopted section
after litter collection has occurred, and shall otherwise be responsible for
removing litter from adopted sections only under unusual circumstances such as
to remove large, heavy, or hazardous items.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
§ 37.019 TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee, upon the recommendation
of the County Engineer, may terminate particular Adopt-A-Highway Program
Agreements then in effect if a group does not meet the terms and conditions of
its agreement, or if the group’s involvement in the Lake County Adopt-A-Highway
Program is inconsistent with any other restrictions or limitations established
by this subchapter. The termination order shall be in writing to the group
coordinator mailed to the address of record.
   (B)   (1)   The County Engineer may terminate, or suspend, a particular
Adopt-A-highway Program Agreement then in effect when the litter collection
provided for therein would unduly conflict with highway construction, highway
maintenance or utility construction or utility maintenance on the adopted
section.
      (2)   The termination or suspension order shall be in writing to the
group coordinator mailed to the address as shown on the application form for
participation.
      (3)   In the event of a suspension the County Engineer may specify the
length of the duration of the suspension.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
§ 37.030 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the “Rules and
Regulations Governing Public Buildings and Grounds” or “this subchapter”.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.031 AUTHORITY.
   These rules and regulations are adopted pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-1005, 5/5-
1015, 5/5-1049, and 5/5-1058 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(Ord. passed 10- -2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.032 APPLICABILITY.
   These rules and regulations apply to all property under the charge and
control of the county and to all persons entering in or on the property. Each
county agency shall be responsible for the observance of these rules and
regulations.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.033 ADMISSION TO PROPERTY.
   Property shall be closed to the public during other than normal working
hours. The closing of property will not apply to that space in those instances
where the county has approved the after normal working hours use of buildings
or portions thereof for activities authorized under §§
37.060 through
37.070. This section shall not apply to county property which is not regularly
open to the public.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.034 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
   The improper disposal of rubbish on property; the willful destruction of or
damage to property; the theft of property; the creation of any hazard on
property to persons or things; the throwing of articles of any kind from or at
a building to cause damage thereto or the climbing upon statues, fountains or
any part of the building is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.035 CONFORMITY WITH SIGNS AND DIRECTIONS.
   Persons in and on property shall at all times comply with official signs of
a prohibitory, regulatory, or directory nature and with the direction of other
authorized individuals.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.036 DISTURBANCES.
   Any unwarranted loitering, disorderly conduct, or other conduct on property
which creates loud or unusual noise or a nuisance; which unreasonably obstructs
the usual use of entrances, foyers, lobbies, corridors, offices, elevators,
stairways, or parking lots; which otherwise impedes or disrupts the performance
of official duties by county employees; or which prevents the general public
from obtaining the administrative services provided on the property in a timely
manner is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.037 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   Entering upon the property, or while on the property, under the influence of
or using or possessing any narcotic drug, hallucinogen, marijuana, barbiturate,
or amphetamine is prohibited. This prohibition shall not apply in cases where
the drug is being used as prescribed for a patient by a licensed physician.
Entering upon the property, or being on the property, under the influence of
alcoholic beverages is prohibited. The use of alcoholic beverages on property
is prohibited except upon occasions and on property upon which the head of the
responsible agency has for appropriate uses granted an exemption.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.038 SOLICITING, VENDING, AND DEBT COLLECTION.
   (A)   Soliciting alms, commercial soliciting, and commercial vending of all
kinds, displaying or distributing commercial advertising or collecting private
debts on county-controlled property is prohibited.
   (B)   This rule does not apply to:
      (1)   Drives for funds for welfare, health, or purposes related to County
government or the courts as sponsored by the county, the head of an occupant
agency or the Circuit Court;
      (2)   Authorized concessions, and concessions or personal notices posted
by employees on authorized bulletin boards; and
      (3)   Solicitation of labor organization membership or dues authorized by
the county under the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (P.A. 83-1012).
   (C)   Designated public areas of county-controlled property may be used for
other activities permitted in accordance with §§
37.060 through
37.070.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.039 DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS.
   (A)   Posting or affixing materials, such as pamphlets, handbills, or
flyers, on bulletin boards or elsewhere on county-controlled property is
prohibited, except as authorized in §
37.038 or when these displays are conducted as part of authorized county or
County-sponsored activities. Posting of material, such as pamphlets, handbills,
and flyers, by County Departments, County-wide elected officials and the
Circuit Court may be allowed on designated bulletin boards upon request to the
Buildings Manager. The material to be posted must first be presented to the
Buildings Manager and must relate to the official business of the County,
occupant agency or the Circuit Court. Upon approval by the Buildings Manager,
the material may be posted on the designated bulletin boards for a period as
determined by the Building Manager. Upon expiration of the approved period, the
material will be removed. Distribution of materials, such as pamphlets,
handbills, or flyers is prohibited, except in the designated public areas of
the property as defined in §§
37.060 through
37.070, unless conducted as part of authorized county activities.
   (B)   Any person or organization proposing to distribute materials in a
public area under this section shall first obtain a permit from the authorized
official under §§
37.060 through
37.070 and shall conduct distribution in accordance with the provisions of §§
37.060 through
37.070.
   (C)   Failure to comply with those provisions is a violation of these
regulations.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.040 PHOTOGRAPHS FOR NEWS, ADVERTISING, OR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
   Photographs may be taken in space occupied by a county agency only with the
consent of the respective department head. Except where a court order or rule
prohibits it, photographs for news purposes may be taken in entrances, lobbies,
foyers, corridors, or auditoriums when used for public meetings. Subject to the
foregoing prohibitions, photographs for advertising and commercial purposes may
be taken only with written permission of the department head of the agency
occupying the space where the photographs are to be taken.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.041 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   Dogs and other animals shall not be allowed upon property for other than
official purposes. This section does not apply to documented service animals or
animals brought onto County property for official purposes by the County or the
occupant agencies.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.042 VEHICULAR AND PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Drivers of all vehicles entering or while on property shall drive in a
careful and safe manner at all times and shall comply with the signals and
directions of authorized individuals and all posted traffic signs.
    (B)   The blocking of entrances, driveways, walks, loading platforms, or
fire hydrants on property is prohibited.
   (C)   (1)   Except in emergencies, parking on property is not allowed
without a permit. Parking without authority, parking in unauthorized locations
or in locations reserved for other persons, or parking contrary to the
direction of posted signs is prohibited. Vehicles parked in violation, where
warning signs are posted, shall be subject to removal at the owners’ risk and
expense.
      (2)   This subsection (C) may be supplemented from time to time by the
issuance and posting of any specific traffic directives that may be required,
and when so issued and posted the directives shall have the same force and
effect as if made a part hereof.
      (3)   Proof that a motor vehicle was parked in violation of these
regulations or directives may be taken as prima facie evidence that the
registered owner was responsible for the violation.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.043 WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES.
   No person entering or while on property shall carry or possess firearms,
other dangerous or deadly weapons, articles, explosives, or items intended to
be used to fabricate an explosive or incendiary device, either openly or
concealed, except for official purposes.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.044 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   There shall be no discrimination by segregation or otherwise against any
person or persons because of race, creed, sex, color, handicap, political
affiliation, religious belief, or national origin in furnishing or by refusing
to furnish to the person or persons the use of any facility of a public nature,
including all services, privileges, accommodations, and activities provided
thereby on the property.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.045 AUTHORITY OF BUILDINGS MANAGER.
   The Buildings Manager shall designate locations outside the county buildings
as designated public areas where expressive activities may be permitted within
the meaning of this subchapter. The Buildings Manager may also develop
reasonable time, place and manner rules on the conduct of expressive activities
at the designated locations. In designating public areas and developing
policies, the Buildings Manager shall attempt to minimize the adverse impact of
permitted activities on the free ingress and egress within the building, the
conduct of official business, and the free enjoyment of the use of the building
by tenants and other members of the public.
   The Buildings Manager further has authority to approve the use of designated
locations of County Buildings and property for the use by County departments,
county-wide elected official occupants of the County Buildings or the Circuit
Court for activities within the scope of the functions of their respective
offices, and to approve County, county-wide elected official occupants of the
County Buildings or Circuit Court sponsored events and commemorations provided
those events or commemorations remain under the control and direction of the
County, County elected officials, or the Circuit Court, without requiring
compliance with the formal permitting process provided herein.
   Nothing herein limits the authority of the Buildings Manager to allow
temporary use of rooms or other private locations within the County Buildings
for purposes consistent with the operations of the County Buildings.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
PROCEDURE FOR THE MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSITION OF REAL ESTATE AND TAX
CERTIFICATES ACQUIRED
BY THE COUNTY OF LAKE, AS TRUSTEE, FOR THE RESPECTIVE TAXING DISTRICTS THROUGH
THE TAX SALE
§ 37.047 BACKGROUND.
   Each year the county conducts a tax sale under the provisions o f the
Illinois Property Tax Code. For properties receiving no bids, the Illinois
Property Tax Code authorizes the County of Lake to act as trustee on behalf of
taxing districts and acquire the tax certificate without payment (each, a
“certificate”). 35 ILCS 200/21-90. The County of Lake as Trustee (“COLT”) then
administers the parcels for the benefit of the taxing districts, the
incorporated areas in which the parcels lie, and thus ultimately for Lake
County’s taxpayers. The Lake County Clerk, through its Tax Extension Division,
administers the Tax Sale Certificate Program.
   A primary goal of the tax sale program is to get properties acquired by tax
deed back on the tax rolls and into the ownership of someone who will regularly
pay the properties’ taxes. A secondary goal, consistent with 35 ILCS 200/21-90,
is to assist municipalities or similar units of local government in recapturing
and remedying derelict properties, particularly for those properties that have
created an economic burden for the municipalities in which they are located and
have a documented history of being unmarketable, or to foster affordable
housing organizations in Lake County. The following procedures are directed
toward these goals.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.048 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
ascribed to them below.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Housing that has a value or cost or rental amount that
is within the means of a household that may occupy moderate-income or low-
income housing. As a guide, such housing, whether rental or owner-occupied, is
generally that which costs no more than 30% of the gross annual household
income for a household of the size that may occupy the unit.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING ORGANIZATION. A not-for-profit and ta x-exempt entity,
limited equity cooperative, or public agency seeking to create affordable
housing.
   CLAIM. A monetary interest in a particular property by reason of the
advancement of public funds for property maintenance, nuisance abatement,
demolition or rehabilitation, und er either statutory or home rule authority.
   ELIGIBLE MUNICIPALITY. A municipality which has a claim against a particular
property.
   MUNICIPALITIES. Cities, villages and incorporated towns, either singularly
or jointly. A MUNICIPALITY may assign its rights under this chapter to an
entity organized by an intergovernmental agreement for the purpose of
assembling, managing and facilitating the redevelopment of abandoned, derelict
or foreclosed properties.
   QUALIFIED ENTITY. Either (i) an eligible municipality, or (ii) another
taxing body, or (iii) an affordable housing organization.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.049 ADMINISTRATION OF CERTIFICATES OF SALE BEFORE A COURT HAS GRANTED THE
COUNTY’S APPLICATION FOR AN ORDER DIRECTING A TAX DEED.
   (A)   For properties where the county obtains a certificate under the
provisions of 35 ILCS 200/21-90, the county may assign the certificate to any
interested party, including taxing districts. Prior to the county applying for
an order directing issuance of a tax deed, assignment shall be made to
nongovernmental purchasers only if the purchaser pays the outstanding tax lien.
   (B)   For governmental entities, the County Clerk may assign the certificate
for less than the outstanding tax lien and an eligible municipality may receive
a credit against the purchase rice equal to the value of its claim.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.050 ADMINISTRATION OF CERTIFICATES OF SALE AFTER A COURT HAS GRANTED THE
COUNTY’S APPLICATION FOR AN ORDER DIRECTING A TAX DEED.
   (A)   Listings of all properties acquired through the COLT process and
offered for sale will be prepared and maintained in the Tax Extension
Department of the County Clerk’s office.
   (B)   The listings shall generally be ordered by township and list street
address, permanent index numbers, short physical descriptions of the properties
for sale, and minimum bid amounts. Eligible municipalities may request the Tax
Extension Department to describe the amount of its claim against the respective
properties.
   (C)   The listings shall be available for the public to access in the Tax
Extension Department of the County Clerk’s Office.
   (D)   A copy of any part or all of the properties listed may be purchased
for $0.50 per page; the County Clerk may also publish these listing on its
website.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.051 SALE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except for those properties that a governmental entity or affordable
housing organization seeks to obtain, all properties acquired by tax deed will
be offered for sale by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
area in which the property is located.
   (B)   Publication will be made at least once per year, and properties will
be listed by municipality (or postal area if unincorporated) with street
address, permanent index number, and minimum bid (as defined under “Terms and
Conditions of Sale” set forth below).
   (C)   Sale to the successful bidder shall be in accordance with the “Terms
and Conditions of Sale” set forth below.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.052 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SALE TO AN ELIGIBLE MUNICIPALITY, OTHER TAXING
BODY OR AN AFFORDABLE HOUSING ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   These sale procedures shall apply to (i) an eligible municipality, or
(ii) another taxing body, or (iii) an affordable housing organization
(together, “qualified entity”).
   (B)   A qualified entity may submit a bid for any property on the list
described in §
37.049 for less than the minimum bid (as defined under “Terms and Conditions of
Sale” set forth below), but such bidders must, along with their bid amount,
submit a brief statement explaining why the entity should receive the property
for less than the minimum bid price, if the bid is below the minimum bid.
   (C)   The County Clerk may assign the certificate or convey a deed to a
qualified entity that submits a bid equal to or less than the minimum bid. The
County Clerk’s discretion to assign or convey for less than the minimum bid set
forth in §
37.052(B) shall be guided by the following factors:
      (1)   Whether the qualified entity has incurred significant costs to
maintain the property, where SIGNIFICANT shall be defined with reference to the
costs in relation to the minimum bid described in the “Terms of Sale” provision
below, with a 50% or greater ratio representing “significant costs”;
      (2)   Whether the qualified entity plans to use the property to create or
otherwise foster affordable housing;
      (3)   Whether the qualified entity plans to use the property on an
ongoing basis for a public purpose, including to foster economic development as
part of a broader plan that extends beyond the property in question;
      (4)   The likelihood of other bidders, who are not qualified entities,
seeking to acquire the property, and the amount of the tax revenue that would
be forgone annually by conveying the property to a qualified entity;
      (5)   The immediacy of the qualified entity’s plan to put the property
into productive or public use.
An eligible municipality or another taxing body may claim a credit against the
purchase price equal to the value of its claim in exchange for a release of the
claim. If the release must be recorded to be effective, the eligible
municipality or other taxing body shall pay the cost for recording the release.
   (D)   After receipt of payment, Lake County, as Trustee, will quit claim the
property to the qualified entity or, if payment occurs prior to the time for
issuance of a tax deed, then the county will assign its interest (including the
certificate) to the qualified entity.
   (E)   To ensure that evidence of title is promptly recorded, the County
Clerk will deliver the quitclaim deed to the Recorder’s Office, which will in
turn send the recorded deed to the purchaser.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.053 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SALE.
   (A)   Offers to purchase a property must be made in writing by sealed bid
and submitted to the County Clerk, Tax Extension Department. Forms will be
available for this purpose. The permanent index number of the subject parcel
must be clearly identified on the outside of the sealed bid.
   (B)   In the first year in which the county offers a property for sale, the
minimum bid amount shall be the current equalized assessed value, increased by
the following: (a) 10%; plus (b) an additional amount equal to county expenses
for maintenance of such parcel, if any, incurred following acquisition of the
tax deed; plus (c) if requested, the value of an eligible municipality’s claim,
payable to the eligible municipality. (As set forth in §
37.052, the minimum bid requirement does not apply to a qualified entity.)
Additionally, the minimum bid amount shall not apply to bidders who own
property adjacent to (i.e., sharing a border with) the property upon which a
bid is submitted.
   (C)   Bids received for a parcel will be retained for 30 days after the
initial bid on the parcel. After the completion of the 30-day period, each bid
will be opened and evaluated.
   (D)   The County of Lake, Trustee, by and through the Lake County Clerk,
reserves the right to accept or reject any or all bids at any time, and
reserves the right to withdraw any parcel from the sale at any time. The County
Clerk shall have the authority to withdraw a parcel from the sale and direct
its conveyance to the previous owner or an interested party upon payment in
full of all amounts remaining unpaid, or to convey the parcel to a governmental
entity seeking to rehabilitate a derelict property, particularly where the
property has created an economic burden for the municipality in which it is
located. The exercise of such discretion shall be made by the County Clerk with
full consideration of principles governing the rights and responsibilities of
the County of Lake, Trustee, as set forth by applicable Illinois law. The
County Clerk may seek input from the Finance and Administration Committee of
the County Board, but any such consultation shall not bind the Clerk’s
discretion in disposing of property.
   (E)   The successful bidder will be required to pay the amount bid plus a
separate recording fee at the time and place of sale.
   (F)   The successful bidder is responsible for the current year’s general
real estate taxes, which will be billed in the following year, except for bids
from municipalities or similar units of local government, to which 35 ILCS 200/
21-95 or 35 ILCS 200/21-100 apply.
   (G)   After receipt of full payment, Lake County, as Trustee, will quitclaim
the property to the successful bidder or, if payment occurs prior to the time
for issuance of a tax deed, then the county will assign its interest (including
the certificate) to the successful bidder.
   (H)   To ensure that evidence of title is promptly recorded, the County
Clerk will deliver the quitclaim deed to the Recorder’s Office, which will in
turn send the recorded deed to the purchaser.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.054 PAYMENT POLICY.
   Payment can be made by cash, money order, cashier’s check, or certified
check, with checks made payable to “County of Lake, Trustee.”
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.055 DISPOSITION OF PARCELS NOT BID.
   Consistent with these procedures, it is in the best interest of the public
that property acquired by tax deed be returned to the tax rolls in a timely
manner or otherwise serve a public interest (e.g., a municipal purchase).
   (A)   All parcels that are not bid upon will remain in the inventory and
will continue to be offered for sale.
   (B)   For parcels receiving no minimum bids after their initial offering and
continuing to be held in inventory for sale for six months, the minimum bid
requirement may be lifted, but the County Clerk may require a successful bidder
to cover any expenses that the county has incurred for maintenance of the
property, as well as the value of any eligible municipality’s Claim.
   (C)   The County of Lake, Trustee, reserves the right to accept or reject
any or all bids and withdraw any parcel from the sale at any time.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.056 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Where the proceeds from the property sale are less than the taxes
owed, such proceeds will be distributed on a pro rata basis to the respective
taxing bodies. Such distributions shall be handled by the Lake County
Treasurer’s Office through its normal tax process.
   (B)   Except as descried in division (C), where the proceeds are more than
the taxes owed, the amount in excess will accrue to the County Corporate Fund
to offset program expenses, and as otherwise permitted by statute.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.057 PROPERTY MANAGEMENT.
   When the county acquires a property by tax deed, the parcels acquired shall
be managed as permitted by statute.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.058 EFFECT OF OTHER ORDINANCES OR LAWS.
   (A)   Property acquired by tax deed is subject to the Lake County Ordinance
titled “Rules and Regulations Governing Public Buildings and Grounds,” codified
in
Chapter 37 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Where there is evidence of encroachment or other continuing use and
efforts to sell the property have failed, the County Clerk shall consult with
the State’s Attorney as to the types of action to be taken.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
§ 37.059 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The procedures set forth above shall be effective immediately, and shall
supersede the procedures established in the resolution passed July 21, 1987,
for the disposition of tax deed-acquired property.
(Ord. 21-0420, passed 3-9-2021)
OCCASIONAL USE OF PUBLIC AREAS IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
§ 37.060 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   Designated public areas of buildings and grounds under the jurisdiction of
the County Board can occasionally be made available for expressive activities
as defined herein. The purpose of these regulations is to create rules and
procedures to be followed in permitting the occasional use of public buildings
and grounds for these and other activities authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
organization of any kind who applies for a permit to use a public area within a
public building or its grounds.
   BUILDINGS MANAGER. The County Administrator or his or her designee.
   COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES. Activities undertaken for the primary purpose of
obtaining a profit for the benefit of an individual or organization organized
for profit, as opposed to activities whose purpose is the expression of ideas
or advocacy of causes, whether of a religious, artistic, political, charitable,
educational, or cultural nature, where the commercial aspects involved are
incidental to the purpose of the activity.
   DESIGNATED PUBLIC AREA. Any area of a public building grounds designated to
be open to members of the public by the Buildings Manager as a location in
which expressive activities may be permitted pursuant to §§
37.060 through
37.070.
   EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITIES. Constitutionally protected expressive activities.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION. A labor organization recognized under the Illinois
Public Labor Relations Act, 5 ILCS 315/1 et seq.
   PERMITTEE. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organization who has been granted a permit to use a public area within a public
building or its grounds.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building and its grounds, or part thereof, under the
charge and control of the County Board.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.062 PERMITS.
   (A)   Application. Any person or organization desiring to use a public area
of a public building or its grounds shall first obtain a permit from the
Buildings Manager. To obtain the permit, a copy, sample, or description of any
material or item proposed for distribution or display and a written application
on a form provided by the Buildings Manager shall be submitted, setting forth
the following:
      (1)   The full name, mailing address, and telephone number of the
applicant;
      (2)   The full name, mailing address, and telephone number of the person
or organization sponsoring, promoting, or conducting the proposed activity;
      (3)   The full name, mailing address, and telephone number of the
individual person or persons who will have supervision of and responsibility
for the proposed activity;
      (4)   A description of the proposed activity;
      (5)   The proposed dates and hours during which the activity is to be
carried out;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons to be engaged in this activity,
if known;
      (7)   An agreement to indemnify the county, its officers, boards,
committees, agents, and employees from losses or claims of every kind and
nature arising out of or resulting from the acts or omissions of the applicant,
its officers, agents, or employees in connection with the permitted activity
(but not for damages or losses directly caused by spectators or others reacting
to the exercise of the applicant’s protected First Amendment rights);
      (8)   The proposed location of the activity;
      (9)   The time at which the applicant, its agents, or employees, intend
(s) to begin to assemble for the activity;
      (10)   A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification
equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices to be used in
connection with the activity;
      (11)   The approximate number of spectators expected;
      (12)   A designation and description of any county services or equipment
proposed to be utilized;
      (13)   A plan the applicant proposes to follow to clean and clear the
site of the activity from debris, litter, pamphlets, and activity-related
signage upon conclusion of the activity; and
      (14)   Any additional information that the Buildings Manager finds
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue.
   (B)   Applicant’s authority.  If the applicant claims to represent an
organization, a letter or other documentation is required showing that the
applicant has authority to represent that organization.
   (C)   Applications for permit to solicit contributions. Any applicant
desiring to use a public area of a public building or its grounds for purposes
of soliciting funds not prohibited by §
37.038 shall, in addition to the above requirements, submit a statement signed
by the applicant that the applicant represents, and will be soliciting funds
for, a non-profit charitable, fraternal, religious, veterans, or political
group, and that the:
      (1)   Applicant’s organization has received an official Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) ruling or letter of determination stating that the organization
or its parent organization qualifies for tax-exempt status under 26 U.S.C. §
501(c)(3), (c)(4), or (c)(5); or
      (2)   Applicant’s organization has applied to the IRS for a determination
of tax-exempt status under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), (c)(4), or (c)(5), and that
the IRS has not yet issued a final administrative ruling or determination of
this status.
   (D)   Failure to complete application. Failure to submit the information
required by subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section shall result in
denial of a permit; however, no permit shall be denied without the opportunity
for a hearing as provided for herein.
   (E)   Filing. Applications shall be filed during regular working hours in
the Buildings Manager’s office or any other place as he or she may designate.
Applications shall be filed a reasonable period of time in advance of the
proposed activity, taking into account the number of participants and
spectators expected to attend the activity, the police protection and crowd
control necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of the participants,
spectators, and the public, the potential disruption to the county agencies,
departments, and services and the public’s access thereto, and the spontaneity
or timeliness of the subject matter to which the activity pertains.
Applications may be submitted by mail or in person. If mailed, applications are
deemed filed upon receipt by the Buildings Manager.
   (F)   Permit issuance. A single permit shall be issued, disapproved, or an
alternative permit issued without unreasonable delay, and in no event later
than ten days following receipt of the completed application by the Buildings
Manager. A permit is deemed a privilege, and not a property right of the
applicant.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
37.063, each permit shall authorize the permittee to conduct the activity for
the period of time requested; provided that a permit shall not be issued for a
period of time in excess of seven calendar days, unless specifically approved
by the Financial and Administrative Committee. After the expiration of the
permit, a new permit may be issued to the former permit holder upon submission
of a new application. In such a case, applicants may be permitted to
incorporate by reference any required information or documentation filed with a
previous application.
      (2)   If permits are requested for the same public area for the same time
period, the Buildings Manager will issue permits on a first-come, first-served
basis.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.063 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Grounds for alternative permit. The Buildings Manager may refuse to
issue a permit as requested and may instead authorize the activity at a date,
time, or location or in a manner different from that described in the
application, if the Buildings Manager finds that:
      (1)   A permit application for a different location at the same time has
already been granted, or has been received and will be granted, or another
event is scheduled elsewhere in the county, and the police resources required
for that prior activity are so great that in combination with the subsequent
proposed activity, the resulting deployment of police services would have an
immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and
property; or
      (2)   The activity, as proposed, poses an unreasonable risk of harm to
the health, safety, and/or welfare of the applicant, potential spectators, or
other members of the public.
   (B)   Notice of alternative permit. Upon initiating action to issue an
alternative permit, the Buildings Manager shall:
      (1)   Promptly notify the applicant in writing of the intent to issue an
alternative permit, the terms of the alternative permit, and the reasons for
this action; and
      (2)   Inform the applicant of his or her right to appeal the alternative
permit to the Financial and Administrative Committee, under §
37.065.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.064 DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATION OR CANCELLATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Grounds for disapproval or cancellation. The Buildings Manager shall
initiate action to disapprove any application or to cancel an issued permit for
use of a public area if the proposed use:
      (1)   Is a commercial activity as defined in §
37.061;
      (2)   Is not expressive activity as defined herein;
      (3)   Obstructs the free ingress and egress of the users of the public
area;
      (4)   Damages the public building or any property within the public
building;
      (5)   Disrupts the official business of the agency or agencies occupying
the public buildings;
      (6)   Interferes with a tenant’s quiet enjoyment of their leasehold;
      (7)   Interferes with a previously approved use of the public area by
another member, or members, of the public;
      (8)   Is obscene within the meaning of obscenity set forth in 720 ILCS 5/
11-20;
      (9)   Pertains to any judicial proceeding then pending in the public
building and this use is intended to influence or impede the judicial
proceeding;
      (10)   Is being conducted with a permit issued in response to an
intentionally false or incomplete application;
      (11)   Violates any of the conditions or standards set forth in this
subchapter or any permit issued hereunder; or
      (12)   When a public emergency arises when police resources required for
that emergency are so great that deployment of police services for the activity
would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of
persons and property.
   (B)   Notice of intent for disapproval of application or for cancellation of
permit. Upon initiating action to disapprove an application or to cancel an
issued permit for any of the above reasons, the Buildings Manager shall:
      (1)   Notify promptly the applicant or permittee in writing of the intent
to disapprove or cancel and the reasons for this action; and
      (2)   Inform the applicant of his or her right to appeal the pending
disapproval or cancellation to the Financial and Administrative Committee under
§ 37.065.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.065 APPEALS FROM DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATION, CANCELLATION OF PERMIT, OR
ALTERNATIVE PERMIT NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Time for appeal. Within five calendar days of notification of the
Buildings Manager’s decision to disapprove any application or cancel an issued
permit under §
37.064 or issue an alternative permit under §
37.063, the applicant or permittee may appeal the Buildings Manager’s
determination to the Financial and Administrative Committee by notifying the
Financial and Administrative Committee, in writing, that he or she desires to
appeal.
   (B)   Record. Although a formal hearing or presentation is not required, the
applicant or permittee and the Buildings Manager shall have the opportunity to
orally state the reasons that the application or cancellation should or should
not be approved or an alternative permit issued. Written materials and
documents may also be submitted. The Financial and Administrative Committee
shall affirm or reverse the Buildings Manager’s determination based on this
information.
   (C)   Time for review. The Financial and Administrative Committee shall
affirm or reverse the Buildings Manager’s determination without unreasonable
delay and in no event later than ten days of the date on which the Financial
and Administrative Committee received the applicant’s or permittee’s
notification of his or her desire to appeal. If the Financial and
Administrative Committee does not rule within this period, the application will
be considered to be approved or the permit validly issued.
   (D)   Notification. Upon reaching a decision on an appeal taken under this
section, the Financial and Administrative Committee shall promptly notify the
applicant or permittee and the Buildings Manager of the decision and the
reasons therefor.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.066 SCHEDULE OF USE.
   (A)   Schedule. Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the Buildings
Manager from:
      (1)   Reserving certain times of the year for use of designated public
areas of the public buildings for official county business;
      (2)   Setting aside certain days or time for maintenance, construction,
or repair; or
      (3)   Preempting an approved use of a public area for official county
business.
   (B)   Time. Designated public areas made available may be used during or
after the regular working hours of county agencies, provided this use will not
interfere with the conduct of county business. When designated public areas are
used by permittees under this subchapter after normal working hours, all
adjacent areas not approved for after-hours usage shall be locked, identified
by signs, or physically barricaded, as appropriate, to restrict the
participants’ movements to only that space or area(s) approved for usage.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.067 SERVICES AND COSTS.
   (A)   Costs. The space to be provided under these regulations is furnished
free of charge. Services normally provided at the building in question, such as
security, cleaning, heating, ventilating, and air- conditioning, shall also be
provided free of charge. Crowd control, if needed, will be provided free of
charge. The applicant shall reimburse the county for costs of labor and/or
services over and above those normally provided. An advance deposit may be
required based upon the Buildings Manager’s reasonable estimate of the
additional costs associated with the labor and/or services requested. If the
applicant desires to provide services, such as security and cleaning, this
request must be approved by the Financial and Administrative Committee who may
decide to provide the services free of charge if the cost is insignificant and
if it is in the public’s interest.
   (B)   Alterations of public area. Generally, there shall be no alteration to
designated public areas used under these regulations by persons, firms, or
organizations, unless it is determined by the Financial and Administrative
Committee that changes should be made in a public building to encourage and aid
in the proposed use. The permittee must make adequate provisions for:
      (1)   The protection of the safety of a user of the public area; and
      (2)   The prevention of injury or damage to the public building.
   (C)   Program requirements. The furnishing of any item necessary for the
proposed activity, such as audiovisual equipment, and the like, shall be the
responsibility of the permittee unless prior arrangements have been made with
the Buildings Manager.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.068 [RESERVED.]
§ 37.069 POSTING OF NOTICES AND INFORMATION BULLETINS.
   Only the following types of notices or information bulletins may be posted
on bulletin boards in non-public areas of the public building:
   (A)   Official business notices of the occupant agency;
   (B)   Requests for funds for welfare, health, and other purposes, sponsored
by the county, the head of the occupant agency, or the Circuit Court;
   (C)   Personal notices of agency employees, such as the sale of an
employee’s home, requests for carpool participation, and the like; and
   (D)   Labor organization notices and issuances on space provided by the
county under agreement between the county and the recognized labor
organization.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 37.070 NON-AFFILIATION WITH THE COUNTY.
   The county reserves the right to advise the public through signs or
announcements of the presence of any permittees and of their non-affiliation
with the county.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 18-0466, passed 5-8-2018)
ADMISSIONS TO WINCHESTER HOUSE
§ 37.086 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   GENERAL ASSISTANCE RESIDENT. A resident whose care is paid for by the local
governmental unit in which he or she resides pursuant to a written agreement
between the county and the local governmental unit.
   GUARDIAN. A person appointed as a guardian of the person or guardian of the
estate of a resident, or both, under the Probate Act of 1975 (755 ILCS 5/1 et
seq.).
   IMMEDIATE RELATIVE. A grandparent, parent, spouse or child, step-
grandparents, step-parents and step-children.
   LAKE COUNTY. The County of Lake, a unit of local government of the State of
Illinois.
   LAKE COUNTY RESIDENT or COUNTY RESIDENT. A person who has established his or
her permanent home within the county. A person shall be deemed to have
established his or her permanent home within this county if he or she has
acquired by purchase, rental, or other arrangement housing facilities which he
or she uses as his or her home; has located his or her household equipment,
furnishings, and personal belongings therein; and is or has been employed, is
seeking employment, or is engaged in other self-support activity, in the
community in which he or she lives or within a distance reasonably proximate
thereto, within or without the county, which is accessible to his or her home
by public or private transportation facilities and to which he or she regularly
commutes, or, if he or she cannot engage in employment or other self-support
activity, is maintained in the home by relatives responsible for his or her
support by other sources or other means of support or means of maintenance and
support. A person shall not be required to occupy a permanent dwelling or have
a fixed home or mailing address in order to establish that he or she is a
COUNTY RESIDENT for purposes of this subchapter.
   PRIVATE PAY RESIDENT. A resident for whom Winchester House receives no
payment from the Illinois Department of Human Services, the Supervisor of
General Assistance, the Veteran’s Administration or Medicare “Part A”.
   PUBLIC AID RESIDENT. A resident for whom Winchester House receives payment
from the Illinois Department of Human Services, the Veteran’s Administration or
Medicare “Part A”.
   RESIDENT’S REPRESENTATIVE. A person, other than an agent or employee of
Winchester House not related to the resident, designated in writing by the
resident to be his or her representative, or the resident’s guardian.
   WINCHESTER HOUSE. The county nursing home operated under the provisions of
the County Home Act.
(1977 Code, § 2:2-1) (Ord. passed 11-9-1999)
§ 37.087 ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND ADMISSIONS PRIORITY.
   (A)   The county shall admit to Winchester House all county residents in
need of skilled and intermediate level nursing care on a first-come, first-
served basis, subject to medically appropriate bed availability; except that a
general assistance resident, whose care is paid for by the local governmental
unit in which he or she has residence, will be admitted to the first available
medically appropriate bed after the local governmental unit enters into a
written agreement to pay for the resident’s care. If the governmental unit
fails to pay for the resident’s care and maintenance, the county may recover
the amount due for care by appropriate civil action against the governmental
unit. Immediate relatives of county residents may be admitted if beds are
available following all requests by county residents.
   (B)   Admissions shall be without regard to race, religion, national origin,
ability to pay, or sex of persons to be admitted. No qualified individual with
a disability will be denied admission on the basis of the disability.
   (C)   All admission requests shall be accompanied by a completed admission
application on a form prescribed for use by the Winchester House Administrator
which shall certify the following:
      (1)   The person to be admitted is 18 years of age or older. Persons
under 18 years of age may not be cared for at Winchester House without prior
written approval from the Illinois Department of Human Services (77 ILAC
300.620(2)(e)). Therefore, admission requests for persons under the age of 18
should be directed to the Administrator of Winchester House, who will contact
the Illinois Department of Human Services if admission is otherwise
appropriate;
      (2)   The person to be admitted is not “destructive of property, himself
or others” (77 ILAC 300.620(2));
      (3)   The person to be admitted is not in need of mental treatment or
mentally ill, and at risk because the person is reasonably expected to self-
inflict serious physical harm or to inflict serious physical harm on another
person as a result of the mental illness as determined by professional
evaluation (77 ILAC 300.620(c)(1));
      (4)   The person to be admitted is not in need of prenatal or maternity
care (77 ILAC 300.620(b));
      (5)   The person to be admitted and/or the resident’s representative has
disclosed all financial assets and income so that Winchester House may make an
informed decision regarding the resident’s ability to pay for care or qualify
for financial assistance. With the approval of the Winchester House
Administrator, this requirement may be waived for a period of 72 hours for
emergency admission;
      (6)   The person to be admitted has been pre-screened by the appropriate
agency for need and eligibility for nursing home care pursuant to state law (77
ILAC 300.615);
      (7)   The person to be admitted shall submit, five days prior to
admission, to the Winchester House Administrator a medical history including a
physical examination conducted by a physician licensed to practice medicine in
this state;
      (8)   The person to be admitted shall have his or her physician arrange
for the following tests:
         (a)   Chest x-ray;
         (b)   Appropriate laboratory workup; and
         (c)   Urinalysis.
      (9)   Additional information and/or requirements shall be required as
dictated by state or federal law.
   (D)   If the admission order or the application discloses the need for
special or extraordinary equipment required to care for the diagnosis of the
resident, the admission shall be referred to the Winchester House Medical
Advisory Committee, for further consideration as to whether Winchester House
will be a suitable placement (77 ILAC 300.620(a)).
   (E)   With approval of the Winchester House Administrator, the requirement
of physical lab work may be waived for a period of 72 hours for emergency
admission. Lab work will be completed within 72 hours and will be paid for by
the resident, his or her family, or other responsible party.
   (F)   The county will hold the bed of any resident admitted to Winchester
House upon the following conditions:
      (1)   For private pay residents, the bed will be held for as long as a
charge of 75% of the current intermediate care rate is paid.
      (2)   Public aid residents, upon return from the hospital, will be
admitted to the first available medically appropriate bed. Under certain
conditions, the Illinois Department of Human Services will pay Winchester House
to reserve a bed for up to ten days. If the state refuses to pay to reserve the
bed or if the ten days have expired, the resident may elect to reserve the bed
at a charge of 75% of the normal daily rate.
      (3)   A resident may be involuntarily discharged from Winchester House
for medical reasons; for the resident’s physical safety; for the physical
safety of other residents, Winchester House staff or visitors; or for late
payment or non-payment for the resident’s stay, as provided by the Illinois
Nursing Home Care Act (210 ILCS 45/3-401).
(1977 Code, § 2:2-1) (Ord. passed 11-9-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Admission of person unable to purchase care and maintenance, see 55 ILCS 5/
5-21010
§ 37.088 CHARGES FOR SERVICES.
   The charge for care at Winchester House shall be as determined by the County
Board and shall be subject to revision to reflect all costs of care rendered on
an average cost per resident per day; any revisions to the Winchester House
rate structure will be made by the county not more than once in any fiscal year
(December 1 through November 30).
   (A)   Basic rate. The basic rate includes personal care, laundry, room and
board, and nursing care as required by law.
   (B)   Additional costs. The resident must pay for any special treatment or
service ordered by any physician or resident which is not covered by the basic
rate, including physician fees and pharmaceuticals. These costs cannot be
determined in advance.
   (C)   Changes in charges. The above charges may be changed by the County
Board at any time subject to 30 days’ written notice to the resident.
   (D)   Fee for returned checks. A service fee of $25 will be charged for any
returned check.
(1977 Code, § 2:2-2) (Ord. passed 11-9-1999)
§ 37.089 SEVERABILITY.
   These rules and regulations shall be construed to be the county’s intent to
regulate under the provisions of the County Home Act without such
unconstitutional, inoperative, or invalid part contained herein.
(1977 Code, § 2:2-1) (Ord. passed 11-9-1999)
CLINICS
§ 37.100 LAKE COUNTY HEALTH CLINICS, FORMERLY TB SANITARIUM.
   The premises located at 2400 Belvidere Street, Waukegan, Illinois, known as
the Lake County Tuberculosis Sanitarium, shall be changed to “Lake County
Health Clinics”.
(1977 Code, § 7:1) (Res. passed 2-11-1975)
HOME HEALTH SERVICE
§ 37.115 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The Board of Health of the County of Lake.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Lake County Health Department and Community Health
Center.
   HOME HEALTH AGENCY or AGENCY. The Health Department, which is responsible
for providing the “home health service” in accordance with the certification
standards established by the Illinois Department of Public Health.
   HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
      (1)   Those items and services furnished to individuals, under the care
of a physician, on a visiting basis in a place of residences used as the
individual’s home.
      (2)   These services are provided by the home health agency under a plan,
established and periodically reviewed by the patient’s physician, for
furnishing such items and services to an individual on a part-time or
intermittent basis and includes nursing care provided by or under the
supervision of a registered professional nurse; physical, occupational, or
speech therapy, medical social work, and home health aide.
(1997 Code, § 2:1-9) (Ord. passed 3-11-1997)
§ 37.116 AUTHORIZATION TO COLLECT FEES.
   Pursuant to § 14 of An Act in Relation to the Establishment and Maintenance
of County and Multiple-County Health Department, approved July 9, 1943, as
amended, the Board of Health is authorized to collect fees for services
rendered by the Home Health Agency.
(1997 Code, § 2:1-9) (Ord. passed 3-11-1997)
§ 37.117 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   With the approval of the County Board, the Lake County Board of Health
may establish fees which shall not be more than the actual cost based on
accepted cost accounting methods of rendering home health service and to
collect the fees from those persons who receive these services or from public
or private agencies which, pursuant to contract, agree to pay the fees on
behalf of eligible persons.
   (B)   The Lake County Health Department may adjust these fees for home
health clients who are determined to be unable to pay full fees for services
rendered, upon consideration of family financial resources, in order to ensure
that individuals are not denied home health service due to an inability to pay
for same.
(1997 Code, § 2:1-9) (Ord. passed 3-11-1997)
§ 37.118 GIFTS AND BEQUESTS.
   The Board of Health is authorized to:
   (A)   Accept gifts and bequests for the purpose of administering the home
health service program and to expend the income therefor, for the maintenance
of home health services; and
   (B)   Deposit all gifts and bequests received which are not otherwise
invested, the income from these gifts and bequests which are invested, and all
fees collected, in the Lake County Health Fund to the credit of the home health
service.
(1997 Code, § 2:1-9) (Ord. passed 3-11-1997)
RULES FOR NEUTRAL SITE CUSTODY EXCHANGE
§ 37.130 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to 55 ILCS 82/25, Neutral Site Custody Exchange Funding Act -
Rules, the following rules shall govern the operation and standards to be
adhered to by a qualified not-for-profit organization in order to qualify for a
grant from the Neutral Site Custody Exchange Fund.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-4a) (Ord. 11-0388, passed 5-10-2011)
§ 37.131 LETTER OF AGREEMENT.
   This county shall enter into a letter of agreement with a qualified not-for-
profit organization to perform the duties related to the Neutral Site Custody
Exchange Funding Act.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-4a) (Ord. 11-0388, passed 5-10-2011)
§ 37.132 NO FEE OR CHARGE.
   All work related to neutral exchange performed by a qualified not-for-profit
organization, its staff, and volunteers shall be performed without collecting a
fee or charge from the parties involved in a custody exchange.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-4a) (Ord. 11-0388, passed 5-10-2011)
§ 37.133 RECORDS.
   (A)   A qualified not-for-profit organization, upon receiving a grant under
this Act, shall maintain records that include, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Identifying client information;
      (2)   Name of staff providing the service;
      (3)   Date, time, and duration of the service;
      (4)   Who attended the exchange;
      (5)   Summary of activities during the exchange;
      (6)   Interventions made during the service;
      (7)   Account of any physical or verbal altercations, threats, and
violations of protection or visitation orders;
      (8)   Account of any failure to comply with guidelines and procedures;
and
      (9)   Any incidence of abuse.
   (B)   The records shall be available for inspection by the Office of the
Chief Judge of the 19th Judicial Circuit and shall demonstrate adherence to all
applicable requirements.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-4a) (Ord. 11-0388, passed 5-10-2011)
§ 37.134 LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS.
   A qualified not-for-profit organization shall, when needed, provide language
interpreter services, including sign language, to the clients without cost.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-4a) (Ord. 11-0388, passed 5-10-2011)
§ 37.135 WRITTEN REQUEST AND BUDGET.
   (A)   A qualified not-for-profit organization shall submit a written request
and budget to the county and the Office of the Chief Judge of the 19th Judicial
Circuit no later than June 15 of each year.
   (B)   The budget shall include, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Salary and wage expenses;
      (2)   Commodity expenses including operational supplies and office supply
expenses;
      (3)   Capital expenses including computers and furniture;
      (4)   Training and travel expenses;
      (5)   Contractual expenses; and
      (6)   Facility expenses, including rent and utilities.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-4a) (Ord. 11-0388, passed 5-10-2011)
§ 37.136 SECURITY FOR PARTICIPANTS.
   (A)   A qualified not-for-profit organization shall have security
arrangements and procedures that seek to provide protection to all participants
of the program.
   (B)   Security arrangements and procedures must include but are not limited
to:
      (1)   Layout of premises that allows for physical and visual separation
between the custodial and non-custodial parents;
      (2)   Written procedures for arrival and departure of clients so that
contact between them does not occur without explicit agreement of the parties
and staff; and
      (3)   Written emergency protocols, including but not limited to fire
safety, medical emergencies, and violent behavior by participants.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-4a) (Ord. 11-0388, passed 5-10-2011)
§ 37.137 REPORTING PROCEDURES; CLIENT COMPLIANCE.
   A qualified not-for-profit organization shall work with the Office of the
Chief Judge to establish reporting procedures on client compliance and
incidents.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-4a) (Ord. 11-0388, passed 5-10-2011)
APPENDIX A: ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM AGREEMENT
AGREEMENT #           
COUNTY OF LAKE
DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION
ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM
   THIS AGREEMENT entered into this             day of                        ,
A.D., 20   , by and between the County of Lake, Illinois, acting by and through
its County Board, hereinafter referred to as the COUNTY, and  (Full legal name
of organization) , a  (Not-For-Profit, Civic Group, Single- or Multi-Family
Group, Commercial or Private Enterprise) having the address of  (street,
number, municipality, zip code) , hereinafter referred to as the GROUP.
   WITNESSETH
   WHEREAS, Public Act 87-1118, more commonly known as the ILLINOIS ADOPT-A-
HIGHWAY ACT (605 ILCS 120/1, as amended), provides for private interests to
support the efforts of units of local government by allowing groups to adopt
various highways, or sections thereof, for the purposes of litter collection;
and
   WHEREAS, said Act sets forth the procedures and responsibilities of both the
private interests and units of local government. Said Act by reference herein
is hereby made a part hereof; and
   WHEREAS, the COUNTY, to aid and assist in the removal of litter and to
improve County Highway roadside environments, has enacted the LAKE COUNTY
ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY ORDINANCE, as amended, in accordance with and in compliance
with the ILLINOIS ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY ACT, as amended. Said Ordinance by reference
herein is hereby made a part hereof; and
   WHEREAS, the GROUP is desirous to participate in the COUNTY’s ADOPT-A-
HIGHWAY PROGRAM by adopting Section  (Number) of (Road Name) , (County Highway
            ) between  (Road Name)  and  (Road Name) , a distance of
approximately (Number) feet ( miles). The Adopted Section of County Highway is
depicted in EXHIBIT A, attached hereto and hereby made a part hereof; and
   WHEREAS, the litter collection efforts on the Adopted Section of County
Highway will be of immediate benefit to residents of the COUNTY and assists in
creating a litter free roadside environment;
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein,
the COUNTY and the GROUP hereto mutually agree as follows:
1.   It is mutually agreed by and between the parties hereto that the foregoing
preambles are hereby incorporated herein as though fully set forth.
2.   The GROUP agrees and hereby acknowledges the hazardous nature of the work
involved in adopting a section of County Highway and participating in the LAKE
COUNTY ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM.
3.   The GROUP agrees to comply with and adhere to the conditions, terms,
requirements, provisions, and responsibilities as set forth in the ILLINOIS
ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY ACT, as amended, the LAKE COUNTY ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY ORDINANCE, as
amended, and EXHIBIT B. EXHIBIT B is attached hereto and hereby made a part
hereof.
4.   The GROUP agrees to notify the COUNTY’s County Engineer of any change of
name, mailing address, email address, or telephone number of the Group
Coordinator.
5.   The GROUP agrees that in the event of their failure to comply with all
conditions, terms, requirements, provisions, and responsibilities as set forth
in THIS AGREEMENT, the COUNTY shall have the right to suspend or terminate THIS
AGREEMENT. Said termination or suspension shall be in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 4.14 of the LAKE COUNTY ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY ORDINANCE, as
amended [see § 37.19 of the code of ordinances].
6.   The GROUP agrees that the COUNTY’s County Engineer may terminate or
suspend THIS AGREEMENT in accordance with § 4.14 of the LAKE COUNTY ADOPT-A-
HIGHWAY ORDINANCE, as amended [see § 37.19 of the code of ordinances]. In the
event of a suspension of THIS AGREEMENT, the specific reason or reasons shall
be clearly set forth in writing and shall be for such a period of time as
reasonably determined by the COUNTY’s County Engineer.
7.   The GROUP agrees that the participating members of the GROUP are and shall
be jointly and severally bound by the conditions, terms, requirements,
provisions, and responsibilities of THIS AGREEMENT.
8.   The GROUP agrees that its involvement, participation, and activities as
contemplated in THIS AGREEMENT shall not be subcontracted, assigned, or
transferred, in any manner or form, to any other group, private citizen, civic
organization, not-for-profit organization, commercial enterprise, or private
enterprise.
9.   The GROUP agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the COUNTY, its
elected officials, its duly appointed officials, agents, employees, and
representatives, and the COUNTY’s Division of Transportation, its duly
appointed officials, agents, employees, and representatives from and against
any and all claims, suits, settlements, actions, losses, expenses, damages,
injuries, judgments, and demands arising from and relating to the GROUP’s
involvement, participation, and activities as contemplated in THIS AGREEMENT
except for the negligent acts of the COUNTY and its agents or employees.
10.   The GROUP agrees that its members, volunteers, and participants or the
volunteers’ agents or representatives shall assume all liability for and hold
the STATE OF ILLINOIS and its agents or employees harmless from any and all
claims of action resulting from the GROUP’s volunteers or agents work in the
Program, except for the negligent acts of the STATE OF ILLINOIS and the STATE’s
agents or employees.
11.   The COUNTY agrees to comply with and adhere to the conditions,
requirements, and provisions as set forth in EXHIBIT C, attached hereto and
hereby made a part hereof.
12.   The following provisions are mutually agreed by and between the parties
hereto:
   a)   The GROUP may terminate THIS AGREEMENT by providing a 30-day written
notification to the COUNTY’s County Engineer.
   b)   THIS AGREEMENT shall not be construed, in any manner or form, to limit,
diminish, or alter the power or authority of the COUNTY and the COUNTY’s County
Engineer to maintain, operate, improve, construct, reconstruct, repair, widen,
or expand any County Highways as best determined as provided by law.
   c)   Nothing contained in THIS AGREEMENT is intended or shall be construed
as, in any manner or form, creating or establishing a relationship of co-
partners between the parties hereto, or as constituting the GROUP (including
its officers, employees, members, and agents), the agent, representative, or
employee of the COUNTY for any purpose, or in any manner, whatsoever. The GROUP
is to be and shall remain independent of the COUNTY with respect to all
provisions of THIS AGREEMENT.
   d)   The provisions of THIS AGREEMENT are severable. If any provision,
condition, requirement, paragraph, section, subdivision, clause, phrase, or
word of THIS AGREEMENT is for any reason held to be contrary to law or contrary
to any rule or regulation having the force and effect of law, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of THIS AGREEMENT.
   e)   The agreement of the parties hereto is contained herein and THIS
AGREEMENT supersedes all oral agreements and negotiations between the parties
hereto relating to the subject matter hereof as well as any previous agreements
presently in effect between the parties hereto relating to the subject matter
hereof.
13.   THIS AGREEMENT may be executed in multiple identical counterparts, and
all of said counterparts shall, individually and taken together, constitute
THIS AGREEMENT.
14.   THIS AGREEMENT shall remain in full force and effect for the time period
beginning at 12:00 midnight  (Day) ,  (Date) , 20    and ending at 12:00
midnight  (Day) ,  (Date)  , 20     .
                                                                        
                                 GROUP PRESIDENT
ATTEST:
                  By:                                       
                  Title:                                       
                                       
GROUP COORDINATOR
By:                                       
Title:                                       
Date:                                       
COUNTY OF LAKE
By:                                       
                                                                        
Lake County
County Engineer
Date:                                       
EXHIBIT A:
ADOPTED SECTION OF COUNTY HIGHWAY
(Map to be inserted)
EXHIBIT B:
GROUP’S CONDITIONS, TERMS, REQUIREMENTS, PROVISIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The GROUP and all its participating volunteers, employees, agents,
representatives, and members shall comply with and adhere to the following
conditions, terms, requirements, provisions, and responsibilities as they
relate to the LAKE COUNTY ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM. These conditions, terms,
requirements, provisions, and responsibilities are in addition to those set
forth in the AGREEMENT attached hereto and by reference herein, hereby made a
part hereof.
The GROUP agrees to:
1.   Obey and abide by all laws, regulations, and directions relating to safety
and any other terms required by the COUNTY or the COUNTY’s County Engineer or
designee.
2.   Provide one adult supervisor over the age of 21 for every five youths
under the age of 18 present on the adopted section of county highway.
3.   Not allow or permit a person under the age of ten to be a participating
member of the GROUP who would be volunteering for the purpose of litter
collection.
4.   Require all participating GROUP members to attend at least one safety
meeting conducted by the GROUP before participating in any litter collection
along the adopted section of county highway.
5.   Require the GROUP coordinator, or designee, to conduct GROUP safety
meetings and to receive the safety training DVD as required by the COUNTY and
the County Engineer.
6.   Conduct pre-pickup safety talks with all members or volunteers who will be
participating in the litter collection.
7.   Use all safety materials and information provided by the COUNTY’s Division
of Transportation at each safety meeting conducted by the GROUP. The GROUP
Coordinator shall sign a receipt for having received a copy of the safety video
from the COUNTY’s Division of Transportation and a statement that the GROUP’s
participating volunteers and members will view the video prior to beginning
litter collection activities.
8.   Adopt a section of County Highway for a minimum of two years.
9.   Collect litter along the adopted section county highway a minimum of two
times a year.
10.   Attempt to schedule at least one of the litter collections during the
months of April or May and again in the month of September or October.
11.   Not conduct litter collection on busy holidays or during heavy holiday
travel weekends or any day immediately preceding or following those holidays or
weekends, such as the Wednesday before or Monday following Thanksgiving
weekend, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve, New
Year’s Day, the Fourth of July, the Fourth of July weekend (Friday through
Monday), Memorial Day, Memorial Day weekend (Friday through Monday), Labor Day
or Labor Day weekend (Friday through Monday).
12.   Not collect litter during the days and times when local events such as
festivals, carnivals, annual municipal celebrations, fairs or shows are
scheduled.
13.   Not collect litter during inclement weather conditions or during rush
hour traffic peak times.
14.   Perform litter collection between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
15.   Provide verbal or written notice to the COUNTY’s County Engineer a
minimum of three working days prior to the date when the litter collection will
be undertaken. The GROUP Coordinator shall be responsible for this providing
notice.
16.   Be responsible for requiring all participating volunteers and members to
wear all safety apparel, including but not limited to safety vests, as provided
by the COUNTY’s Division of Transportation during all litter collection
activities and at times when the participating volunteers and members are on or
within the right-of-way of the adopted section of county highway.
17.   Be responsible for prohibiting participating volunteers and members from
possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of alcohol or drugs during
litter collection while on the adopted section of county highway.
18.   Maintain a first-aid kit and an adequate supply of drinking water while
participating volunteers and members are performing litter collection on the
adopted section of county highway.
19.   Educate its participating volunteers and members as to how to respond to
emergencies, how to contact emergency help and to know the nearest location of
all emergency facilities.
20.   Be aware of any physical maladies or impairments of its participating
volunteers and members and not to allow the participation of volunteers and
members if their health would be endangered by litter collection activities.
21.   Arrange to pick up trashbags and receptacles from the COUNTY’s Division
of Transportation during normal business hours a minimum of three working days
prior to the date of litter collection. Safety apparel must be returned to the
COUNTY’s Division of Transportation within 15 working days of the date of the
expiration of THIS AGREEMENT.
22.   Place all litter in the trashbags and receptacles provided by the
COUNTY’s Division of Transportation.
23.   Place filled or partially filled trashbags and receptacles at such
locations as specified by the COUNTY’s County Engineer or designee. Filled or
partially filled trashbags and receptacles shall not be placed on the roadway
pavement or within ten feet of the roadway pavement. Trashbags and receptacles
shall not be placed within ten feet of any guardrail, culvert, inlet, drainage
pipe opening, concrete wall, bridge, or traffic signal. Placement shall not
obstruct or hinder the flow of surface drainage water, obstruct sight lines of
intersecting streets, highways or access drives or obscure any roadway signs or
traffic signals.
24.   Not remove, or cause to be removed, any filled or partially filled
trashbags and receptacles from the right-of-way of the adopted section of
county highway. Recycling is encouraged and as such, recyclable materials may
be removed, provided proper disposal is used.
25.   Upon arrival at the adopted section of county highway, immediately unfold
and display the “Clean-Up Crew Working” safety signs that are affixed on the
Adopt-A-Highway identification sign posts located at each beginning of the
adopted section of county highway. The “Clean-Up Crew Working” safety signs
shall remain unfolded and on display for the entire time the GROUP’s
participating volunteers and members are on the adopted section of county
highway. Upon completion of the litter collection and immediately prior to
leaving the adopted section of county highway, the safety signs shall be
refolded and fastened so the “Clean-Up Crew Working” sign faces are no longer
displayed. (It should be noted that an identification sign with a folded safety
sign affixed is located at the beginning of each adopted section of county
highway facing each direction of travel on the roadway.)
26.   Collect litter on one side of the adopted section of county highway at a
time. Collection activities shall be conducted in such a manner that
participating volunteers and members shall be facing oncoming traffic.
27.   Make every effort to minimize the number of vehicles transporting
participating volunteers and members to the adopted section of county highway
(e.g., carpool). Vehicles shall be parked on the same side of the roadway as
the participating volunteers and members are on. Vehicles shall not be parked
on or within any roadway pavement, on or within medians, along curves, on
bridge decks, or near or under overpasses, and shall be parked in such a manner
as to not interfere with vehicles traveling on the pavement, cause a safety
hazard, block side streets, access drives, or intersecting highways, or inhibit
or diminish sight visibility at corners and of highway signs.
28.   Educate its participating volunteers and members to avoid and keep a safe
distance away from the roadway pavement, guardrail, culverts, inlets, drainage
pipes, concrete walls, bridges, traffic signals, and any other areas of
potential hazards within the right-of-way of the adopted section of county
highway.
29.   Instruct its participating volunteers and members to never cross over or
pick up litter on the roadway pavement.
30.   Instruct and ensure that its participating volunteers and members are
properly attired for litter collection. Proper attire shall include the wearing
of safety apparel obtained from the COUNTY’s Division of Transportation and
should also include brightly colored clothing, long sleeves, long pants,
leather shoes or boots, gloves, and proper outerwear for existing weather
conditions.
31.   Instruct its participating volunteers and members to avoid contact with
poisonous plants, stinging insects, and animals.
32.   Instruct its participating volunteers and members to refrain from
horseplay, demonstrations, or any other activity not related to litter
collection activities.
33.   Avoid and maintain a safe distance from any area of the adopted section
of county highway under construction or where construction activities are
underway.
34.   Not go onto private property which adjoins the right-of-way of the
adopted section of county highway.
35.   Avoid potentially hazardous items, which include but are not limited to
old car batteries, animal carcasses, heavy or large items, hazardous materials,
and any other unidentified questionable items. In the event these items are
present on the adopted section of county highway, the GROUP shall notify the
COUNTY’s County Engineer or designee as soon as possible.
36.   Instruct participating volunteers and members to handle broken glass,
sharp objects, and other like items with extreme care and to avoid kneeling,
falling, or stepping on such items. Care should be taken to never attempt to
compact litter in the trashbags and receptacles.
EXHIBIT C:
COUNTY’S CONDITIONS, TERMS, REQUIREMENTS, PROVISIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The COUNTY agrees to the following conditions, terms, requirements, provisions,
and responsibilities as they relate to the LAKE COUNTY ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM.
These conditions, terms, requirements, provisions, and responsibilities are in
addition to those set forth in the AGREEMENT attached hereto and by reference
herein, hereby made a part hereof.
The COUNTY agrees:
1.   That its Division of Transportation shall erect the appropriate signs at
the beginning of each Adopted Section of County Highway for each direction of
travel. Said signs shall include the GROUP’s name, a folding safety sign and
shall comply with the provisions of the LAKE COUNTY ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY ORDINANCE,
as amended, and the requirements set forth in the ILLINOIS MANUAL ON UNIFORM
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAY, the most recent edition.
2.   To provide the GROUP with a safety training video.
3.   To provide the GROUP with trashbags and receptacles.
4.   To provide the GROUP with safety vests.
5.   That its Division of Transportation, upon receipt of notice from the
GROUP, shall remove filled trashbags and receptacles from the Adopted Section
of County Highway as soon as practical after the litter collection.
6.   That its Division of Transportation shall provide the safety training
program as specified in the LAKE COUNTY ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY ORDINANCE, as amended.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-2000; Ord. passed 4-9-2013)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS AND SOLID WASTE
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
      
52.   WATER REGULATIONS
      
53.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
54.   PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
Solid Waste Hauling and Recycling; Licensing and Administrative Requirements
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Collection of recyclable materials and volume-based pricing
   
50.03   Licenses
   
50.04   Construction and demolition debris diversion
   
50.05   Administrative proceedings
   
50.06   Hearings
   
50.07   Implementation in townships
   
50.08   Provisions cumulative
   
50.09   Effective date
   
50.10   Amendments
Regulation of Disposal Sites
   
50.20   Purpose
   
50.21   Definitions
   
50.22   Requirements for operation
   
50.23   Permits
   
50.24   Dumps
   
50.25   Garbage and combustible material
   
50.26   Inspections
   
50.27   Interpretation, purposes and conflict
Procedure for New Pollution Control Facilities; Site Approval Requests
   
50.40   Definitions
   
50.41   County approval of pollution control facility
   
50.42   Pre-filing notice requirement
   
50.43   Application
   
50.44   Filing fee and administration of fees and costs
   
50.45   Appointment and conduct of Hearing Officer
   
50.46   County review and participation
   
50.47   Other parties
   
50.48   Participants at the hearing
   
50.49   Public hearing
   
50.50   Written public comment
   
50.51   Record
   
50.52   Hearing Officer’s recommendation and proposed findings of fact
   
50.53   County Board decision
Solid Waste Management Tax
   
50.60   Definitions
   
50.61   Amount of tax
   
50.62   Exemptions
   
50.63   Payment
   
50.64   Reports
   
50.65   Solid Waste Management Fund
   
50.66   Saving clause
 
   
50.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Solid Waste Disposal Site Regulations; Sanitary Landfill
   
Appendix B: Solid Waste Disposal Site Regulations; Dump
SOLID WASTE HAULING AND RECYCLING; LICENSING AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   APPLICANT. In reference to a solid waste hauling license, any person
applying for a solid waste hauling license. In reference to construction and
demolition recycling, any person who applies to the county for the applicable
registrations or permits to undertake any covered project within unincorporated
Lake County.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS (C&D DEBRIS). Non-hazardous,
uncontaminated materials resulting from the construction, remodeling, or
demolition of utilities, structures, or roads.
   C&D DEBRIS THAT IS PROCESSED FOR USE AT A LANDFILL. C&D debris that is
processed for use at a municipal solid waste landfill unit as alternative daily
cover, road building material, or drainage structure building material in
accordance with the landfill’s waste disposal permit issued by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
   COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois, a body politic and corporate.
   COVERED PROJECT. All new construction, renovation, demolition, entire re-
roofing, or entire re-siding projects, of 1,500 square feet or greater gross
floor area, within unincorporated Lake County.
   DIVERSION/DIVERTED. To manage, sort and process C&D debris into recyclable
C&D debris, recovered wood that is processed for use as fuel, and/or C&D debris
that is processed for use at a landfill.
   DIVERSION REQUIREMENT. The diversion of at least 75% of the total C&D debris
generated by a covered project unless the applicant has been granted an
variance pursuant to §
50.04(G); in which case, the DIVERSION REQUIREMENT shall be the maximum
feasible diversion rate as established in the variance granted.
   HAULER. Any person who engages in the business of collecting or hauling
garbage, municipal waste, recyclable material, landscape waste, brush or other
refuse on a continuous and regular basis, and makes multiple scheduled
collections per month within the county.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
   MUNICIPAL WASTE. Garbage, general household institutional and commercial
waste, industrial lunchroom or office waste, landscape waste and construction
and demolition debris.
   MUNICIPALITY. Each incorporated town, village, or city located either
partially or wholly within the boundaries of the county.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, limited liability company, association,
partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry,
public or private corporation, or any other legal entity whatsoever.
   RECOVERED WOOD THAT IS PROCESSED FOR USE AS FUEL. Wood that has been
salvaged from C&D debris and processed for use as fuel, as authorized by
applicable state or federal environmental regulatory authority, and supplied
only to intermediate processing facilities for sizing, or to combustion
facilities for use as fuel, that have obtained all necessary waste management
and air permits for handling and combustion of the fuel.
   RECYCLABLE C&D DEBRIS. C&D debris that has been rendered reusable and is
reused or that would otherwise be disposed of or discarded but is collected,
separated or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of
raw materials or products. RECYCLABLE C&D DEBRIS does not include C&D debris
processed for use as a fuel or for use at a landfill.
   RECYCLING. A method, technique or process designed to remove any contaminant
from waste so as to render such waste reusable, or any process by which
materials that would otherwise be disposed of or discarded are collected,
separated or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of
raw materials or products.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Material that is separated from municipal waste for the
purpose of recycling, including but not limited to, ferrous metal cans,
aluminum containers, glass, plastic, which shall include HDPE, PET containers
and plastics #3 through #7, newsprint, corrugated paper, junk mail, magazines,
office paper, and boxboard.
   RENOVATION. Any construction or improvement to an existing structure.
   SALVAGE. The controlled removal of C&D debris from a covered project for the
purpose of recycling.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN. The official county plan adopted pursuant to
the Illinois Solid Waste Planning and Recycling Act for the management of
municipal waste generated within the county’s boundaries, as amended.
   SWALCO. The Solid Waste Agency of Lake County, Illinois.
   VOLUME-BASED PRICING. A system under which residents pay for municipal waste
management and disposal services by weight or volume collected, not a fixed
fee.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013)
§ 50.02 COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS AND VOLUME-BASED PRICING.
   (A)   Recyclable material collection offered or required. Each hauler
operating within the county shall be required to offer, either as part of basic
service or alternately as an additional service, the collection of recyclable
materials from any multifamily home, commercial business or institutional
facility within the county and shall be required to provide the collection of
recyclable materials, as part of basic service, from any single- family home,
at least once every two weeks. Haulers are encouraged to provide residents of
single-family homes with larger containers (35, 65 or 95 gallon carts) for
collecting recyclable materials. Haulers shall provide information on how and
what materials to recycle as least once every other year to customers with
recycling service. Haulers shall provide a written offer to provide recycling
services to commercial businesses that are not recycling at least once during
the term of the contract or in the absence of a contract at least once every
two years, whichever is shorter. The hauler’s written offer must include a
request that the commercial business respond to the hauler’s request to provide
recycling services in writing.
   (B)   Recyclable material collection enforcement. Each municipality located
within the county may license, franchise or otherwise regulate the collection
of recyclable materials within their individual jurisdictions so as to require
the opportunity of any individual resident, single-family home, multifamily
home, commercial business, or institutional facility to recycle recyclable
materials at the curbside or other more accessible location.
   (C)   Collection of recyclable materials. All materials collected as
recyclable materials shall not be deposited in a landfill or incinerator unless
all reasonable efforts have been made to sell the recyclable material to a
processor or end user.
   (D)   Ownership of recyclable materials. Ownership of recyclable materials
set out for collection shall remain with the individual resident, single-family
home, multifamily home, commercial business, or institutional facility that set
out the material for collection until removal by the hauler. Upon removal of
the recyclable material by the hauler, ownership shall vest in the hauler.
   (E)   Volume-based pricing. Each hauler operating within the unincorporated
area of the county shall be required to offer volume-based pricing, utilizing
either a graduated can option with the price increasing as the size of the
waste can increases or a limited waste disposal program, as part of residential
municipal waste collection service. Residential customers covered by collection
contracts pursuant to township or county aggregated franchise agreements shall
not be subject to volume-based pricing requirements.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013)
§ 50.03 LICENSES.
   (A)   License required. No hauler shall engage in the collection of
municipal waste, recyclable materials or landscape waste from any individual
resident, single-family home, multifamily home, commercial business, or
institutional facility within the county without first having applied for and
obtained a license to do so from the county.
   (B)   Municipal license. Each municipality may license, franchise, contract
with or otherwise control the haulers operating within the respective
boundaries of the municipality and shall require as part of said license,
franchise, contract or other control that the hauler offer the service of
recyclable materials collection to each individual resident, single-family
home, multifamily home, commercial business, or institutional facility within
the municipality.
   (C)   License procedure.
      (1)   Application. Application for a license shall be made in writing to
the county on the form provided by the county, shall be verified by the
applicant and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; if the
applicant is a partnership, the application shall show for each partner his or
her name and address and interest and also all information contained by
subsections (C)(1)(b) and (C)(1)(c) below. If the applicant is a corporation,
the application shall show the name and address of the registered agent, and
with respect to each director, and each shareholder owning 5% or more of the
corporation’s shares (i) his or her name and address, (ii) the information
required by subsection (C)(1)(c) below, and in addition, with respect to each
director and shareholder owning more than 25% of the shares, the information
required by subsection (C)(1)(b) below;
         (b)   The experience of the Applicant in the collection, transport and
disposal of refuse and applicant’s (or principal owner) business experience (or
a related field) during the five-year period immediately preceding the date of
the application;
         (c)   The criminal record, if any, of the applicant;
         (d)   The rates or a schedule of rates proposed to be charged;
         (e)   The number and kind of vehicles owned and controlled by the
applicant, and the number and kind of vehicles proposed to be licensed
hereunder for use in the collection of municipal waste, recyclable materials or
landscape waste from within the county’s boundaries. An application may be
amended from time to time during the license period to provide for increases or
reductions in the number of vehicles;
         (f)   The location of the applicant’s office and garage;
         (g)   The color scheme, insignia and trade name to be used to
designate the vehicles of the applicant;
         (h)   A description of each vehicle including the vehicle
identification number and license plate number of the vehicle;
         (i)   A certificate from the Secretary of State of the State of
Illinois for each vehicle proposed to be licensed hereunder showing compliance
by the applicant with the statutes of the State of Illinois, or as the same may
be in force and effect, relating to the bonding, licensing and/or insuring of
each such vehicle;
         (j)   A policy or certificate of insurance, issued by a company
acceptable to the county, showing proof of insurance as required below. All
such policies or certificates of insurance shall be in an acceptable form. The
licensee shall maintain the full insurance coverage required herein at all
times and a duplicate certificate of insurance shall be deposited with the Lake
County Clerk and shall provide that such insurance may not be canceled except
upon 30 days prior written notice to the Lake County Clerk. The insurance
coverage specified herein constitutes the minimum requirements and said
requirements shall in no way lessen or limit the liability of the licensee
under the terms of this subchapter. The licensee shall procure and maintain at
its own cost and expense any additional kinds and amounts of insurance, which,
in the licensee’s own judgment, may be necessary for its proper protection.
            1.   Workers’ compensation insurance. The licensee shall carry this
with a company authorized under the laws of the State of Illinois with a policy
to protect itself against liability under the Workers’ Compensation Act and the
Workers’ Occupational Diseases Act of the State of Illinois.
            2.   Vehicle liability insurance. The licensee shall carry under
its own name a comprehensive policy to insure the entire vehicle liability for
its operations with limits of not less than $1,000,000 each person and
$3,000,000 each accident bodily injury liability, $1,000,000 each accident for
property damage liability.
            3.   General liability. The licensee shall carry in its own name a
comprehensive liability policy for its operations other than vehicular
operations with limits of at least $1,000,000 each person and $3,000,000 each
accident bodily injury liability, $1,000,000 each accident for property damage
liability.
         (k)   Such other information as the county may require from time to
time.
      (2)   License issuance. The county shall approve the application and
issue the license upon the payment of the fee required herein if it finds:
         (a)   That the applicant is not in default to the county;
         (b)   That the applicant has conducted its business in accordance with
this code of ordinances and regulations of the county;
         (c)   That the equipment used in the applicant’s business meets the
requirements of this code of ordinances and regulations of the county;
         (d)   The issuance of the license is in the best interest of the
county and that the quality of service to be rendered will serve the public
health, safety and welfare; and
         (e)   That all information, insurance, certificates and agreements
required by this section have been provided and approved.
      (3)   License renewal. The county shall provide a license renewal form to
each hauler within 60 days prior to the expiration of the hauler’s current
license. License renewal forms shall be completed and returned to the county at
least 30 days prior to the expiration of the hauler’s current license.
      (4)   Accuracy and updating of information. All information required to
be submitted for this license shall be complete, accurate and submitted in a
timely manner. The applicant shall notify the county of any change of address
or telephone number.
      (5)   Transfer of ownership. Licenses are not transferable. Any attempted
transfer of a license shall render said license immediately void. An ownership
change in a corporation that involves the sale or transfer of 35% or more of
the stock shall void the existing license.
   (D)   License issuance or denial.
      (1)   License action. The county shall have 30 days from the receipt of a
complete license or renewal application to issue or deny the license or the
license renewal.
      (2)   Notification. The county shall notify the applicant in writing of
the issuance or denial of said application. Denial of said license shall be by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
      (3)   License denial. A license denial shall provide written notice
stating the basis for the denial and shall provide notice to the applicant that
if an appeal is desired, a written request for a hearing must be filed within
15 calendar days following service, exclusive of the date of service. Upon
receipt of a request for hearing, the county shall set a time and place for the
hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures in §
50.06.
   (E)   License and vehicle registration fee.
      (1)   Schedule of fees. The fee for each license shall be $50. Checks
must be made payable to the Lake County Treasurer. Payment of all fees must
accompany the license application or renewal.
      (2)   Vehicle registration. The county reserves the right to issue a
decal and require the placement of said decal conspicuously on the outside of
each vehicle so utilized by the hauler. Such decals may be issued annually. The
number of said vehicles utilized by the hauler shall be reported in the
application. If the county exercises the right to require decals on each
vehicle, no vehicle may be used without displaying said decal.
   (F)   Reporting. The Hauler shall submit a written report to SWALCO, on a
form provided by SWALCO, on its solid waste, recycling and landscape waste
operations, on or before January 31 of each year, for the previous six calendar
months of July through December, and also on or before July 31 of each year for
the previous six calendar months of January through June. The report shall
contain:
      (1)   The total tonnage of municipal waste collected from within
municipal jurisdictions or geographically defined unincorporated areas of the
county and the location or locations the municipal waste was transported to;
and
      (2)   The total tonnage of recyclable material collected from residential
programs within municipal jurisdictions or geographically defined
unincorporated areas of the county and the location or locations the recyclable
material was transported to; and
      (3)   The total tonnage of recyclable material collected from commercial
accounts within municipal jurisdictions or geographically defined
unincorporated areas of the county and the location or locations the recyclable
material was transported to; and
      (4)   The total tonnage of landscape waste material collected from within
municipal jurisdictions or geographically defined areas of the county and the
location or locations the landscape waste material was transported to.
   (G)   Delegation of licensing. The county may delegate licensing, as
provided for in §
50.03, to a qualified agency. Such an agency may also be responsible for
revocation of licenses, as provided for in §
50.05.
   (H)   Compliance with other laws. The obtaining of a license herein shall
not be deemed to exclude the necessity of obtaining other licenses or permits
as required by all applicable city, county, state and federal laws or
regulations. The hauler shall at all times operate in compliance with all
applicable city, county, state, and federal rules or regulations.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013; Ord. 17-1208,
passed 11-14-2017)
§ 50.04 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS DIVERSION.
   (A)   Applicability of covered projects. Seventy-five percent of
construction and demolition (C&D) debris generated by a covered project shall
be diverted in accordance with this section. Failure to comply with any of the
terms of this subchapter shall subject the person to the full range of
enforcement mechanisms set forth in §
50.99(B).
   (B)   C&D debris compliance planning.
      (1)   Re-roofing and re-siding projects. By submitting a registration
application for a re-roofing or re-siding project, the applicant agrees to
comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Other permitted projects.
         (a)   Prior to the issuance, by the County Planning, Building and
Development Department (“PB&D”), of a permit for a covered project, the
applicant must complete and submit the C&D Debris Compliance Plan, on a form
provided by the PB&D. By submitting an application for a covered project and a
C&D Debris Compliance Plan, the applicant agrees to comply with the
requirements of this subchapter. The Plan must include:
            1.   A description of the covered project including the number of
structures and the gross floor area;
            2.   Identification of all materials to be diverted from disposal
to recyclable C&D debris, recovered wood, and/or alternate daily cover;
            3.   A description of whether and to what extent materials will be
separated on-site or co-mingled;
            4.   Identification of the vendors or facilities that will collect
or receive the construction or demolition debris, and such additional
information as the PB&D Director may require demonstrating that the vendor or
facility will recycle or divert C&D debris received from the covered project;
            5.   The estimated date on which the covered project is to
commence; and
            6.   Such additional information as the PB&D Director may require.
         (b)   Where all of the facts cannot be ascertained, the applicant
shall provide the best estimate based on all information reasonably available
about the covered project.
   (C)   Application fee. The application fee for any re-roofing and re-siding
project, as described in subsection (B)(1) above, shall be $5, in addition to
all other permit or registration related fees. The application fee for any
covered project, as described in subsection (B)(2) above, shall be $20, in
addition to all other permit related fees. The application fee must be payable
to the Lake County Treasurer and must be submitted with the application.
   (D)   Review of C&D debris compliance plan.
      (1)   Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter,
the Lake County PB&D Department shall not issue a permit for a covered project
without an acceptable C&D Debris Compliance Plan and application fee.
      (2)   Denial. If it is determined that the C&D Debris Compliance Plan is
incomplete or fails to demonstrate that at least 75% of all C&D debris
generated by the covered project will be diverted, the C&D Debris Compliance
Plan shall be returned to the applicant marked “failed”. Upon the return of the
C&D Debris Compliance Plan, the applicant may make necessary changes and
resubmit the C&D Debris Compliance Plan or request a variance, in writing, from
the requirements of this section, to be approved by the PB&D Director, in
consultation with SWALCO.
   (E)   C&D debris compliance report. Not less than ten business days prior to
the scheduled date for the final inspection of a covered project subject to
this section, the applicant shall complete and submit the C&D Debris Compliance
Report provided by PB&D. The C&D Debris Compliance Report must include the
following information:
      (1)   The date(s) demolition and/or construction commenced;
      (2)   The weight of C&D debris that was generated at the project site;
      (3)   The weight of C&D debris that was diverted to achieve the 75%
diversion requirement;
      (4)   The final calculation demonstrating compliance with the 75%
diversion requirement; and
      (5)   Original receipts from all vendors and facilities which collected
or received C&D debris, indicating weights received by each.
   (F)   Determination of compliance.
      (1)   Compliance. The information submitted under subsection (E) above
shall be reviewed in order to determine whether the applicant has complied with
the Diversion Requirement.
      (2)   Non-compliance. If it is determined that the applicant has not
complied with subsection (A) above, enforcement shall occur under the terms of
§
50.99(B).
      (3)   Extraordinary circumstances. If the diversion requirement has not
been achieved due to extraordinary circumstances, the applicant may request a
variance, in writing, from the requirements of §
50.04, to be approved by the PB&D Director, in consultation with SWALCO.
   (G)   Variance criteria. The PB&D Director may grant a variance from the
requirements of §
50.04 only if the PB&D Director finds that all of the following have been met.
      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances applicable to
the project that do not apply to similar projects and that make compliance with
the section impracticable.
      (2)   Granting the variance will not constitute a grant of special
privilege inconsistent with limitations imposed on similar covered projects.
      (3)   Cost to the applicant of strict compliance with this section is not
the primary reason for granting the exception.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013; Ord. 17-1208,
passed 11-14-2017)
§ 50.05 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Suspension or revocation of license.
      (1)   The county may suspend or revoke any license issued under §
50.03 for a violation of any provision of this subchapter. Suspension shall be
for a period as prescribed within §
50.99(B).
      (2)   Notice of a suspension or revocation shall be in writing and shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail upon the licensee at
least 15 calendar days prior to the effective date of the suspension or
revocation. The written notice shall contain the effective date of the
suspension or revocation; the facts which support the conclusion that a
violation or violations have occurred; a statement that if the licensee desires
to appeal, a written request for a hearing must be received by the county, as
specified in the notice, within 15 calendar days following service of the
notice, exclusive of the day of service; and that the request for hearing must
state the grounds for appeal. If a hearing is requested, the suspension or
revocation shall be stayed pending outcome of the hearing.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the county shall set a date,
time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures in §
50.06.
   (B)   Summary suspension of license.
      (1)   If the county finds that the public health, safety or welfare
requires immediate action, it may order summary suspension of a license.
      (2)   Written notice of a summary suspension shall be by personal service
upon the licensee or sent by certified return receipt mail to the licensee’s
business address. The county shall also take reasonable steps to notify
licensee by telephone, at the phone number provided by the licensee, prior to
the summary suspension.
      (3)   The written notice shall state the effective date of the summary
suspension, the violation requiring emergency action, the facts which support
the conclusion that a violation has occurred, a statement that if the licensee
desires to appeal, a written request for a hearing must be received by the
county, as specified by the notice, within ten calendar days following service
of the notice, exclusive of the day of service, and that the request for
hearing must state the grounds for appeal.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a request for hearing the county shall set a date,
time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures in §
50.06.
      (5)   The summary suspension shall not be stayed during the appeal.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013)
§ 50.06 HEARINGS.
   Hearings required pursuant to this subchapter shall be conducted as follows.
   (A)   Hearing Commission and Officer. The hearing shall be before an
impartial Hearing Commission consisting of three members appointed by the
County Board. One member of the Commission will be appointed and will act as
the Hearing Officer.
   (B)   Prehearing and hearing notice. The county shall schedule and provide
notice of the date, time and place of the prehearing conference and hearing.
The prehearing conference shall be held at least three weeks prior to the
hearing. The hearing shall be held no later than 45 calendar days after receipt
of the request for hearing or by mutual agreement of the parties.
   (C)   Procedures. The prehearing conference and hearing shall be conducted
in the following manner:
      (1)   The prehearing conference shall be held before the Hearing Officer
and shall define the issues, schedule the exchange of witness lists and
documentary evidence, seek agreement on the authenticity of documents and
relevant testimonial evidence, determine whether intended evidence is
cumulative and repetitive and consider all other matters that will assist in a
fair and expeditious hearing.
      (2)   Each party shall exchange all relevant information and documentary
evidence at least one week prior to the hearing date. Such information shall
include all evidence intended for introduction at the hearing and includes, but
is not limited to, the following: exhibits, statements, reports, witness lists
including a description of the facts and opinions to which each is expected to
testify, photographs, slides, and demonstrative evidence. Evidence not
exchanged in accordance with these provisions will not be considered in the
hearing unless good cause is shown to the Hearing Officer.
      (3)   The hearing shall be public and shall be recorded by a certified
court reporter. The licensee or applicant shall be responsible for all costs of
the certified court reporter, including appearance and the provision of a
transcript.
      (4)   All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation.
      (5)   The hearing is subject to the general rules of evidence with
latitude necessary to gain facts or information. Irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The Hearing Officer shall make
all rulings for the Hearing Commission.
      (6)   The county, licensee or applicant, and additional parties as
determined by the Hearing Officer, shall present evidence in that order. Each
party shall have the opportunity to cross examine the witnesses of the other
party. The Hearing Commission may examine witnesses.
      (7)   The Hearing Commission shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions based upon the evidence provided at the hearing.
      (8)   The cost of preparing a record shall be borne by the applicant or
licensee.
      (9)   Appeal of a decision by the Hearing Commission shall be subject to
the provisions of the Illinois Administrative Review Law and shall be made to
the Circuit Court of the Nineteenth Judicial Court.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013)
§ 50.07 IMPLEMENTATION IN TOWNSHIPS.
   If a township within the county has an ordinance in place on the effective
date of this subchapter which substantially conforms with or exceeds the
requirements of this subchapter including but not limited to the required
collection of recyclable material, reporting requirements, and the offering of
volume-based pricing to residential customers, the township may continue to
enforce its own ordinance and such enforcement shall constitute, within that
township, implementation of this subchater. A township may at any time adopt
and enforce an ordinance that is more stringent than that required by this
subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013)
§ 50.08 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions in this subchapter are cumulative and are additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinances covering any subject matter in
this subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013)
§ 50.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter, as amended on June 11, 2013, shall be in full force and
effect beginning on January 1, 2014.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9) (Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. passed 6-11-2013)
§ 50.10 AMENDMENTS.
   This subchapter may be amended from time to time by amendatory ordinances.
(Ord. passed 6-11-2013)
REGULATION OF DISPOSAL SITES
§ 50.20 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter codifies an ordinance defining sanitary landfills,
dumps, requiring permits for the operation of the solid waste disposal sites;
regulating the disposal and dumping of garbage, refuse, and other trash; and
the fixing of penalties for violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of promoting and protecting the general health and the
control of disease throughout Lake County, this subchapter is hereby ordained
by the County Board.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
§ 50.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   COMBUSTIBLE WASTE. All waste substances capable of incineration or burning,
but excluding explosive or highly inflammable material.
   DUMP. All land or parcels of land on which non- putrescible refuse is
accepted for deposit or permitted to be deposited regardless of whether a
charge is made therefor.
   GARBAGE. All animal and vegetable waste and all putrescible matter.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Director of the Lake County Health Department or his or
her authorized representative.
   NON-COMBUSTIBLE WASTE. All other waste substance not capable of incineration
or burning, such as earth fill, glass, metal, earthenware, and the like.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, club, corporation, association, partnership,
company, organization, political subdivision, or another legal entity.
   REFUSE. All waste substances, including garbage, as well as combustible and
non-combustible wastes.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A method of disposing of refuse on land without creating
nuisances or hazards to the public health or safety by confining refuse to the
smallest practical area, compacting it to the smallest practical volume by
employing power equipment, and covering with a layer of compacted earth or
suitable cover material at the conclusion of each day’s operation, or at other
intervals as may be necessary.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. Any site including a sanitary landfill or dump
used for the disposal of solid or semi-solid wastes from more than one
premises, or from a commercial or industrial operation, not suitable for
discharge into water carriage waste disposal systems.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
§ 50.22 REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION.
   The Health Officer of the county, in order to protect the health and safety
of the people of the county and of the general public, is authorized and
directed to promulgate regulations establishing minimum standards governing the
operation of solid waste disposal sites. The regulations shall become effective
upon approval by the County Board, and shall be filed with the Lake County
Clerk as a public record.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
Cross-reference:
   Regulations, see
Appendices A and
B
§ 50.23 PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any land, premises, or
property within the county for the dumping or disposal of any garbage, refuse,
or other waste materials of any kind without first filing an application with
the Health Officer, and securing a valid permit from the Health Officer for the
operation of a solid waste disposal site. The permit issued by the Health
Officer is in addition to any building and zoning permits required, and the
permit issued by the Health Officer does not signify compliance with
requirements established by other regulatory agencies. Application for permits
shall be on forms furnished by the Lake County Health Department.
   (B)   If the Health Officer, as a result of his or her review of the
completed application, finds that the proposed solid waste disposal site can be
operated in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and that no
health hazards or nuisances will be created as a result of the operation, he or
she shall issue a permit to the applicant upon delivery of a performance bond
issued by a surety company in the amount of $10,000, payable to the county
where the solid waste disposal site is located in the unincorporated area of
the county; and when the solid waste disposal site is located within the
corporate limits of a municipality, the bond shall be payable to the
municipality, except that where a solid waste disposal site is operated by a
municipality within the corporate limits of the municipality, a bond shall not
be required.
   (C)   The performance bond shall be conditioned, as follows:
      (1)   The permittee, his or her agents and servants, will comply with all
of the terms, conditions, provisions, requirements, and specifications
contained in this subchapter and the regulations adopted pursuant hereto;
      (2)   The permittee, his or her agents and servants, will save harmless
the county or specific municipality in which the solid waste disposal site is
located, from any expense incurred through the failure of the permittee, his or
her agents and servants, to operate and maintain the dump or landfill as
required by this subchapter, including any expense that the county or
municipality may incur to correct any condition or violation of this
subchapter, including the county’s or municipality’s own labor and equipment
whenever the Health Officer determines it is necessary for the county or
municipality to correct any conditions violating the provisions of this
subchapter or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or from any damages growing
out of the negligence of the permittee or his or her agents or servants; and
      (3)   Before acceptance, all bonds shall be approved by the County Board
or governing body of the municipality in which the solid waste disposal site is
located. If a corporate bond is offered, it shall be executed by a surety or
guaranty company qualified to transact business in this state.
   (D)   The Health Officer may suspend any permit authorized by this
subchapter upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this
subchapter. The Health Officer may revoke any such permit, after an opportunity
for a hearing before him or her, upon finding that the solid waste disposal
site for which the permit was issued is in violation of any of the provisions
of this subchapter.
   (E)   If the permit shall be suspended by the Health Officer, it shall be
unlawful during the period of the suspension for the permit holder to operate
the solid waste disposal site for which the permit was issued.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.24 DUMPS.
   Dumps may accept for deposit only non- combustible waste having no
putrescible material therein. The dumping of garbage and combustible refuse at
solid waste disposal sites not operating as sanitary landfills is prohibited.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
§ 50.25 GARBAGE AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.
   The dumping of garbage and combustible material shall be restricted to solid
waste disposal sites operated as sanitary landfills in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter and regulations adopted pursuant hereto.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
§ 50.26 INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections as
are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this subchapter and the
regulations promulgated hereunder. It shall be the duty of the operator of a
solid waste disposal site to give the Health Officer free access to the
property at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections as are
necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this subchapter and
the regulations promulgated hereunder.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
§ 50.27 INTERPRETATION, PURPOSES AND CONFLICT.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, safety, or health ordinance
or code in force in the incorporated or unincorporated areas of the county
existing on the effective date of this subchapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people of Lake County shall prevail.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
PROCEDURE FOR NEW POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES; SITE APPROVAL REQUESTS
§ 50.40 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply.
      ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act, as amended (415 ILCS 5/
1 et seq.).
      AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      APPLICANT. Any person, firm, or partnership, association, corporation,
company, local government, joint action agency, or organization of any kind who
files a request for site approval pursuant to this subchapter.
      APPLICATION. Request or application for site location approval of a
pollution control facility submitted to the Lake County Clerk pursuant to this
subchapter.
      COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois.
      COUNTY BOARD. The Lake County Board.
      COUNTY CLERK. The Lake County Clerk.
      HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. A site at which hazardous waste is
disposed.
      HEARING OFFICER. The person appointed by the Lake County State's Attorney
to conduct a public hearing and make findings of fact, conclusions of law, and
recommendations to the County Board as provided for in this subchapter.
      OPERATOR. Any person, firm or partnership, association, corporation,
company, limited liability company, or organization of any kind engaging in the
activity of operating a pollution control facility in the unincorporated area
of the county.
      POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD. The Illinois Pollution Control Board.
      POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY. Any waste storage site, sanitary landfill,
waste disposal site, waste transfer station, waste treatment facility, or waste
incinerator that accepts waste from or that serves an area that exceeds or
extends over the boundaries of any local general purpose unit of government.
For purposes of this subchapter, a "local general purpose unit of government"
is Lake County. A POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY includes a new pollution control
facility as defined by the Act.
   (B)   In addition, all other words used in this subchapter and defined in
the Act shall have the same definitions and meanings as found in 415 ILCS 5/
1 et seq.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.41 COUNTY APPROVAL OF POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY.
   No site location approval for the development or construction of a new
pollution control facility within the unincorporated area of the county may be
granted by the County Board unless an application is filed for approval of such
site and is submitted for consideration to the County Board in accordance with
this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.42 PRE-FILING NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No later than 14 days prior to submittal of an application for a site
location approval, applicant shall cause notice of intent to submit such
application to all owners of property located within 250 feet in each direction
of the lot line of the subject premises. Notification must be in conformance
with the provisions of § 39.2 of the Act.
   (B)   Notice shall also be sent to all members of the General Assembly from
the legislative district in which the site is located and published in a
newspaper of general circulation published in Lake County.
   (C)   Notice shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location
of the proposed site, the nature and size of the development, the nature of the
activity proposed, the probable life of the proposed activity, the date when
the request for site approval will be submitted, and a description of the right
of persons to comment on such request or participate in the hearing as set
forth in the Act and this subchapter.
   (D)   Proof of compliance with this notification requirement must be
submitted with the application.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.43 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for site location approval of a new pollution control
facility shall be made in writing and filed with the County Clerk. The
application shall contain the information set forth in this section and shall
be divided into nine subsections corresponding to the nine criteria set forth
in § 39.2(b) of the Act. A tenth subsection shall be included that provides
additional documentation to be submitted.
   (B)   Specific information by criteria.
      (1)   Subsection One. The application shall contain sufficient detail to
demonstrate that the proposed facility is necessary to accommodate the waste
needs of the area that it is intended to serve. Subsection One shall include
but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   A map showing the extent of the service area the facility is
intended to serve and a statement of that area's waste management needs.
         (b)   A study performed by an experienced solid waste professional
establishing that the proposed facility is necessary to accommodate the needs
of the service area. The subsection shall include the qualifications of the
individual or company that completed the study. Minimum requirements of the
study are:
            1.   A calculation of the current amount of waste generated and
disposed within the service area and an estimate of the amount of waste to be
generated and disposed within the service area for the next 20 years.
            2.   A calculation of the current amount of waste exported out of
and imported into the service area.
            3.   A calculation of the capacity of the proposed facility, the
estimated daily volume of waste to be received and the source of said waste,
and the estimated duration of operation at the proposed facility.
            4.   If applicable, the estimated daily volume of waste to be
transported from the facility and the anticipated destination(s) and percentage
of waste to each destination.
            5.   A description of the type(s) of waste to be received.
            6.   A calculation of the permitted landfill disposal capacity and
permitted transfer station capacity available within the service area.
            7.   An economic benefit analysis for the service area if the
facility is sited.
         (c)   A description of the proposed facility, its operation and the
expected longevity thereof.
         (d)   A list of the existing and permitted-for-development pollution
control facilities located within or serving or reasonably capable of serving
the area proposed to be served and, with respect to each such facility, to the
extent such is reasonably available, the following information shall be
provided: location, size, owner and/or operator, type of facility, remaining
capacity, annual permitted or design capacity for waste/material throughput,
probable life of the proposed facility, publicly announced or filed facility
expansions, and generic types of wastes received and authorized to be received.
         (e)   A description of the expected types, amounts, and methods of
disposal, treatment or storage of all wastes proposed to be received at the
facility and the expected generating sources and geographical locations of
these wastes in general.
      (2)   Subsection Two. The application shall contain sufficient detail to
demonstrate that the proposed facility is so designed, located and proposed to
be operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected. The
study shall be performed under the direction of a Professional Engineer
registered in the State of Illinois. The subsection shall include the
qualifications of the individual and company that completed the study.
Subsection Two shall include but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   The subsection shall contain all applicable information required
by the Act and the Pollution Control Board regulations for development permit
applications.
         (b)   The subsection shall contain an aerial photograph depicting a
1,500 foot radius from the proposed facility. The subsection shall also include
a site plan showing details of the proposed facility including but not limited
to:
            1.   All existing and publicly disclosed or recorded wells;
            2.   Fences, buildings and other structures;
            3.   Roads, entrances and driveways; and
            4.   Flow of traffic and waste/materials through the site and
facility.
         (c)   Elevation views of the proposed facility from the north, south,
east and west.
         (d)   All documents, if any, submitted, as of the filing date, to the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency pertaining to the proposed facility,
except trade secrets determined to be such pursuant to the Act and Illinois
Pollution Control Board regulations.
         (e)   The subsection shall include a demonstration and determination
that all applicable location standards in the Act and the Pollution Control
Board regulations have been met.
         (f)   A statement of the plan of operation for the proposed facility,
including but not limited to the following:
            1.   Methods of waste and material transferring at the facility and
ultimate management of all waste and/or materials accepted at the facility;
            2.   Days and hours of operation and daily cleanup procedures to be
used at the site or facility;
            3.   Personnel, including number and duties of employees, and
including person(s) directly responsible for operations of the site or
facility;
            4.   Litter, vector, dust and odor control;
            5.   Stormwater calculations to demonstrate that all county
ordinances and standards are met by the site plan; surface drainage and erosion
control;
            6.   Fire plan per applicable fire protection district
requirements. Also a site plan which shall indicate but not be limited to, site
access, site utilities, detention basin with normal and high water levels, road
improvements, site geometry and building location;
            7.   Corrective actions for spills and other operational accidents;
            8.   If applicable, the stages of development or use;
            9.   A closure plan; an end use and a post-closure care plan is
also required if waste is intended to remain at the site after closure is
completed;
            10.   Equipment utilized, each item's function, physical
description, capacity and number of units used in the operations;
            11.   Description of type of waste to be received, i.e., municipal
solid waste and commercial waste, landscape waste, construction and demolition
debris, and the like. Description of prohibited wastes and wastes to be
received which will require special handling (asbestos, landscape waste, and
the like);
            12.   Methods used to screen each load of waste coming into the
site to assure only municipal solid waste is received, or, if other waste types
are to be received, describe segregation procedures;
            13.   Methods used to transfer and dispose of generated waste such
as wash down liquids, residues, run off, and the like. Include any documentary
evidence of the site or third party acting as the repository of the wastes,
such as permits issued by the Illinois EPA Bureau of Water or waste stream
authorizations;
            14.   Alarms and firefighting equipment as well as a contingency or
action plan to be implemented in the event of an emergency. All applications
must contain a description of, and a plan sheet showing:
               a.   Any primary or secondary containment control system, i.e.,
embankments, dikes or internal drainage systems;
               b.    Capacity of the containment system relative to the number
and volume of containers or maximum quantity of waste in the building;
            15.   Description of the site or facility inspection procedures and
provide an inspection schedule. Describe how leaking containers will be
managed, and procedures for managing and removing unauthorized wastes;
            16.   Description of procedures for managing surface water (run-on/
run-off) during construction and operation;
            17.   Recycling:
               a.     Describe the type(s) of recycling and/or salvaging at the
facility. Indicate storage areas for recyclables on plans. Describe minimum
frequency of removal for each recyclable material.
               b.    Storage information for recyclable materials (may be
provided in narrative form):
                  (i)    Physical location. Surface area must be described.
List materials to be stored and cross reference the type of storage with
location on map of developed site. For any tanks, indicate if located above
grade or below grade.
                  (ii)    Refuse volume. Include maximum daily volume and
annual projected volume for each recyclable material.
                  (iii)    Number of containers. Provide the maximum number of
containers in the storage area as well as any proposed stacking scheme.
                  (iv)    Duration of storage. Turnover rate or frequency of
removal.
                  (v)    List plan to ensure that materials are not accumulated
speculatively.
                  (vi)    Design. Describe how materials will be sorted.
Include the method to assure salvaged materials are free of waste and will not
cause environmental problems during storage.
      (3)   Subsection Three. The application shall contain sufficient detail
to demonstrate that the proposed facility is located so as to minimize
incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the
effect on the value of the surrounding property. Subsection Three shall include
but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   A land use study shall be performed by a qualified person who
will consider the proposed facility and its compatibility with the surrounding
land uses. The subsection shall include the qualifications of the individual
and company that completed the study. The study shall include, but not be
limited to:
            1.   An exhibit showing the land uses and zoning designations
within a one-mile radius of the proposed site and all airports within five
miles of the site.
            2.   Typical photographic views of the proposed site from selected
residences and commercial/industrial establishments within one mile of the
boundary of the proposed facility which fairly depict the site from each
direction.
            3.   A description of the landscape plan to be implemented at the
proposed facility to minimize the incompatibility with the surrounding area
during the operating life of the facility. The landscape plan shall include the
final design grades of the facility.
            4.   A description of the proposed use of the site after the
pollution control facility is closed.
            5.   A description of the development of the site and the
surrounding area and current trends of development in the surrounding area and
the proposed facility's impact on those trends.
         (b)   A property value impact study shall be performed by a certified
real estate appraiser to determine the effects on property values in the
surrounding areas. The subsection shall include the qualifications of the
individual and company that completed the study. The study shall include, but
not be limited to, a description and analysis of factors relating to the
proposed site that may impact property values in the area along with a
description of the design features and operating procedures that will be used
to minimize the impact on property values.
      (4)   Subsection Four. The application shall contain sufficient detail to
demonstrate that (A) for a facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste
disposal site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100 year
flood plain, or that the site is flood-proofed; (B) for a facility that is a
sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the
boundary of the 100 year flood plain, or if the facility is a facility
described in subsection (b)(3) of § 22.19a of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/22.19a), or that the site is flood-proofed.
Subsection Four shall include but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   A map prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Illinois showing the proximity of any 100-year flood plain to the
proposed site.
         (b)   For a facility other than a landfill or waste disposal site or a
facility described in subsection (b) of § 22.19a of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/22.19a), if the site is located in the 100 year
flood plain, design drawings and calculations prepared by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Illinois shall be required as evidence that
the site is flood-proofed.
         (c)   A detailed topographic survey of the subject site and the
surrounding area within 500 feet which indicates land use.
      (5)   Subsection Five. The application shall contain sufficient detail to
demonstrate that the proposed plan of operations for the facility is designed
to minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other
accidents. Subsection Five shall include but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   A fire protection plan that includes, but is not limited to,
maintaining a supply of water on-site and radio or telephone access to the
nearest fire department.
         (b)   A load checking program for detecting and preventing the
disposal of hazardous waste in non-hazardous waste facilities.
         (c)   An accident prevention plan designed to prevent spills and other
accidents that may occur on the site. The plan shall include but is not limited
to providing emergency response instructions, spill prevention and clean-up
methods, and worker safety instructional plans.
      (6)   Subsection Six. The application shall contain sufficient detail to
demonstrate that the proposed traffic patterns to and from the facility are so
designed as to minimize the impact on existing traffic flows. Subsection Six
shall include a traffic impact study performed by an experienced traffic
engineer who is registered as a professional engineer in the State of Illinois.
The subsection shall include, but is not limited to:
         (a)   A statement of the qualifications of the individual and company
that completed the study;
         (b)   A map showing all roads and highways along with their respective
classifications within one mile of the site that will be used by traffic
generated by the proposed facility;
         (c)   Volume counts taken within the past six months for the roads and
highways indicated in (b) above;
         (d)   A gap analysis indicating the time intervals for ingressing and
egressing the facility;
         (e)   A survey of accidents within the past five years that may
indicate problem intersections or roads;
         (f)   A calculation of average and peak traffic flows that will be
generated by the proposed site; and
         (g)   A statement or report of traffic information regarding the
proposed site including the anticipated number and hourly concentration of
vehicles and their size, weight and direction of movement.
      (7)   Subsection Seven. The application shall contain sufficient detail
to demonstrate that if the proposed facility will be treating, storing, or
disposing of hazardous waste, an emergency response plan exists for the
facility which includes notification, containment, and evacuation procedures to
be used in case of an accidental release. The subsection shall include the
qualifications of the individual and company that completed the study.
Subsection Seven shall include, but not be limited to the following:
         (a)   Certification that hazardous waste will not be treated, stored,
or disposed of on site; or
         (b)   A proposed emergency response plan for the site which shall
include, but not be limited to:
            1.   Provision for the notification of appropriate agencies and
personnel in the event of a release or substantial threat of a release;
            2.    Containment and removal procedures; and
            3.   Evacuation procedures for the facility and the surrounding
area.
      (8)   Subsection Eight. The application shall contain sufficient detail
to demonstrate that the proposed facility is consistent with the Lake County
Solid Waste Management Plan, as amended and updated. The subsection shall
include the qualifications of the individual and company that completed the
study.
      (9)   Subsection Nine. The application shall contain sufficient detail to
demonstrate that if the proposed facility will be located within a regulated
recharge area, all applicable requirements specified by the Pollution Control
Board for such areas have been met. Subsection Nine shall include but is not
limited to the following:
         (a)   Evidence and documentation that any requirements specified by
the Pollution Control Board have been met; or
         (b)   Evidence and documentation that the facility will not be located
in a regulated recharge area.
      (10)   Subsection Ten. The application shall include the following
information:
         (a)   A statement describing the past operating experience of the
applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or subsidiary of the parent
corporation), with respect to the type of solid waste management facility or
solid waste management operations which are the subject of the request for site
location approval, such statement to identify, at a minimum, each such past or
current operating facility in Illinois, which has received solid waste at any
time during the past ten years. Such statement shall also identify particularly
the applicant's experience at applicant-designed-and-constructed facilities
within the three-state area and the applicant's prior experience with any
unusual design or operational features of the proposed facility.
         (b)   Documentation of past record of findings of violations,
convictions, or admissions of violations of the applicant (and any subsidiary
or parent corporation) in the field of solid waste management when considering
criteria two and five as defined by § 39.2(a) of the Act. The application shall
include a clear listing of the following information for the state of Illinois
in the last five years:
            1.   All findings, convictions, or admissions of violations, either
criminal or civil, of any foreign, federal, state, or local environmental
regulation or statute of (a) the applicant, (b) any subsidiary corporation of
the applicant, (c) any parent corporation of the applicant in the field of
solid waste management, and (d) any subsidiary of the parent corporation.
            2.   Description of solid waste management program operated at the
facility which involved the finding(s), conviction(s), or admission(s) of
violation(s).
            3.    Enforcement action, if any, taken by government entity
involved.
            4.   Remedial action taken at site, if any, including cost thereof.
         (c)   State whether or not the applicant or operator has ever
involuntarily closed a pollution control facility, the location of said
facility, and the date on which the process of closing started and the date on
which it was completed.
         (d)   Certificates of insurance verifying the insurance policies
carried by the applicant to cover single accidents, such as fires, explosions,
non-sudden accidental occurrences and pollution impairment arising out of the
operation of the pollution control facility and resulting in bodily injury,
property damage, or environmental impairment.
         (e)   A copy of all host agreements entered into for the proposed new
pollution control facility.
   (C)   The application shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Shall be typed on paper 8½ inch x 11 inch, and if necessary 11 inch
by 17 inch, in size (except engineering plans and other drawings and plans) and
shall be securely bound on the left side.
      (2)   Shall include all information specified in division (B) above and
shall be divided into clearly-marked sections with dividers. Exhibits and
drawings shall be clearly marked with respect to which section and subsection
they pertain. The pages of the application and all exhibits submitted to the
county shall be consecutively numbered and shall specify the section number.
      (3)   Shall be signed by the applicant, or if the application is filed by
a corporation, it shall be signed an authorized officer of the applicant.
      (4)   Shall include a face sheet containing only the following
information:
         (a)   A statement that it is an application for approval of a site for
a new pollution control facility;
         (b)   A statement indicating whether it is an application for a waste
storage site, sanitary landfill, waste disposal site, waste transfer station,
waste incinerator, or any combination thereof, or any other type of pollution
control facility governed by the Act;
         (c)   The name of the applicant;
         (d)   The principal business address and telephone number of the
applicant; and
         (e)   The name, title, address, telephone number, and email address of
the person designated by the applicant as its agent for service of notices.
      (5)   Shall be sworn under oath by the applicant, or if a corporation,
the authorized officer thereof, which shall state that the person signing the
application has reviewed the application, that they know the contents thereof,
and that the statements made therein are true to the best of their knowledge.
      (6)   A minimum of ten complete copies of requests for site approval,
including ten copies of all site plans, exhibits, and maps shall be filed. The
applicant shall also produce 30 USB flash drives of the entire application in
.pdf or other searchable electronic format so that the application can be
uploaded to the county website and so that read-only copies of the application
may be provided to the County Board and county staff.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a complete application for site approval, the County
Clerk shall date stamp same and immediately deliver seven copies plus all
electronic format submissions of the application to the County Administrator.
No application for site approval shall be deemed complete unless the
application fees have been paid.
   (E)   A copy of the application and all related documents or other materials
on file shall be made available for public inspection in the Office of the
County Clerk during normal business hours. Additionally, the Lake County
Administrator shall cause a copy of the application and all related documents
and materials on file to be available on Lake County's website. Members of the
public shall be allowed to obtain a copy of the application or any part thereof
upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction. All copying requests shall be
fulfilled by the County Clerk within a reasonable time from the time of the
request.
   (F)   The applicant shall provide one additional copy of the application to
each municipality within one and one-half miles of the proposed facility.
Applicant shall also provide a copy of the application for site approval to be
made available for public inspection to each public library within one and one-
half miles of the proposed facility.
   (G)   An application for site approval may not be filed which is
substantially the same as a request which was disapproved pursuant to a finding
against an applicant under any criteria of § 39.2(b) of the Act, as amended,
within the preceding two years.
   (H)   The acceptance of the application by the County Clerk is a pro forma
acceptance. The applicant is solely responsible for providing sufficient
technical information to meet their burden of proving the criteria cited in 415
ILCS 5/39.2, as may be amended from time to time.
   (I)   In order to give members of the public an opportunity to make informed
written comment pursuant to 415 ILCS 5/39.2(c) and to give members of the
public and departments of the county an opportunity to prepare adequately and
fairly for the public hearing hereinafter described, the applicant must comply
with all applicable application requirements as set forth in division (B)
hereof. Failure to comply with the application requirements shall render the
required information inadmissible at the public hearing.
   (J)   At any time prior to the completion by the applicant of the
presentation of the applicant's factual evidence and an opportunity for cross-
questioning by the county and any participants, the applicant may file not more
than one amended application upon payment of additional fees in the sum of
$50,000 ($10,000 for transfer stations); provided, however, that the time
limitations for final action by the County Board shall be extended for an
additional period of 90 days.
   (K)   Other amendments may be made if, in the opinion of the Hearing
Officer, the proposed amendment is non-substantive.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.44 FILING FEE AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEES AND COSTS.
   (A)   No application for site approval for a pollution control facility is
deemed complete without payment of the applicable filing fee.
   (B)   The applicant shall deposit with the County Clerk a fee of $250,000
with an application for site approval for a pollution control facility, except
that an application for a waste transfer station only shall have a fee of
$150,000. Filing fees shall be in the form of a certified or cashier's check
made payable to the Lake County Treasurer.
   (C)   All expenses incurred by the county in conducting the review of the
request for site approval, the subsequent hearing, and the site approval
decision shall be paid from the fees as provided in this subchapter, as
amended. Application fees shall be used by the county to defray the reasonable
and necessary cost of preparing to process and processing the application
including, but not limited to, cost of site inspection, clerical expenses,
copying costs, notice costs, court reporter fees, Hearing Officer fees,
attorney fees, professional consultant fees (i.e. qualified professional
engineers, planners, appraisers, and the like), tests, exhibits, and testimony,
if any, and other relevant costs incident to the consideration of the
application for site approval, the public hearing, the decision and all
expenses leading up to the consideration not previously reimbursed and
preparing the record on appeal. Costs and expenses incurred by the county in
defending an applicant's appeal of a denial of a siting application are
specifically exempted from reimbursement.
   (D)   In the event that, at any time prior to the conclusion of the site
approval decision, the county has expended such sums as to reduce the balance
of the application fee to a figure less than $10,000, the applicant, upon
notice from the county, shall deposit an additional $10,000 to the application
fee to cover costs as described above.
   (E)   Upon termination of any proceedings under the hearing process, a final
accounting and summary of all authorized expenditures and reimbursements shall
be presented to the appropriate County Board committees. Any portion of an
application fee not required for reimbursement to the county for costs or
expenses incurred by the county under the hearing process shall be returned to
the applicant. Should there be costs and/or expenses in excess of the amount
paid by the applicant in the application fee, the applicant shall bear any and
all additional costs. Any portion of the application fee that remains
unexpended at the conclusion of the site approval decision shall be returned to
the applicant.
   (F)   In order to properly administer the application fee received with
respect to the hearing process and procedure set forth herein, the Lake County
Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to receive and hold application
fees for administration subject to the review and approval of the Planning,
Building, Zoning and Environment and the Financial and Administrative
Committees.
   (G)   In order to expedite payment of all bills incurred as a result of
administering the hearing process, all bills and questions concerning billing
should be directed to the County Administrator.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.45 APPOINTMENT AND CONDUCT OF HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Lake County State's Attorney shall appoint the Hearing Officer for
the public hearing on the request for site approval. The Hearing Officer shall
be an attorney licensed to practice in Illinois and shall not have a conflict
of interest in the property or affairs of the applicant or of any participant
in the proceeding. The Lake County State's Attorney may remove and/or replace
the Hearing Officer at will or upon the request of the County Board
Chairperson. If the Hearing Officer is replaced, a new hearing officer shall be
appointed. In the interim, the hearing may be adjourned or continued, with the
County Board Chairperson or a County Board member as presiding officer.
   (B)   For good cause shown, the Hearing Officer may waive any requirement of
this subchapter except financial or application requirements.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Administer oaths and affirmations.
      (2)   Hold a pre-hearing conference not less than five business days
prior to the date established for the commencement of the hearing. At that
time, the applicant, the county and any other participants of record shall
participate. The purpose of the pre-hearing conference shall include, but not
be limited to, the following: (a) determination of criteria which will be
placed in issue by any of the parties at hearing; (b) to the extent necessary
and practicable, address any pre-hearing issues which may have arisen; (c)
address any pre-hearing motion which has been filed or any motions which will
be presented on the first day of hearing prior to the commencement of the
evidentiary testimony.
      (3)   Regulate the course of the hearing, including but not limited to,
controlling the order of proceedings, consistent with this subchapter.
      (4)   Require witnesses or person presenting unsworn public comment to
state their position either for, against, or undecided with respect to the
proposed facility.
      (5)   Examine a witness and direct a witness to testify.
      (6)   Establish reasonable limits on the duration of public hearing
consistent with the Act and this subchapter, including, but not limited to, the
reasonable limitation of sworn testimony, unsworn public comment, direct and
cross-examination of any witness, and the limitation of repetitive or
cumulative testimony or questioning.
      (7)   Rule upon objections and evidentiary questions, with the
understanding that such rulings must be consistent with fundamental fairness,
but need not be in strict compliance with the Illinois Supreme Court Rules or
Illinois Code of Civil Procedure.
      (8)   The applicant and county's attorney shall be allowed to cross-
examine witnesses as of right, subject to such reasonable limitation as may be
set by the Hearing Officer. Other participants represented by counsel may be
allowed cross-examination in the discretion of the Hearing Officer.
      (9)   The Hearing Officer shall have, consistent with fundamental
fairness, the discretion to reasonably limit cross-examination. The Hearing
Officer may allow the pro se participants to submit questions to the Hearing
Officer who may ask the question, rephrasing, modifying or otherwise changing
the question as reasonably necessary. The Hearing Officer may refuse to ask any
question consistent with the principles of fundamental fairness.
      (10)   Allow the introduction of late-filed evidence, be it written or
testimonial, on behalf of any participant, provided good cause is shown for the
late-filing, and the evidence is relevant and not unduly prejudicial to the
applicant or to another participant so that fundamental fairness to all parties
is preserved.
      (11)   Exercise discretion to allow public comments at each hearing or
may set one time for public comment.
      (12)   At the conclusion of the public hearing and after consideration of
all public comments, the Hearing Officer shall submit a recommendation on the
site approval application which includes written findings of fact and
conclusions of law to the County Board, and file a copy of such findings with
the County Clerk.
      (13)   Prepare the record for appeal with the assistance of the County
Clerk.
   (D)   No ruling of the Hearing Officer shall be appealable to the County
Board.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.46 COUNTY REVIEW AND PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a copy of an application for site approval, the County
Administrator shall notify the following county departments and/or relevant
agencies of that receipt:
      (1)   Department of Planning, Building and Development;
      (2)   Health Department;
      (3)   Public Works Department;
      (4)   Division of Transportation;
      (5)   Solid Waste Agency of Lake County (SWALCO); and
      (6)   Lake County Stormwater Management Commission (SMC).
   (B)   The County Administrator may request the Lake County State's Attorney
appoint special counsel to the County Administrator to assist in the review and
representation of the county staff in the site application approval hearing and
process.
   (C)   The County Administrator, together with the assistance of special
counsel if appointed, shall be the department responsible for coordinating
review of the request for site approval by the aforementioned departments and
agencies and is authorized to call interdepartmental and agency meetings and
set deadlines for the submittal of reports and recommendations.
   (D)   The aforementioned departments and agencies may attend the public
hearings and may ask questions as needed to assist in reaching their
recommendations.
   (E)   The aforementioned departments and agencies are authorized to prepare
and submit reports and recommendations in response to the request for site
approval and shall file them with the County Clerk as set forth in §
50.48.
   (F)   The county departments and relevant agencies and consultants retained
by the county are authorized to present testimony at the public hearing as set
forth in §
50.49.
   (G)   The County Administrator, special counsel, the county staff and the
county's consultants shall not discuss the application or the review thereof
with, nor submit reports or recommendations to, the County Board Chairperson,
County Board members, or the State's Attorney or other attorney appointed as
counsel to the County Board except in accordance with the public hearing
process set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.47 OTHER PARTIES.
   (A)   Any person, group, or party (other than the applicant and the county,
through its representative) who desires to participate in the public hearing by
providing sworn testimony or submission of written questions shall file an
appearance with the County Clerk at least ten days prior to the hearing.
Parties wishing an opportunity to cross-examine witnesses must be represented
by counsel. Every appearance shall provide the following information: name,
address, daytime phone number and email address of the participant or counsel;
whether the participant will be participating on their own behalf or as a
representative/spokesperson of another person or entity (and if on behalf of an
entity the name of the entity); whether the person or entity will be
represented by an attorney during the public hearings; and whether the person
intends on providing oral testimony or comment during the public hearing.
   (B)   Should the public hearing extend beyond one day, additional parties or
members of the public, not of record as of the first day of the public hearing,
will not be allowed to be a recognized participant at the hearing.
   (C)   All reports, studies, exhibits, or other evidence or copies thereof,
other than testimony, which any other person desires to submit for the record
at the public hearing must be filed with the County Clerk as set forth in §
50.48.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.48 PARTICIPANTS AT THE HEARING.
   (A)   The applicant is a participant.
   (B)   The county is a participant. For purposes of the Act, the county
employees and staff, and any experts, consultants, investigators or attorneys
hired by the county to review, investigate, present at the hearing, or
otherwise work for the county concerning the application for site approval, all
constitute one participant.
   (C)   Other parties who have filed an appearance with the County Clerk in
accordance with §
50.47 may appear as a participant. Any such participant may be represented by
an attorney provided an appearance has been filed.
   (D)   All participants, other than the applicant, shall file with the County
Clerk at least ten days prior to the hearing an original plus two copies of any
reports, studies, exhibits, or other evidence or copies thereof, other than
testimony, which the participant desires to submit for the record at the public
hearing. In the event that the tenth day prior to the date set for public
hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the next working day shall be
considered the day that reports, studies, and exhibits must be filed. The
County Clerk shall date stamp any reports, studies, exhibits, or other evidence
upon receipt. The County Clerk shall make one copy of a filed document
available for public inspection and shall provide one copy to the County
Administrator. The County Administrator shall cause any document filed to be
uploaded on the county website. Members of the public shall be allowed to
obtain copies of the documents upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
   (E)   Each participant shall submit to the Hearing Officer a list of
witnesses it intends to call and the nature of the anticipated testimony of
each such witness by no later than two days prior to the hearing. A participant
shall not be permitted to call any witnesses, except rebuttal witnesses, who
have not been properly identified in accordance with this requirement.
   (F)   Members of the County Board may appear at the hearing and may ask
questions or otherwise participate without regard to the written notification
required above. The County Board may appear through its counsel.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.49 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   No sooner than 90 days but no longer than 120 days from the date of
filing of a complete application for site approval with the County Clerk, a
public hearing shall be held as close as possible to the proposed facility.
   (B)   Within 30 days of the date of filing of the complete application for
site approval, the County Administrator shall determine the date, time, and
location of the public hearing. The County Administrator shall provide written
notification to the applicant and the County Clerk of the date and location of
the public hearing.
   (C)   The applicant shall provide notice of the hearing as follows:
      (1)   Publish two legal notices in a newspaper of general circulation
published in the county. The first notice shall be published no later than 60
days from the date of filing of an application and the second notice shall be
published not later than 14 days before the hearing. The notices shall consist
of a display add containing the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the person, partnership, or corporation
requesting site location approval;
         (b)   The owner of the site, if ownership is in a land trust, the
names of the beneficiaries of the trust;
         (c)   The legal description of the site;
         (d)   The street address of the property, and if there is no street
address applicable to the property, a description of the site with reference to
location, ownership, or occupancy or in some other manner that will reasonably
identify the property to residents of the neighborhood;
         (e)   The nature and size of the proposed development;
         (f)   The nature of the activity proposed;
         (g)   The probable life of the proposed activity;
         (h)   The time and date of the public hearing;
         (i)   The location of the public hearing;
         (j)   A statement that the application and public record is available
for public review on the Lake County website and in the Office of the County
Clerk; and
         (k)   A statement that all copies of evidence other than oral
testimony to be submitted at the public hearing must be filed with the County
Clerk at least ten days before the public hearing; provided however, that the
Hearing Officer, in their sole and absolute discretion, may allow for the
admission of evidence at the public hearing, or any continuance thereof,
otherwise required to be filed with the Office of the County Clerk in
accordance with this section;
         (l)   A statement that any person intending to participate in the
public hearing process (through sworn testimony or unsworn oral comment) must
file an appearance with the County Clerk at least ten days prior to the public
hearing in accordance with §
50.47.
      (2)   Certified mail, return receipt requested, to all members of the
General Assembly from the district in which the proposed site is located.
      (3)   Certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
      (4)   Certified mail, return receipt requested, to the governing
authority of all municipalities and townships within one and one-half miles of
the proposed facility.
   (D)   The applicant for site location approval shall have the burden of
going forward with evidence of the suitability of the site location for the
proposed use. The applicant shall present at least one witness who shall be
subject to cross-examination at the hearing.
   (E)   Any person appearing at the public hearing as provided for in §
50.47 shall have the right to give testimony, comment on the suitability of the
site location for the proposed use, and submit questions to the Hearing Officer
for cross-examination of a witness. An attorney who has filed an appearance on
behalf of a participant shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses as may
be limited by the Hearing Officer.
   (F)   Verbal recording of the public hearing shall be made by a certified
reporter and a verbatim transcript prepared. Copies of the transcript shall be
made available at cost upon request.
   (G)   Conduct of the public hearing shall be substantially as follows:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Introduction of the Hearing Officer and recognition of Lake County
Board members in attendance;
      (3)   Recognition of the applicant and identification of the request for
site approval;
      (4)   Recognition of fees, notices, and date of filing of the request for
site approval;
      (5)   Recognition of the county and other parties registered to
participate and any other reports, exhibits, maps, or documents of record as
filed pursuant to this subchapter, as amended;
      (6)   The applicant, the county, and other registered parties may make an
opening statement;
      (7)   The Hearing Officer shall then hear testimony from the applicant
and/or any witnesses the applicant may wish to call.
      (8)   Upon the close of the applicant's testimony, parties registered to
participate, as set forth in (G)(5), may offer expert witnesses and evidence
they may wish to present. These other parties may or may not be represented by
counsel.
      (9)   Upon the close of the applicant's and other parties' testimony and
evidence, the county may present any witnesses and evidence it wishes to
present.
      (10)   Members of the public may then present unsworn oral comment to the
Hearing Officer. General comment pursuant to this subsection shall be limited
to five minutes per person. The Hearing Officer in their discretion may permit
others in attendance at the hearing to make comment or may expand an
individual's time for comment if deemed appropriate. Public comments shall not
be given the evidentiary weight of sworn testimony subject to cross-
examination.
      (11)   Summary statements by applicant, other parties, and the county,
subject to limitations as imposed by the Hearing Officer;
      (12)   Rebuttal statement, if any, by the applicant, subject to
limitations as imposed by the Hearing Officer; and
      (13)   Hearing closed.
   (H)   The Hearing Officer shall decide the order of presentation of
testimony subject to this subchapter, as amended;
   (I)   All witnesses shall testify under oath. Testimony may include the use
of exhibits. All witnesses shall be subject to reasonable questioning as
follows: direct, cross-questioning, redirect, recross, and the like. After all
parties have presented testimony, reasonable rebuttal, surrebuttal, and the
like may be allowed at the discretion of the Hearing Officer.
   (J)   Should any issues, facts, data, or other evidence arise during the
course of the public hearing, which were not apparent or reasonably foreseeable
by a party from the request for site approval as filed with the County Clerk,
the situation may constitute grounds for a recess in the public hearing for a
period not to exceed five working days.
   (K)   The applicant and any participant may submit to the Hearing Officer a
post-hearing brief, including proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law,
no later than 30 days after conclusion of the public hearing.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.50 WRITTEN PUBLIC COMMENT.
   (A)   At the close of the public hearing, the Hearing Officer shall state
the date and process for submission of written comments to be considered part
of the record. Such date shall be 30 days after conclusion of the public
hearing, except if such date falls on a Sunday or a federal holiday it shall be
the following business day.
   (B)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the applicant shall publish
legal notice informing the public of the deadline and process for submitting
written comment. The County Administrator shall post the information on the
Lake County website.
   (C)   The County Clerk (on behalf of the County Board) shall accept written
comment from any person concerning the appropriateness of the proposed site.
Upon receipt of the written comment, the County Clerk shall date stamp same and
shall file written comment and the postmarked envelope in which the comment was
received.
   (D)   Copies of written comments shall be made available for public
inspection in the Office of the County Clerk, and members of the public shall
be allowed to obtain a copy of any written comment upon payment of actual cost
of reproduction.
   (E)   Any written comment timely submitted to the County Clerk, including
comment postmarked not later than the date set by the Hearing Officer, shall be
made part of the record at the public hearing as hereinafter described, and the
County Board shall consider any timely written comments in making its final
determination concerning the request.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.51 RECORD.
   (A)   The County Clerk shall be responsible for keeping the record of the
hearing.
   (B)   The record shall consist of the following:
      (1)   The request for site location approval as described in §
50.43;
      (2)   Proof of notice as described in §
50.42;
      (3)   Proof of notice given by applicant pursuant to 415 ILCS 5/39.2(b);
      (4)   Written comments filed by the public and received by the County
Clerk or postmarked by the date set by the Hearing Officer;
      (5)   All reports, studies, exhibits, or documents received into evidence
at the public hearing. The applicant shall tender as an exhibit a copy of any
host agreements entered into relating to the pollution control facility which
is the subject of the application;
      (6)   The transcript of the public hearing;
      (7)   Post-hearing briefs submitted by the date set by the Hearing
Officer;
      (8)   All motions filed and written Hearing Officer rulings issued during
the public hearing;
      (9)   Findings of fact and recommendations of the Hearing Officer; and
      (10)   The resolution containing the final decision of the County Board.
   (C)   The County Clerk shall be responsible for certifying all copies of the
record of the public hearing.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.52 HEARING OFFICER'S RECOMMENDATION AND PROPOSED FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   After the public hearing and any continuation thereof, the Hearing
Officer shall draft and present to the County Board proposed findings of fact
and a recommendation concerning the site approval request. The Hearing Officer
may recommend any conditions reasonable and necessary to accomplish the
purposes of § 39.2 of the Act and not inconsistent with regulations promulgated
by the Illinois Pollution Control Board. The findings of fact and
recommendation, including recommended conditions, shall be based upon and
supported by the record as identified in §
50.51.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer's recommendation and findings of fact shall be
presented to the County Board Chairperson within 15 days after the final date
to submit written comment.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer's recommendation on the request for site approval,
including any conditions, shall be based on and address the following criteria:
      (1)   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the
area it is intended to serve;
      (2)   The facility is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected;
      (3)   The facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of
the surrounding property;
      (4)   The facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year
floodplain or the site is flood-proofed;
      (5)   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents;
      (6)   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;
      (7)   If the facility will be treating, storing, or disposing of
hazardous waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which
includes notification, containment, and evacuation procedures to be used in
case of an accidental release;
      (8)   The facility is consistent with the Lake County Solid Waste
Management Plan adopted by the County Board on September 12, 1989, as amended
and updated, in effect at the time of the application; and
      (9)   If the facility will be located within a regulated recharge area,
any and all applicable requirements specified by the Illinois Pollution Control
Board for the area have been met.
   (D)   In making a recommendation, the Hearing Officer shall consider as
evidence the previous operating experience and past record of convictions or
admissions of violations of the applicant (and any subsidiary, parent
corporation, or subsidiary of the parent corporation) in the field of solid
waste management when considering criteria of subsections (C)(2) and (C)(5)
under this section.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 50.53 COUNTY BOARD DECISION.
   (A)   The County Board shall consider the record from the public hearing and
the proposed findings of fact and recommendations of the Hearing Officer and
shall make a decision concerning a site approval request within 180 days from
the filing with the County Clerk an application for site approval. The decision
of the County Board shall be in writing, specifying the reasons for the
decision, such reasons shall be in conformity with § 39.2(a) of the Act. The
County Board may conditionally approve any request for site approval, provided
the conditions are reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Act
and are not inconsistent with regulations promulgated by the Illinois Pollution
Control Board. Any determination by the County Board shall be supported by the
record.
   (B)   If there is no final action by the County Board within 180 days after
the filing of the application for site approval, the applicant may deem the
application approved unless the time for approval has been extended for an
additional period of 90 days pursuant to the Act and this subchapter.
   (C)   No determination by the County Board of a site approval request may be
reconsidered.
   (D)   The decision of the County Board shall be available for public
inspection in the Office of the County Clerk and may be copied upon payment of
actual cost of reproduction.
   (E)   A local siting approval granted under this subchapter shall expire at
the end of two calendar years from the date upon which it was granted, unless
local siting approval under this subchapter is for a sanitary landfill
operation, in which case the approval shall expire after three calendar years
from the date which it was granted, unless within that period of time the
applicant has made an application to the agency for a permit to develop the
site. In the event that the local siting decision has been appealed, the
calculation of the expiration date shall be deemed to begin on the date upon
which the appeal process is concluded.
(Ord. 24-0593, passed 5-14-2024)
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT TAX
§ 50.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   CLEAN CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS FILL OPERATION. A current or former
quarry, mine, or other excavation where clean construction or demolition debris
or uncontaminated soil (as defined by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Act, 415 ILCS 5/3.160) is used as fill material.
   COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois.
   SOLID WASTE. Any waste resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food, and waste from the handling, processing,
storage and sale of produce; sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; or other discarded
material.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility in which solid waste is
disposed.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-8B) (Res./Ord. 10-0596, passed 7-13-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Solid waste definitions, see 415 ILCS 5/3.535 and 415 ILCS 10/2
§ 50.61 AMOUNT OF TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby assessed and imposed upon the operators of all solid
waste disposal facilities permitted or required to be permitted by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency within the county, a tax in the amount of:
      (1)   $0.3175 per ton/$0.15 per cubic yard, if more than 150,000 cubic
yards of non-hazardous waste is permanently disposed of at the site in a
calendar year of solid waste permanently disposed of;
      (2)   $8,337.50 if more than 100,000 cubic yards, but not more than
150,000 cubic yards, of non-hazardous waste is permanently disposed of at the
site in a calendar year;
      (3)   $3,875.00 if more than 50,000 cubic yards, but not more than
100,000 cubic yards, of non-hazardous waste is permanently disposed of at the
site in a calendar year;
      (4)   $1,162.50 if more than 10,000 cubic yards, but not more than 50,000
cubic yards, of non-hazardous waste is permanently disposed of at the site in a
calendar year;
      (5)   $162.50 if not more than 10,000 cubic yards of non-hazardous waste
is permanently disposed of at the site in a calendar year; and
      (6)   Upon inclusion of clean construction and demolition debris fill
operations in the inspection and enforcement program, $0.07 per ton/$0.10 per
cubic yard of clean construction or demolition debris or uncontaminated soil
accepted at a clean construction or demolition debris fill operation in a
calendar year.
   (B)   The tax set forth herein shall not apply to:
      (1)   Waste which is hazardous waste;
      (2)   Waste which is pollution control waste;
      (3)   Waste from recycling, reclamation, or reuse processes which have
been approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency as being designed
to remove any contaminant from wastes so as to render the wastes reusable,
provided that the process renders at least 50% of the waste reusable;
      (4)   Non-hazardous solid waste that is received at a sanitary landfill
and composted or recycled through a process permitted by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency; or
      (5)   Any landfill which is permitted by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency to receive only demolition or construction debris or
landscape waste.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-8B) (Res./Ord. 10-0596, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 50.62 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions from this tax shall be granted in accordance with 415 ILCS
5/22.16 and 22.16a, except that this tax shall apply to any contract lawfully
executed before June 1, 1986 under which more than 150,000 cubic yards (or
50,000 tons) of solid waste is to be permanently disposed of.
   (B)   The operator shall provide to the county proof of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency’s approval of any claimed exemption by
including the proof with the applicable quarterly summary report and payment.
No exemption shall be granted by the county under this section absent proof of
approval of the exemption by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-8B) (Res./Ord. 10-0596, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 50.63 PAYMENT.
   Payment of the tax shall be made on a quarterly basis in conjunction with
the report required by §
50.64. The payment shall be in the form of a check or order payable to the
Treasurer, County of Lake.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-8B) (Res./Ord. 10-0596, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 50.64 REPORTS.
   All operators of solid waste disposal facilities shall make quarterly
reports and fee payments based upon the quantity of solid waste reported in the
quarterly solid waste summary. This quarterly report is due on April 15, July
15, October 15, and January 15 of each calendar year and shall contain a
summary of all wastes received during the applicable quarter for which the
report is submitted, as well as computations reflecting the total fees to be
paid, and any approved exemptions.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-8B) (Res./Ord. 10-0596, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 50.65 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FUND.
   (A)   Fees collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited in the
Lake County Solid Waste Management Fund and shall be expended only for solid
waste management purposes, including long-term monitoring and maintenance of
landfills, planning, implementation, inspection, enforcement and other
activities consistent with the Solid Waste Management Act.
   (B)   It is the intent of this Board that there be a priority protocol
followed in expending these funds. This priority protocol shall be, in ranked
order, as follows.
      (1)   For funding the inspection and enforcement program for solid waste
disposal facilities within this county (and all litigation related thereto that
may arise from time to time). The inspection and enforcement program to be
established only pursuant to the joint execution of an Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency delegation agreement by the state and this County Board and
the joint execution of an agreement or agreements between the Lake County Board
of Health and/or other qualified parties and this County Board relative to the
conduct of the inspection program.
      (2)   For funding other solid waste management purposes as cited in
subsection (A) above (as funds are available).
   (C)   The Lake County Comptroller and the Lake County Treasurer shall manage
the Fund in accordance with existing County Board financial management policies
and procedures.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-8B) (Res./Ord. 10-0596, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 50.66 SAVING CLAUSE.
   Nothing in this subchapter hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act
or ordinance hereby repealed by this subchapter; nor shall any just or legal
right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired, or affected by this
subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-8B) (Res./Ord. 10-0596, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Solid waste hauling and recycling. 
      (1)   Enforcement of §§
50.02 and
50.03.
         (a)   Any person who violates §§
50.02 or
50.03 shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 for each day a violation has
been found to have been committed.
         (b)   In the case of a licensed hauler’s second violation, a 14-day
suspension of a license to collect or haul municipal waste, recyclable
materials or landscape waste within the county shall be imposed. A licensed
hauler who incurs a third violation within 12 months of the first violation
shall result in revocation of the license for one year.
         (c)   The county may institute appropriate actions or proceedings,
including application for injunctive relief, action to compel performance or
other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation
of §§
50.02 or
50.03.
      (2)   Enforcement of §
50.04.
         (a)   Enforcement officer(s). Section 50.04 shall be enforced by the
Director of the Lake County Planning, Building and Development Department, or
his or her designees.
         (b)   Notice of Ordinance Violation. The Enforcement Officer, as
defined in subsection (B)(2)(a) above, shall have the authority to issue a
Notice of Ordinance Violation when an individual has been found to be in
violation of any subsection of §
50.04. If Administrative Adjudication is found to be the appropriate remedy to
resolve the violation, the notice must be served in accordance with and shall
contain all information specified and required in §§
94.50 through
94.66 (Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance).
         (c)   Penalties. The Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer may
assess fines for failure to abate violations of §
50.04 in accordance with the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance
or State of Illinois statute.
         (d)   Injunctive relief. The county may institute appropriate actions
or proceedings, including application for injunctive relief, action to compel
performance or other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
any violation or threatened violation of §
50.04.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-9)
   (C)   Disposal sites. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of
§§
50.20 through
50.27 or the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200. Each day that a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8)
(Ord. [Board of Health, Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961; Ord. passed - -2005; Ord.
passed 6-11-2013)
APPENDIX A: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE REGULATIONS; SANITARY LANDFILL SANITARY
LANDFILL
   The following regulations shall be observed by any person, firm, or
corporation to whom a permit is issued for the operation of a sanitary landfill
in the county. These regulations shall govern the operation of all approved
sanitary landfills, and any failure to observe these regulations shall be
sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of the permit by the
licensing agency.
Regulation A.   All garbage and other refuse accepted by the permit holder
shall be thoroughly compacted by equipment of sufficient weight and capacity to
carry out all necessary operations to the satisfaction of the Health Officer.
Sufficient auxiliary equipment shall be maintained on the site or otherwise
available to permit operation in case of a breakdown.
Regulation B.   Mixed refuse material shall be spread out on the working face
of the landfill so that the depth does not exceed a maximum depth of two feet
prior to its compaction.
Regulation C.   The areas shall be continually policed to prevent fire and the
blowing of papers, shall be neat and sanitary at all times, and shall be
covered at the end of each day’s operation as hereinafter set out to prevent
blowing papers and unsightly condition. The size of the active face on which
refuse is being currently deposited shall be kept to a minimum.
Regulation D.   Cover material will consist of loam, clay, sand, or a mixture
of at least 50% earth and other inert materials, such as ashes, cinders, or
gravel. A minimum depth of 12 inches of compacted cover and final spread cover
material shall be kept on all inactive faces of the landfill at all times. The
active faces of the landfill should be covered at the end of each day’s
operation, or as otherwise directed by the Health Officer, with at least six
inches (before compaction) of cover material.
Regulation E.   When the fill has been brought up to two feet below the desired
finished grade, it shall be covered with at least 24 inches of compacted cover
material graded and seeded in such a manner as to prevent erosion.
Regulation F.   Where the “trench system” of sanitary landfill is used,
successive parallel trenches must be at least two feet apart.
Regulation G.   All garbage and refuse material existing on the site at the
time the permit is issued, either in the form of an open dump or any other
form, shall be collected, compacted, and covered with cover material at least
one foot in depth if below the desired finished grade, or with inert material
at least two feet in depth at the finished grade. This cover operation shall be
completed within 15 working days after the issuance of a special permit for the
sanitary landfill site.
Regulation H.   The permittee or operator shall erect temporary or permanent
fences or take other measures as may be necessary for reasonable control of
blowing paper and other materials from the landfill.
Regulation I.   Any materials salvaged from the fill must be handled and stored
in such a manner as to prevent rat harborage and permit proper operation of the
landfill. The salvaged material must be removed from the working surface to a
distant location so as not to interfere with the compacting and covering. All
salvaged material must be completely removed from the landfill site every 24
hours, unless provision is made for temporary storage within an enclosed,
roofed and rat-proof structure approved by the Health Officer.
Regulation J.   Burning of any materials deposited in a dump or landfill is
expressly prohibited, except where a special permit has been issued by the
Health Officer to permit burning.
Regulation K.   Adequate fire-fighting equipment shall be available at all
times on the site, or the operator of the landfill shall furnish the Health
Officer with proof of a fire-fighting agreement between the operator and the
local fire district.
Regulation L.   No fill shall be placed in streambeds or other areas where
streams would be obstructed or where erosion by the stream would remove cover
material. There shall be no seepage or drainage of any material from the fill
of such a nature as would constitute an odor nuisance, or health hazard, or
pollute any water course.
Regulation M.   The permit holder shall provide an access road, approved by the
Health Officer, that is passable in all types of weather conditions to the
dumping site.
Regulation N.   The permit holder shall institute adequate dust control
measures at all times deemed necessary by the Health Officer. Adequate dust
control measures shall include the addition of a dust palliative.
Regulation O.   The permit holder shall also provide an auxiliary fill site
available and ready for use during periods of heavy rain or snowfall, and when
the area being filled and covered may not be reached because of the weather
conditions.
Regulation P.   Insects and rodents on the landfill site shall be controlled
and exterminated as directed by the Health Officer.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
APPENDIX B: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE REGULATIONS; DUMP
DUMP
   The following regulations shall be observed by any person, firm, or
corporation to whom a permit is issued for the operation of a dump in the
county. These regulations shall govern the operation of all approved dumps, and
any failure to observe these regulations shall be sufficient grounds for the
suspension or revocation of the permit by the licensing agency.
Regulation A.   Dumps may accept for deposit only non-combustible waste
containing no putrescible material.
Regulation B.   The dump site shall be continually policed to prevent fire and
shall be kept neat and sanitary at all times.
Regulation C.   When the dump site has been brought up to two feet below the
desired finished grade, it shall be covered with at least 24 inches of
compacted cover material such as defined in Regulation D. of the Regulations
for Sanitary Landfills, graded and seeded in such a manner as to prevent
erosion.
Regulation D.   All garbage and refuse material, other than that permitted by
§§
50.20 through
50.27 to be disposed of at a dump site, existing on the site at the time the
permit is issued, shall be collected, compacted, and covered with cover
material at least one foot in depth if below the desired finished grade or with
inert material at least two feet in depth at the finished grade. This cover
operation shall be completed within 15 working days after the issuance of a
special permit for the dump.
Regulation E.   Any material salvaged from the dump must be handled and stored
in such a manner as to prevent rat harborage, and permit proper operation of
the dump. All salvage material must be completely removed from the dump site
every 24 hours unless provision is made for temporary storage in an entirely
rat-proof structure approved by the Health Officer.
Regulation F.   Burning of any materials deposited in a dump or landfill is
expressly prohibited.
Regulation G.   No fill shall be placed in stream beds or other areas where
stream channels or floodplains would be obstructed.
Regulation H.   The permit holder shall provide an access road, approved by the
Health Officer, that is passable in all types of weather conditions.
Regulation I.   The permit holder shall institute adequate dust control
measures at all times deemed necessary by the Health Officer. Adequate dust
control measures shall include the addition of a dust palliative.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-8) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII] passed 6-12-1961)
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Accounts
   
51.03   Access to records
Rates and Charges
   
51.15   Billing, generally
   
51.16   Metered water
   
51.17   Metered sewer
   
51.18   Unmetered water
   
51.19   Unmetered sewer
   
51.20   Effective date and future increases
   
51.21   Illegal connection or turn-on
   
51.22   Liability; late payment; delinquency
   
51.23   Connection fees
   
51.24   Additional rates and charges
   
51.25   Rate surcharge for certain portions of the waterworks/sewerage system
   
51.26   Summer sewer credit
   
51.27   Wholesale sewer rates, fees and charges
   
51.28   Lake County AMR Meter Opt-Out Policy
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this ordinance shall be as follows.
   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand which is defined as the quantity of oxygen
used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20°C,
determined by standard laboratory test procedures and expressed in mg/l.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.4 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specifically designed and constructed for
sampling and metering industrial wastes discharged to a public sewer.
   COUNTY. The County of Lake, a political subdivision of the State of
Illinois.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of
1972 (Public Law 92-500 and Public Law 93-243) and the Clean Water Act of 1977
(Public Law 95-217).
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   (a)   For the purpose of industrial cost recovery, any
nongovernmental, nonresidential user-of publicly owned sewerage works which
discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary
wastes and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented,
under one of the following divisions:
            1.   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing
            2.   Division B - Mining
            3.   Division D - Manufacturing
            4.   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services
            5.   Division I - Services
         (b)   In determining the amount of a user's discharge for purposes of
industrial cost recovery, the County will exclude domestic wastes or discharges
from sanitary conveniences. After applying the sanitary waste exclusion of this
paragraph, discharges in the above divisions that have a volume exceeding
25,000 gpd or the weight of BOD or suspended solids equivalent to that weight
found in 25,000 gpd of sanitary waste are considered industrial users. Sanitary
wastes, for purposes of this calculation of equivalency, are wastes containing
0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids per 100 gallons of
wastewater per day.
      (2)   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or
creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
      (3)   For the purpose of user charges, industrial users shall include
manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substances into other products. These activities occur in
establishments usually described as plants, factories, or mills, and
characteristically use power driven machines and material handling equipment.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or
process, or from the development, recovery of processing of any natural
recovery of processing of any natural resource as distinct from employees’
waste or wastewater from-sanitary conveniences.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user that has a flow of 50,000
gallons or more per average work day, or has a flow greater than ten percent of
the flow carried by the sewerage works receiving the waste, or has in its
waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under
§ 307(a) of Federal Act, or is found by the permit issuance authority, in
connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned
treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly
or a combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or
upon the quality of effluent from that tre*atment works.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface water.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document to regulate the discharge of
pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act.
   ORDINANCE. This ordinance.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, public or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed in gram molecular weight (moles) per liter.
   PHOSPHORUS. The total concentration of orthophos-phate, polyphosphates and
organic phosphorus compounds in wastewater, the quantity of which is determined
by standard laboratory test procedures and expressed in mg/l of elemental
phosphorus.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other wastes on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD arid 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before discharge
into the public sewer.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights of connection and use, and is operated, maintained and controlled by the
County or other public agencies.
   RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, OR NON-INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user of the sewerage
works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user.
   RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER EQUIVALENT. A term used as a basis of billing for
sewage collection and treatment service which is equivalent to a single-family
residential user with an average sewage load of two and one-half times that of
a “Population Equivalent”.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage and polluted industrial wastes,
and to which stormwater, surface drainage, groundwater or unpolluted wastewater
are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the wastewater from residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional buildings together with such groundwater
infiltration and surface water inflow that may be in the sewers.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. An arrangement of devices, structures and processes
for the treating and disposing of sewage.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. All facilities of the county for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes.
   SHALL. Mandatory; MAY means permissive.
   SLUG. Any discharge of sewage, industrial waste or other wastewater which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or quantity during normal operating conditions.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act effective July 1, 1970
(Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 111-1/2, §§ 1001-1051).
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer that conveys stormwater runoff and
surface water drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. That portion of precipitation which is not absorbed into
the ground and which is drained from the ground surface to a natural outlet or
watercourse.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his
duly authorized deputy or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastewaters; the
quantity of which is determined by standard laboratory filtering test
procedures and referred to as nonfilterable residue and expressed in mg/l.
   UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER. Wastewater that would not cause any violation of
water quality standards of the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois when
discharged to a natural outlet or watercourse.
   WASTEWATER. The wastewater from any domestic, commercial, industrial and
institutional uses.
   WATERCOURSE. Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, slough, gulch, ditch, reservoir, lake, pond, or other natural or
manmade drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and surface water
drainage flow either continuously or intermittently.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-1, 4:3-4) (Ord. 1979.04.43, passed 4-10-1979; Ord.
1984.10.43, passed 10-9-1984; Ord. 1988.02.35, passed 2-9-1988)
§ 51.02 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Superintendent shall establish a proper system of books, records,
and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all
transactions relative to the Sewerage Revenue Fund, and at regular annual
intervals shall cause to be made an audit of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the Fund by the certified public accountants for the county.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the sewerage system
including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer user service charges and
industrial cost recovery charges do in fact comply with this chapter. In this
regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include
the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons of wastewater flow for the fiscal
year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (4)   Number of users connected to the sewerage system;
      (5)   Number of non-metered users; and
      (6)   A list of users discharging industrial wastes and volume of waste
discharged.
   (C)   Each user of the sewerage system shall be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to waste water treatment and sewer collection
service.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-1, 4:3-4) (Ord. 1979.04.43, passed 4-10-1979; Ord.
1984.10.43, passed 10-9-1984; Ord. 1988.02.35, passed 2-9-1988)
§ 51.03 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The United States Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have
access to any books, documents, papers, and records of the county which are
applicable to the county system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for
the purpose of making audits, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof
to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to
the federal and/or state grant.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-1, 4:3-4) (Ord. 1979.04.43, passed 4-10-1979; Ord.
1984.10.43, passed 10-9-1984)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.15 BILLING, GENERALLY.
   The rates, fees, and charges for the use and service of certain waterworks
and sewerage systems of the County, billed on various cycles, shall be
established in §§
51.16 through
51.28. Rates in §§
51.16 through
51.19 include pass-through rates or fees from third-party service providers or
other agencies. Charges in §§
51.16(D) establish the monthly service charge per domestic water meter based on
size. In addition to rate adjustments expressly authorized in §§
51.16 through
51.28, to the extent that Superintendent issues bills for the collection of
pass-through rates, fees, or charges payable to third-party service providers
or other agencies, the Superintendent is hereby authorized and directed to
timely adjust user bills to reflect changes in the pass-through rates, fees, or
charges of third-party service providers or other agencies. Whenever billing
adjustments result from changes in the pass-through rates, fees, or charges of
third-party service providers or other agencies, the Superintendent shall cause
users to be notified, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the changes in
such pass-through rates, fees, or charges, which notification shall be in
addition to the notification required pursuant to §
51.02 (C)
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 1964.10.01, passed 10-13-1964; Res.
1978.11.44, passed 11-14-1978; Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10-2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0738, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-
1271, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 13-1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed
5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-2015;
Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102, passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-1311,
passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 21-0832, passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-
2023)
§ 51.16 METERED WATER.
   The rates for metered water per 1,000 gallons are:
Metered Water FY 2025 FY 2026
Metered Water                                                                      FY 2025 FY 2026
(A)   General Service Areas                                                             
   (1)   Residential Block 1 (1,000-2,000 gallons per month)                 $1.44   $1.52
   (2)   Residential Block 2 (3,000-6,000 gallons per month)                 $6.89   $7.30
   (3)   Residential Block 3 (7,000 gallons or greater per month)            $7.58   $8.03
   (4)   Non-Residential; Residential with multiple dwelling units per meter $6.89   $7.30
irrigation meters
(B)   Lake Michigan Water Service Areas ([https://export.amlegal.com/media/     FY 2025 FY 2026
59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-4172.jpg])
   (1)   Residential Block 1 (1,000-2,000 gallons per month)                 $0.36   $0.38
   (2)   Residential Block 2 (3,000-6,000 gallons per month)                 $4.95   $5.25
   (3)   Residential Block 3 (7,000 gallons or greater per month)            $5.85   $6.20
   (4)   Non-Residential; Residential with multiple dwelling units per meter $4.95   $5.25
irrigation meters
(C)   Hawthorn Woods - Glennshire/Forest Lake (†)                             FY 2025 FY 2026
   (1)   Residential Block 1 (1,000-2,000 gallons per month)                 $0.59   $0.61
   (2)   Residential Block 2 (3,000-6,000 gallons per month)                 $5.25   $5.57
   (3)   Residential Block 3 (7,000 gallons or greater per month)            $6.51   $6.91
   (4)   Non-Residential; Residential with multiple dwelling units per meter $5.25   $5.57
irrigation meters
(D)   Monthly Service Charge for Domestic Water Meters                          FY 2025 FY 2026
   (1)   Up to 1"                                                            $10.45  $11.07
   (2)   1.5"                                                                $11.77  $12.48
   (3)   2"                                                                  $15.21  $16.12
   (4)   3"                                                                  $41.18  $43.65
   (5)   4"                                                                  $50.80  $53.85
   (6)   6"                                                                  $73.18  $77.57
   (7)   8"                                                                  $98.72  $104.64
   (8)   12"                                                                 $165.87 $175.82
([https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
4172.jpg]) Beginning December 1, 2023, the 3rd party pass-through fees for the Central Lake County
Joint Action Water Agency are not included. LCPW is responsible for collecting these fees per an
Intergovernmental Agreement (1989) and rates are subject to fluctuate based upon rate changes
approved or passed by the agency.
(†) Beginning December 1, 2023, the 3rd party pass-through fees for Aqua Illinois, Inc. are not
included. LCPW is responsible for collecting these fees per an Intergovernmental Agreement (2008)
and rates are subject to fluctuate based upon rate changes approved or passed by Aqua.
 
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10-2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0738, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-
1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed
6-10-2014; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 16-0314, passed 4-12-2016;
Ord. 16-0944, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102,
passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-1311, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 19-1743, passed 11-12-
2019; Ord. 20-1031, passed 8-11-2020; Ord. 21-0832, passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 22-
0967, passed 7-12-2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.17 METERED SEWER.
The rates for metered sewer per 1,000 gallons, 2,000 gallons per month minimum
are:
 FY 2025 FY 2026
                                                                                FY    FY
                                                                                2025  2026
(1)   General Service Areas                                                  $6.90 $7.19
(2)   Southeast Central - Libertyville                                       $2.18 $2.26
   Countryside Manor, North Libertyville Estates, Terre Faire~
(3)   Northeast Central - NSWRD Wildwood [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-4172.jpg]                 $6.53 $6.79
   (7,000 gallons or greater per month)
(4)   Northeast Central - NSWRD Arbor VistaX [https://export.amlegal.com/medi$6.06 $6.29
59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-4172.jpg]
(5)   Northwest Consolidated I ^                                             $4.25 $4.41
(6)   Northwest Consolidated II                                              See   See
   (Remington Pt. North - base meter charge)^                                note  note
                                                                                (^)   (^)
(7)   Northwest Consolidated II (Holiday Pk. & Thomas Pl.)                   $2.53 $2.64
(^) Pass-through fees for the Village of Fox Lake. Effective January 1, 2020, LCPW assumed
the responsibility of collecting these fees due to the merger with the Lakes Region
Sanitary District. These rates are subject to fluctuate based upon rate changes approved or
passed by the Village.
(~) Does not include 3rd party pass-through fees for the Village of Libertyville. LCPW is
responsible for collecting these fees per an Intergovernmental Agreement (2010) and rates
are subject to fluctuate based upon rate changes approved or passed by the Village.
(x) Does not include 3rd party pass-through fees for the Village of Grayslake. LCPW is
responsible for collecting these fees per an Intergovernmental Agreement (1993) and rates
are subject to fluctuate based upon rate changes approved or passed by the Village.
([https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
4172.jpg]) Does not include 3rd party pass-through fees for the North Shore Water
Reclamation District (NSWRD). LCPW is responsible for collecting these fees per an
Intergovernmental Agreement (2015) and rates are subject to fluctuate based upon rate
changes approved or passed by the district.
 
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10-2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-
1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed
6-10-2014; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 16-0944, passed 10-11-2016;
Ord. 17-1039, passed 10-10-2017; Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102,
passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-1311, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 19-1743, passed 11-12-
2019; Ord. 20-0215, passed 2-11-2020; Ord. 20-0689, passed 6-9-2020; Ord. 20-
1031, passed 8-11-2020; Ord. 21-0038, passed 1-12-2021; Ord. 21-0832, passed 6-
8-2021; Ord. 22-0967, passed 7-12-2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.18 UNMETERED WATER.
   The rates for unmetered water, per single family residence or equivalent,
are:
 
                       FY 2025 FY 2026
(1)   Arden Shores  $17.85  $18.92
(2)   Countryside La$68.87  $73.00
(3)   Forest Lake   $31.51  $33.42
(4)   Oak Terrace   $51.66  $54.75
 
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10-2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-
1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed
6-10-2014; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 16-0944, passed 10-11-2016;
Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102, passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-1311,
passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 20-1031, passed 8-11-2020; Ord. 21-0832, passed 6-8-
2021; Ord. 22-0967, passed 7-12-2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.19 UNMETERED SEWER.
   The rates for unmetered sewer, per single family residence or equivalent,
are:
 FY 2025 FY 2026
                                                                           FY     FY
                                                                           2025   2026
(1)   General Service Area                                              $55.21 $57.41
(2)   Southeast Central - Libertyville~                                 $17.42 $18.12
(3)   Northeast Central[https://export.amlegal.com/media/               $49.01 $50.97
59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-4172.jpg]
(4)   Ravenna, Royal Melbourne, Kildeer North, Kildeer Central, Kildeer $69.01 $71.77
South
(5)   Riverside Preserve                                                $87.63 $91.14
(6)   Northwest Consolidated II^                                        $31.85 $33.13
(7)   Northwest Consolidated II                                         $18.98 $19.74
   (Duck Lake Crossing)^
(8)   Northwest Consolidated II                                         $18.98 $19.74
   (Nippersink)^
(9)   Northwest Consolidated II                                         $31.85 $33.13
   (Dawn Marie, Emerald Bay & Fairfield Villages)^^
(10)   Northwest Consolidated II                                        $31.85 $33.13
   (Ingleside)^
(~) Does not include 3rd party pass-through fees for the Village of Libertyville. LCPW
is responsible for collecting these fees per an Intergovernmental Agreement (2010) and
rates are subject to fluctuate based upon rate changes approved or passed by the
Village.
(^) Does not include 3rd party pass-through fees for the Village of Fox Lake. On January
1, 2020, LCPW assumed the responsibility of collecting these fees due to the merger with
the Lakes Region Sanitary District. These rates are subject to fluctuate based upon rate
changes approved or passed by the Village.
(^^) Does not include 3rd party pass-through fees for the Village of Round Lake. On
January 1, 2020, LCPW assumed the responsibility of collecting these fees due to the
merger with the Lakes Region Sanitary District. These rates are subject to fluctuate
based upon rate changes approved or passed by the Village.
([https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-
0-4172.jpg]) Does not include 3rd party pass-through fees for the North Shore Water
Reclamation District (NSWRD). LCPW is responsible for collecting these fees per an
Intergovernmental Agreement (2015) and rates are subject to fluctuate based upon rate
changes approved or passed by the district.
 
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10-2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-
1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed
6-10-2014; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 16-0944, passed 10-11-2016;
Ord. 17-1039, passed 10-10-2017; Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102,
passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-1311, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 19-1743, passed 11-12-
2019; Ord. 20-0215, passed 2-11-2020; Ord. 20-1031, passed 8-11-2020; Ord. 21-
0038, passed 1-12-2021; Ord. 21-0832, passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 22-0967, passed 7-
12-2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.20 EFFECTIVE DATE AND FUTURE INCREASES.
   (A)   The aforementioned water and sewer rates shall become effective for
all billed consumption beginning December 1, 2025, for FY 2026 and applied at
the end of the appropriate billing cycles, unless otherwise determined by the
Director of Public Works.
   (B)   On December 1, 2025 and December 1, each year through 2027, the water
rates established in §§
51.16 and
51.18 shall be automatically increased: by 6%. For FY 28 the water rates
established in §§
51.16 and
51.18 shall be automatically increased by 3% unless the county has performed a
rate analysis study to establish then current rates.
   (C)   On December 1, 2025 and December 1,each year through FY 2028, the
sewer rates established in §§
51.17 and
51.19 shall be automatically increased by 4% unless the county has performed a
rate analysis study to establish then current rates.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10- 2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-
1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed
6-10-2014; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 16-0314, passed 4-12-2016;
Ord. 16-0944, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 17-1039, passed 10-10-2017; Ord. 18-0871,
passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102, passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-1311, passed 8-13-
2019; Ord. 20-1031, passed 8-11-2020; Ord. 21-0832, passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 22-
0967, passed 7-12-2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.21 ILLEGAL CONNECTION OR TURN- ON.
   No person shall connect to or turn water or sewer on to any premises without
permission from the county or after it has been shut off by the county.
(Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0740, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850,
passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-
2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-
1102, passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.22 LIABILITY; LATE PAYMENT; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Enforcement Officer. All sections of this subchapter shall be enforced
by the Director of the Lake County Public Works Department, or his or her
designees.
   (B)   Liability. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, or the
user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for all
service to such premises, and service is furnished to the premises by the
county only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, or
user of any service are jointly and severally liable therefore to the County of
Lake.
   (C)   Liability for undercharges and overcharges. In the event that there is
an undercharge for service by reason of either an error involving billing
procedures or metering equipment discrepancies, such undercharge shall be
billed to the user, owner or occupant and collected by the county, provided,
however, that the period of undercharge accumulation shall not exceed 12
months. In the event that there is an overcharge for service by reason of
either an error involving billing procedures or metering equipment
discrepancies, such overcharge shall be credited to the user, owner, or
occupant by the county, provided, however, that the period of overcharge
accumulation shall not exceed 12 months.
   (D)   Late payments, penalty. If payment of the entire amount of a bill for
sewer and/or water service is not received by the County of Lake on or before
the twentieth day after the billing date, then a late payment penalty of 10% of
the unpaid balance of the bill shall be added thereto and become due and
payable.
   (E)   Delinquency. In the event the sewer and/or water service charges
including any penalty then due are not paid within 60 days after the date of
billing, such charges and penalty shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be
delinquent. Such delinquency shall be a violation of this subchapter and
subject to enforcement and imposition of fines. Pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-43035,
the County has the authority to charge a late fee to cover any fees or costs
incurred by the County for carrying and collecting delinquent payments, with
respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by the County. A
cost of collections fee of 35% of the unpaid balance due shall be applied to
the unpaid balance of the bill and become immediately due and payable.
   (F)   Shut off. If sewer and/or water service charges are determined to be
delinquent or an unauthorized connection is made, the water or sewer service
may be shut off by the Director of the Lake County Department of Public Works.
Water and/or sewer service will not be turned on until all payment, penalties
and fees have been paid.
   (G)   Warning of Ordinance Violation. If any charges and/or penalties are
declared to be delinquent, the Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
issue a Warning of Ordinance Violation. The Warning shall, at a minimum,
identify the violation for which it is being issued, shall include the address
at which the violation has occurred, shall allow the respondent to elect to pay
all outstanding charges and/or penalties to abate the violation(s) within a
reasonable time, and shall state that a Notice of Ordinance Violation may be
issued if the warning is not adhered to as specified.
   (H)   Notice of Ordinance Violation; Administrative Adjudication. If an
individual has previously been issued a Warning of Ordinance Violation or is in
violation of §
51.21 and the individual fails to pay all outstanding charges and/or penalties
by the date specified in the warning, the Enforcement Officer shall have
authority to issue a Notice of Ordinance Violation. If Administrative
Adjudication is found to be the appropriate remedy to resolve the violation,
the notice must be served in accordance with and shall contain all information
specified and required in §§
94.50 through
94.66 (Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance). Prior to the hearing
date documented on the Notice of Ordinance Violation, the respondent may elect
to pay all outstanding charges and/or penalties deemed delinquent, pay the fine
listed on the Notice of Ordinance Violation, and not participate in the
hearing.
   (I)   Liens.
      (1)   In the event the sewer and/or water service charges, including any
penalty, are declared to be delinquent, the County of Lake shall commence with
proceedings to create a lien upon the real estate to which water or sewerage
service is supplied through the delinquent account in accordance with the
county's authority pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5- 15021. To create this lien, the
county shall send to the delinquent owner or owners of record of the real
estate, as referenced by the taxpayer's property identification number:
         (a)   A copy of each delinquency notice sent to the person who is
delinquent in paying the charges or other notice sufficient to inform the owner
or owners of record; and
         (b)   A notice that unpaid charges or rates may create a lien on the
real estate pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-15021.
      (2)   In addition, the County shall file a notice of such lien in the
office of the Lake County Recorder of Deeds. This notice shall consist of a
statement sworn to by an authorized officer or employee of Lake County setting
out:
         (a)   A description of such real estate sufficient for the
identification thereof;
         (b)   The amount of money due for such water or sewerage service; and
         (c)   The date when such amount became delinquent.
      (3)   The county shall also send a copy of the notice of lien to the
owner or owners of record of the real estate, as referenced by the taxpayer's
property identification number. If all of the above requirements are met, the
county shall have the power to foreclose this lien in the same manner and with
the same effect as in the foreclosure of mortgages on real estate.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10- 2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-
1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed
6-10-2014; Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102, passed 10-9-2018; Ord.
19-1311, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.23 CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   The basic rates for connection users, per dwelling unit or equivalent
thereto, to certain waterworks and sewerage systems of the county shall be
established as follows.
(1) Water System Connection                                     FY 2025 FY 2026
   (a) General Service Areas (third-party provider)            $4,510  $4, 510
      (i)   Arden Shores2, Forest Lake2, Hawthorn Woods2,     $4,510  $4, 510
              Mettawa2
   (b) General Service Areas (well water)                      $5,470  $5, 470
(2) Sewer Service Connection                                    FY 2025 FY 2026
   (a) Diamond/Sylvan Lake                                     $8,760  $8, 760
   (b) Northeast                                               $7,730  $7, 730
   (c) Northeast Central
        (requires separate NSWRD permit and connection fee)
                                                            FY 2025 FY 2026
              Highland Lake, Arbor Vista, Idlewood, Wildwood,
      (i)   Druce Lake, Third Lake, Grayslake retail, Gurnee  $3,580  $3.580
              retail
      (ii)  Grayslake wholesale1, Hainesville (east)1, Gurnee $2,040  $2,040
              wholesale1, Waukegan1 
   (d) Northwest
      (i)   Northwest I (Fox Lake Hills2, Petite Lake2,       $3,080  $3,080
              Stanton Bay2, Lakes Region Sanitary District1,2)
              Northwest II (Hainesville (west)1,2, Lake
      (ii)  Villa1,2, Round Lake1,2, Round Lake Beach1, 2,    $1,540  $1,540
              Round Lake Heights1,2, Round Lake Park1,2)
      (iii) Round Lake - Trunk Sewer Recapture Fee3           $431.12 $431.12
   (e) South Central
      (i)   Vernon Hills                                      $6,500  $6,500
   (f) Southeast
      (i)   Portwine Sector: Bannockburn, Deerfield,          $8,220  $8,220
              Lincolnshire1, Riverwoods
      (ii)  Ela Sector: Hawthorn Woods, Long Grove, Forest    $10,210 $10,210
              Lake, Kildeer
      (iii) Buffalo Grove1, Riverwoods2                       $5,950  $5,950
      (iv)  Kildeer, Long Grove, Pekara, Horatio Gardens      $7,490  $7,490
      (v)   Lincolnshire1, Lake Zurich1, Hawthorn Woods       $4,030  $4,030
   (g) Southeast Central
      (i)   Countryside Manor, Terre Faire, North             $3,120  $3,120
              Libertyville Estates
      (ii)  Libertyville1, Green Oaks2                        $1,580  $1,580
1 Requires separate permit and connection fee from other agencies
2 Additional connection fee(s) collected and passed through to outside agencies
3 The Recapture Expense shall be adjusted annually at the beginning of each
fiscal year through 2026 and be based on the Construction Cost Index (CCI) as
defined by Engineering News Record
 
      (1)   Connection charges for commercial, industrial, and institutional
users shall be based on the foregoing rates for each 250 gallons per day of
design flow as determined in accordance with coefficients approved by the
Director of Public Works and in accordance with all adopted agreements with
communities and agencies.
      (2)   Connection charges in the Northeast Sewer System shall be based on
350 gallons of design flow until December 2, 2024 after which time the basis
shall be 250 gallons of design flow.
      (3)   The Lake County Public Works Department collects the Round Lake -
Trunk Sewer Recapture Fee on behalf of the Lakes Region Sanitary District
through 2026.
   (B)   The foregoing connection fees shall also be applicable and charged on
a pro-rata basis whenever an existing use is changed or modified to the extent
that it results in higher daily usage in accordance with §
51.23(D)(1).
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10- 2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0738, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord.
passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-
2015; Ord. 16-0944, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-
1102, passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-1311, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 19-1743, passed
11-12-2019; Ord. 20-0038, passed 1-14-2020; Ord. 20-1031, passed 8-11-2020;
Ord. 21-0038, passed 1-12-2021; Ord. 21-0832, passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 22-0967,
passed 7-12-2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.24 ADDITIONAL RATES AND CHARGES.
   The following rates and charges, for services, in addition to and
supplementing those previously described by ordinance, are hereby established.
   (A)   General inspection fee: $100 per inspection.
   (B)   Construction water: $50 per dwelling unit or equivalent thereof.
   (C)   Seasonal, after-hours, or temporary service turn-off/turn-on: $100.
   (D)   Force account work, contract operation and maintenance: $65 per man-
hour, regular (4-hour minimum maintenance call out); $100 per man-hour,
overtime; plus, support equipment.
   (E)   Water meter charges:*
 FY 2025 FY 2026
                                             FY 2025 FY 2026
(1)   Single-unit residential dwelling met$350    $377
   (5/8 in. meter or 1 in. meter)
(2)   5/8 in. meter                       $294    $313
(3)   1 in. meter                         $407    $441
(4)   1-1/2 in. meter                     $967    $1,151
(5)   2 in. meter                         $1,267  $1,307
(6)   3 in. meter                         $2,101  $2,890
(7)   4 in. meter                         $2,240  $3,055
(8)   6 in. meter                         $2,553  $3,453
(9)   Meters over 6 in.                   Cost    Cost
 
   (F)   Automatic sprinkler systems: $0.12 per head per month.
   (G)   Septage disposal fee: initial permit $200; annual renewal $100.
   (H)   Septage disposal fee: $40 per 1,000 gallons.
   (I)   Septage decant: $40 per 1,000 gallons.
   (J)   Drying pad fee: $250 per truckload, $150 per sweeper.
   (K)   Hydrant flow test: $250 per hydrant.
   (L)   Laboratory test fees are as follows:
Laboratory Test Fees
Test Price
Test                               Price
Water & Waste Water                 
Alkalinity                         $15.00
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)    $25.00
Chlorine, Residual                 $15.00
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD)       $20.00
Chloride                           $15.00
Conductivity                       $12.00
Oil & Grease                       $50.00
Fluoride                           $15.00
Hardness*                          $15.00
Nitrate                            $18.00
Nitrite                            $18.00
Nitrogen, Ammonia                  $15.00
Nitrogen, Total Kjeldahl           $35.00
Ortho-Phosphate                    $18.00
pH                                 $10.00
Phosphorous, Total                 $25.00
Settleable Solids                  $18.00
Total Suspended Solids (TSS)       $18.00
Total Dissolved Solids (TDS)       $18.00
Volatile Solids (VS)               $18.00
Volatile Suspended Solids (VSS)    $18.00
Total Solids (TS)                  $18.00
Sulfate                            $18.00
Turbidity                          $15.00
Total Organic Carbon (TOC)         $25.00
Test                               Price
Microbiology
Fecal Coliform                     $25.00
Total Coliform/E. Coli (Colilert)  $25.00
Total Coliform/E. Coli (MF)        $25.00
Heterotropic Plate Count (HPC)     $30.00
Soil, Sludge, Solid Waste
Nitrogen, Ammonia                  $15.00
Nitrogen, Total Kjeldahl           $35.00
Volatile Solids (VS)               $18.00
Total Solids (TS)                  $18.00
Specific Oxygen Uptake Rate (SOUR) $20.00
Metals
Arsenic                            $55.00
Barium                             $55.00
Boron                              $55.00
Cadmium                            $55.00
Chromium, Total                    $55.00
Copper                             $55.00
Iron                               $35.00
Lead                               $55.00
Manganese                          $55.00
Molybdenum                         $55.00
Nickel                             $55.00
Selenium                           $55.00
Silver                             $55.00
Zinc                               $55.00
Lab Processing Fee*
*Processing fee to cover shipping and time and materials for samples that are
sent to outside labs for the testing.
 
   (M)   Installation of outside AMR transmitter: $50 per transmitter.
   (N)   Manual meter reads in lieu of transmitter: $9.33 per month.
   (O)   Grease trap installation: $100.
   (P)   Grease trap inspection: $100.
   (Q)   FOG Discharge License: $100.
   (R)   Non-domestic waste disposal: $40/1,000 gallons.
   (S)   Pretreatment:
      (1)   Pretreatment permit: $300.
      (2)   Industrial inspection: $65 per hour.
      (3)   Industrial sampling: $65 per hour.
      (4)   Permit renewal: $250.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9, 4:2-9A3) (Ord. 10-0784, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 11-0425,
passed 5-10-2011; Ord. 12-0232, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 12-0856, passed 8-14-
2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 13-
1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed
6-10-2014; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 16-0944, passed 10-11-2016;
Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102, passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-1311,
passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 19-1743, passed 11-12-2019: Ord. 21-0038, passed 1-12-
2021; Ord. 22-0967, passed 7-12-2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 24-
0926, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 51.25 RATE SURCHARGE FOR CERTAIN PORTIONS OF THE WATERWORKS/SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Definitions. For all purposes of this section, except as otherwise
expressly provided or unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined
in this section, including the words and terms as defined in the preambles
hereto, have the meanings assigned to them in this section and include the
plural as well as the singular.
   (B)   Incorporation of preambles. The County Board hereby finds that all of
the recitals contained in the preambles to this section are true and correct
and does incorporate them into this section by this reference.
   (C)   System surcharges.
Service Area Surcharge End Date
Service Area                         Surcharge               End Date
1) North Libertyville Estates Levee  $5 per month            N/A
   Maintenance
   Hawthorn Woods-Glennshire Water
2) Capital Cost (address on payment  $77 per month           September 15, 2039
   plan)
   Hawthorn Woods-Glennshire Water
3) Capital Cost (address on payment  $45 per month           September 15, 2039
   plan)
   Countryside Manor, North
4) Libertyville Estates, Terre Faire $19 per month           December 2025
   Water Connection Charge (address
   on payment plan)
   Countryside Manor, North
5) Libertyville Estates, Terre Faire $6.65 per month         December 2025
   Water Connection Charge (address
   on payment plan with CDBG Grant)
6) Northwest Regional Excess Flow    $1.50 per month per RCE May 2026
   Surcharge
   CLCJAWA Water Connection Charge
7) for Grandwood Park and Fox Lake   $7.78 per month         December, 2049
   Hills water system customers
 
   (D)   Collection; recordation. Certain county staff and officers, as
appropriate, are hereby directed to record this section with the Lake County
Recorder's office and to undertake any necessary administrative operations to
execute the collection of the one-time capital cost charge or the surcharge.
   (E)   Certain provisions of master rate ordinance to apply.
      (1)   The provisions of the master rate ordinance (§
51.22) relating to delinquency of payment and enforcement shall apply.
      (2)   This section shall be attached to and included as a part of the
master rate ordinance adopted in 2007, as amended.
   (F)   Governing law. This section shall be construed under and governed by
the laws of this state.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:2-9A[1], 4:2-9B[A2]) (Ord. 1997.05.60, passed 5-13-1997; Ord.
09-2045, passed 10- 13-2009; Ord. 10-0837, passed 9-14-2010; Ord. 13-277,
passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 13-0850, passed 10-13-2013; Ord. passed 12-10-2013;
Ord. 14-0392, passed 5-13-2014; Ord. 14-0581, passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 15-1005,
passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102, passed 10-9-
2018; Ord. 19-1311, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Bonds, see
TSO Table I
§ 51.26 SUMMER SEWER CREDIT.
   (A)   During the period of May 15 to September 15, sewer service charges for
residential customers who do not separately meter the outside use of water
shall not exceed 120% of the average usage for the preceding eight-month
period. Where sufficient information is not available, as in the case of a new
customer, average usage shall be determined from billing records of existing
customers.
   (B)   This section shall be published and take effect as provided by law.
(Ord. 1989.05.66, passed 5-9-1989; Ord. 15-1005, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 18-
0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102, passed 10-9-2018;Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-
11-2023)
§ 51.27 WHOLESALE SEWER RATES, FEES AND CHARGES.
   Wholesale sewer rates for the communities of Antioch, Buffalo Grove,
Grayslake, Green Oaks, Gurnee, Hainesville, Harbor Ridge, Lake Villa, Lake
Zurich, Libertyville, Lincolnshire, Riverwoods, Round Lake, Round Lake Beach,
Round Lake Heights, Round Lake Park and Waukegan are established as follows:
   (A)   Sewer rates.($ per 1,000 gallons/$ per Residential Customer Equivalent
(RCE) per month).
   (B)   Wholesale sewer rates do not include the flow component from third-
party passthroughs. Wholesale sewer rates are subject to change based on
passthrough increases through 2025.
  FY 2025                           FY 2026
  $1 per 1,000 $ per Residential                        $ per Residential
  gallons      Customer Equivalent  $ per 1,000 gallons Customer Equivalent
               (RCE) per month                          (RCE) per month
                     FY 2025                       FY 2026
                                  $ per                        $ per
                     $1 per 1,000 Residential      $ per 1,000 Residential
                     gallons      Customer         gallons     Customer
                                  Equivalent (RCE)             Equivalent (RCE)
                                  per month                    per month
1.  Antioch          $6.12        $48.92           $6.36       $50.88
2.  Buffalo Grove    $5.06        $37.92           $5.26       $39.44
3.  Grayslake        $4.26        $31.95           $4.43       $33.23
4.  Green Oaks       $1.37        $10.94           $1.42       $11.37
5.  Gurnee           $4.26        $31.95           $4.43       $33.23
6.  Hainesville      $1.82        $13.65           $1.89       $14.20
    (Northwest)
    Hainesville
7.  (Northeast       $4.26        $31.95           $4.43       $33.23
    Central)
8.  Harbor Ridge     $4.14        $31.05           $4.31       $32.29
9.  Lake Villa       $1.82        $13.65           $1.89       $14.20
10. Lake Zurich      $5.06        $37.92           $5.26       $39.44
11. Libertyville     $1.37        $10.94           $1.42       $11.37
12. Lincolnshire     $5.06        $37.92           $5.26       $39.44
13. Riverwoods       $6.90        $55.21           $7.18       $57.42
14. Round Lake       $1.82        $13.65           $1.89       $14.20
15. Round Lake Beach $1.82        $13.65           $1.89       $14.20
16. Round Lake Park  $1.82        $13.65           $1.89       $14.20
17. Round Lake       $1.82        $13.65           $1.89       $14.20
    Heights
18. Waukegan         $4.26        $31.95           $4.43       $33.23
 
   (C)   Excess flow surcharge
1.   Fox Lake             $1.50 per RCE per month
2.   Hainesville (Northwes$1.50 per RCE per month
3.   Harbor Ridge         $1.50 per RCE per month
4.   Lake Villa           $1.50 per RCE per month
5.   Round Lake           $1.50 per RCE per month
6.   Round Lake Beach     $1.50 per RCE per month
7.   Round Lake Heights   $1.50 per RCE per month
8.   Round Lake Park      $1.50 per RCE per month
 
   (D)   The aforementioned water and sewer rates shall become effective for
all consumption beginning December 1, 2024, for FY 2025 and applied at the end
of the appropriate billing cycles, unless otherwise determined by the Director
of Public Works. The wholesale sewer rates established in §
51.27 shall be effective December 1, 2024, and automatically increase by 4% for
FY 25 through FY 28 unless the county has performed a rate analysis study to
establish then current rates.
(Res. 2004.08.34, passed 8-10-2004; Res. 2007.11.26, passed 11-13-2007; Res.
2008.03.63,passed 3-11-2008; Res. 2009.03.01, passed 3-17-2009; Res. 10-1897,
passed 9-8-2009; Res. 12 0857, passed 8-14-2012; Res. 13-1271, passed 11-12-
2013; Res. 14-0393, passed 5-13-2014; Res. 15-0335, passed 4-14- 2015; Ord. 15-
1005, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 16-0944, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 18-0871, passed
8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102, passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 19-0541, passed 4-9-2019; Ord.
19-1311, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 19-1743, passed 11-12-2019; Ord. 20-1031,
passed 8-11-2020; Ord. 21-0038, passed 1-12-2021; Ord. 21-0832, passed 6-8-
2021; Ord. 22-0967, passed 7-12-2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 51.28 LAKE COUNTY AMR METER OPT-OUT POLICY.
   (A)   In order to modernize meter reading and billing services available to
customers, Lake County is installing automated water meters (AMR) with
technology that transmits data back to the county offices. This technology uses
a meter transmitter that sends usage data from the customer's meter. The meter
transmitter is connected by a wire and sends readings wirelessly utilizing
radio frequency.
   (B)   Despite the many advantages of the system, the county recognizes that
some customers may want to opt-out of the AMR technology. Public Works has
explored two options that could be made available to customers. (However, under
both options the existing meter must be replaced.)
      (1)   Option 1: meter transmitter installed on the outside of the house.
The standard location for the transmitter is in the basement ceiling or
crawlspace joist above the meter inside the house. As an alternative, the
transmitter can be wired to and installed on the outside of the house. The one-
time outside installation fee that will be billed to those customers who choose
the outside meter transmitter installation option is established in the Public
Work's applicable ordinance, which shall be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Option 2: no meter transmitter - manual meter read. Under this
option, there would be no meter transmitter installed to send the meter data.
The customer would be responsible to send their water meter reading into the
Public Works office via phone or e-mail every two months, six times a year. The
county would travel to and enter the customer's house and take a manual read of
meter usage twice a year. In order to cover the costs of manually reading the
meter, manually entering the meter data and travel costs, an annual charge
established in the Public Work's applicable rate ordinance, which shall be
amended from time to time, would be assessed on water bills as a monthly
charge. As a consequence of this option, the customer would not benefit from
leak detection notification and usage data from the customer online portal.
(Ord. 13-1341, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 18-0871, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 18-1102,
passed 10-9-2018; Ord. 21-0038, passed 1-12-2021; Ord. 22-0967, passed 7-12-
2022; Ord. 23-0906, passed 7-11-2023)
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
   
52.01   Introductory provisions
   
52.02   Connection to water system
   
52.03   Use of water system
   
52.04   Liability
   
52.05   Cross-connection control
   
52.06   Inspection
   
52.07   Validity; severability
   
52.08   Effective date
   
52.09   Variance and appeal process
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be officially known and cited as the Water
Use Ordinance of Lake County, Illinois. References made herein to "this
chapter" shall be interpreted as referring to the Water Use Ordinance.
   (B)   Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the statutory authority
conferred by the Illinois Counties Code, 55 ILCS 5, including without
limitation Division 5-15 of such Code (55 ILCS 5/5-15001 et seq.).
   (C)   Applicability and jurisdiction. This chapter shall apply to all
premises served or supplied by public water systems owned and operated by Lake
County.
   (D)   Minimum requirements. The standards of this chapter are minimum
requirements. The issuance of any permit, certificate or approval in accordance
with the standards and requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the
recipient of such permit, certificate or approval from the responsibility of
complying with all other applicable requirements of any other local, county,
state or federal agency, having jurisdiction over the structures or land uses
for which the permit, certificate or approval was issued.
   (E)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to define and set forth the
regulations of the county concerning connection to, use, and maintenance of its
public water supply system and inspection and maintenance of water services
connected directly or indirectly thereto.
   (F)   Word usages and construction of language.
      (1)   Meanings and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this chapter shall be construed according to the purpose set out
in division (E).
      (2)   Headings, illustrations and text. In case of any difference of
meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any heading,
drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control unless such
heading, drawing, table, figure, or illustration is deemed by the Public Works
Director to provide greater protection to the safe, efficient, and effective
operation of the public water supply system.
      (3)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists
of items or examples that use terms such as "including," "such as," or similar
language are intended to provide examples. They are not intended to be
exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
      (4)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last
day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the county, that day shall be
excluded.
      (5)   References to other regulations, publications and documents.
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or
document, that reference shall be construed as referring to the most recent
edition of such resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document or to
the relevant successor document, unless otherwise expressly stated.
      (6)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of
a department or another officer or employee of the county to perform an act or
duty, that provision shall be construed as authorizing such officer, department
head or employee to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have
supervisory authority.
      (7)   Technical and nontechnical terms. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
(See also division (I), "Definitions.")
      (8)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies, and
agencies to which references are made are those of Lake County, unless
otherwise expressly provided.
      (9)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall," "will," and
"must" are mandatory, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The
words "may" and "should" are advisory and discretionary terms.
      (10)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
         (a)   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events apply; and
         (b)   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events may apply.
      (11)   Tenses and plurals. Words used in one tense (past, present, or
future) include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (12)   Numerical calculations. Unless otherwise specifically indicated,
for standards involving the use of numbers, all calculations shall be rounded
to the nearest hundredths.
   (G)   Conflicting provisions.
      (1)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of
this chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government,
the more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law.
      (2)   Conflict with other county regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions
found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the county, the more
restrictive provision will control. No text amendment, variance or condition of
approval placed on a permit or other form of county approval under this chapter
shall have the effect of nullifying, abrogating or diminishing the provisions
of any other county ordinance.
   (H)   Transitional provisions.
      (1)   Violations continue. Any violation of the previous water use
regulations of the county shall continue to be a violation under this chapter
and shall be subject to penalties and enforcement under §
52.99, unless the use, construction or other activity is consistent with the
express terms of this chapter, in which case enforcement action shall cease,
except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations that occurred
before the adoption of this chapter.
   (I)   Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
      ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the USEPA.
      AGENCY. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      AGENCY DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
      APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any backflow prevention device or
method authorized under the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and
the Agency.
      APPROVING AUTHORITY. The County Board of Lake County, Illinois.
      AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the county does not have control.
      BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a public water supply system from any source
other than the intended source of the public water supply system.
      B-BOX. A valve box used to access a corporation stop. Also called a
BUFFALO BOX or SHUT-OFF BOX.
      CLOSED-LOOP AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM. An air conditioning system in which
the heat exchange fluid is used in more than one cooling cycle before being
discharged to waste.
      CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. Any of the owner, official custodian, user or
person in control of any premise supplied by or in any manner connected to a
public water supply system.
      CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer's
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system, as is the service connection (exclusive of the b-box, corporation stop,
and the meter).
      CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of
any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
      CORPORATION STOP. A shutoff valve attached to a service connection from a
water main to a building (often installed near the curb), which may be operated
by a valve key to start or stop flow in the water-supply lines of a building.
Also called CURB STOP.
      COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between at least
two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains public water
supply system water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety
or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other. DIRECT
CROSS-CONNECTION means a cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance. INDIRECT CROSS-
CONNECTION means a cross-connection through which an unknown substance can be
forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe public water
system.
      CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR (CCCDI). A licensed plumber who
is certified by the Agency and in accordance with Illinois Plumbing License
Law, 225 ILCS 320/3(1) to inspect cross-connection control devices.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Lake County Public Works Department or his
or her duly authorized representative.
      DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015 and
authorized under the Illinois Plumbing Code. A DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY must
include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable
connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
      ENGINEERING SUPERVISOR. The manager of the Engineering Division of the
Public Works Department.
      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
      FEDERAL ACT. The Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Acts Amendments, and
any amendments hereto.
      FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
      HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
      INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine all materials, fixtures,
piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for
compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water constituent.
It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has replaced the unit
formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately
equivalent, in reporting the results of water analysis.
      NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use
as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.
      ORDINANCE. This chapter.
      PERMIT FEES. The charge or charges composed of connection fees,
inspection fees, and meter fees.
      PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
      pH. The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated
by taking the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in
the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping,
from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply
systems. PLUMBING includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances
for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of
any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from
the point of connection to such building drain to the building sewer or private
sewage disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
      POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
      POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code
604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
      POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
      PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:
         (a)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
         (b)   Process waters;
         (c)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system
which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
         (d)   Cooling waters;
         (e)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
         (f)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
         (g)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid gaseous fluids used
in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes and structures through which water
is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve as
least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a
"community water supply" or a "non-community water supply."
      PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT. The Lake County Public Works Department and
persons under the direction or supervision of the Director.
      RATE ORDINANCE. The ordinance(s) or other official action(s) that the
approving authority may adopt from time-to-time setting forth rate, charges,
and other costs or expenses (including without limitation fines and penalties)
to be imposed, charged, or assessed in connection with water service from the
water facilities.
      REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE DEVICE (RPZ). A device containing a minimum of two
independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated
pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and
approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of
normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the
supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential
relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the
pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit
includes tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and
each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.  Service
connection means the opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the
water main through which water is supplied to the user.
      STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, and any
amendments thereto.
      STATE LOAN. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of water works as provided for by the Illinois State Act and for
making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of
Illinois.
      SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer's piping system.
      SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
      USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
      USEPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
      WATER FACILITIES. The public water system of the county and any or all of
its component parts.
      WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
      WATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge periodically levied on all users of the
water facilities in accordance with the current Rate Ordinance. The service
charge may be established and changed from time-to-time by action of the
approving authority. A WATER SERVICE CHARGE may also be referred to as a USER
FEE.
      WATER SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGE. The charge or charges assessed on
customers newly connecting, changing use or enlarging an existing connection to
the water facilities, which charge may be established and changed from time-to-
time by action of the approving authority. A WATER SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGE
may also be referred to as a CONNECTION FEE.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 52.02 CONNECTION TO WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Service connection permits and charges.
      (1)   No connection without permit. Connections to the county public
water supply system shall be made after issuance of a permit by the county. All
such connections shall be made by a licensed plumber or a bonded sewer and
water contractor utilizing a licensed plumber under the supervision of Public
Works Director, and no connections shall be buried and backfilled until the
work has been inspected to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director.
Whenever any new connections to the county public water supply should hereafter
be made, a connection fee shall apply, in accordance with the Rate Ordinance
and be paid at the time a permit is issued by the Public Works Department.
      (2)   Connections required.
         (a)   Existing houses, buildings and properties.
            1.   The owner of all existing houses, buildings or properties
located within service areas of the Lake County Public Works Department and
abutting on any street, public easement or right-of-way in which there is now
located, or which the county intends in the future to be located, a public
watermain owned by the county, is required to make a connection to the Water
Facilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in the event that
(i) a building is demolished or (ii) an existing private well serving the
property needs to be replaced or deepened in order to maintain compliance with
the Lake County Health Department requirements, provided that the public water
supply is within 250 feet of the property line of residences or within 1,000
feet of the property line of nonresidential properties.
            2.   Upon connection to the Water Facilities, private wells
previously serving the house, building or property shall be sealed in
accordance with the requirements of the Lake County Health Department. A
variance shall be required from both Lake County Health Department and Public
Works Department to retain an existing well. If approved, a cross-connection
control device shall be installed in accordance with §
52.05.
            3.   The owner shall pay all costs of connection, turn-on, meter,
and watermain extension fees.
         (b)   Future houses, buildings and properties.
            1.   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties hereafter
constructed within service and abutting on any street, public easement or
right-of-way in which there is located, or which the county intends in the
future to be located, a public watermain owned by the county, is required to
make a connection to the Water Facilities in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, provided that the public water supply is within 250 feet of the
property line of residences or within 1,000 feet of the property line of
nonresidential properties, upon the earlier of: (i) the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, or (ii) once the existing well serving such property
is no longer operable.
            2.   Upon connection to the Water Facilities, any private wells
previously serving the house, building or property shall either be sealed in
accordance with the requirements of the Lake County Health Department or, where
the Director has granted a variance to retain the well, shall have a cross-
connection control device installed in accordance with §
52.05.
            3.   The owner shall pay all costs of connection, turn-on, meter,
and watermain extension fees.
         (c)   Watermain extension.
            1.   If requested water service requires the installation of any
watermain, any applicant whose building, structure or premises directly
benefits from such main extension shall pay with such application the cost to
install the main (including, but not limited to construction cost, permit fees,
and all engineering, administrative and legal expenses). Such payment shall be
made in addition to any other connection, turn-on or meter fees in force at the
time of the application.
            2.   Any extension of the main shall be installed in accordance
with plans approved by the Public Works Department and shall be installed along
the entire frontage of the premises to be served to the next adjacent property
as determined by the Director.
         (d)   Plumbing Code compliance. No permit for connection to the Water
Facilities shall be issued unless the house, building or property to receive
service is in compliance with the Illinois Plumbing Code as adopted and amended
by Lake County.
   (B)   Application for water service. No water from the Water Facilities
shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person but the
Director. An application for water and/or sewer service account is necessary to
have water turned on and shall be made to the Public Works Department prior to
water turn on. Water will only be turned on between 7:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday (except during county observed holidays) with a
responsible adult representative of the applicant present. Water turn on shall
be made by appointment. Applicant must appear in person at the administrative
offices of the Public Works Department and present a valid driver's license or
other state issued photo identification within 30 days of establishing service,
otherwise the account is subject to disconnection without further notice.
   (C)   Water service installation. The pipe, valves and fittings used for the
service connection and b-box including materials and size, shall be as
specified by the Public Works Department. Any service connection into the water
main shall be made by a licensed plumber or a bonded sewer and water contractor
utilizing a licensed plumber . The owner shall pay all costs associated with
installing the service connection, including such services and materials as may
be provided by the county.
   (D)   Repairs to system. The owner of any house, building or property
connected to the county public water supply system shall maintain the service
connection and all other appurtenances thereto (other than the b-box,
corporation stop, and meter, which shall be and remain the property of the
county) in good repair and protected from frost at the owner's expense. In the
event that the county becomes aware of deficiencies in the service connection,
the county shall notify the owner of such deficiencies, either in person or in
writing. The owner shall have the deficiencies corrected within 48 hours after
such notice or as otherwise determined by the Director, after which the water
supply shall be shut off and shall not be turned on again until such time as
the deficiencies are corrected.
   (E)   Shut-off boxes.
      (1)   B-boxes shall be placed on every service pipe, and shall be located
between the curb line and the sidewalk line or otherwise in a location approved
by the Director. Such b-boxes shall be Minneapolis pattern and located such
that they are easily accessible for maintenance by the Public Works Department.
      (2)   If a customer or a customer's agent damages a b-box or corporation
stop, then the Public Works Department shall cause the b-box or corporation
stop to be repaired at the customer's expense.
      (3)   If the b-box is located on private property, then the owner of such
private property grants to the county a license to go upon such private
property for any purposes of connecting or disconnecting water service or
repairing, replacing, or maintaining water facilities and such license shall be
a precondition of any owner or user to connect to or remain connected to the
county water service. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require
the county to make repairs of any water facilities located on private property.
Furthermore, if there is more than one corporation stop located along a service
connection, the county shall only be responsible for the maintenance and repair
of the corporation stop closest to the watermain.
      (4)   B-boxes and corporation stops shall be located outside of any
paved, hard surface driveway approaches or driveway areas where a new water
service connection is installed for any one- and two-family dwellings. In all
new subdivisions, water service connections, b-boxes, and corporation stops
must be utilized in their designed and approved locations.
      (5)   No person may interfere with the Public Works Department's access
to a b-box or corporation stop, including, but not limited to, camouflaging or
otherwise concealing the location of a b-box. To the extent that a customer has
directly or indirectly concealed or permitted the concealment, or otherwise
interfered with access to a b-box in a manner that causes the Public Works
Department to incur additional costs when accessing a b-box (including paving
over any b-box or corporation stop), the Public Works Department has the
discretion to charge the customer for such additional costs as a cost of water
service.
   (F)   Separate services required. A separate water service connection is
required for every building or residence. Where a building contains more than
one commercial or industrial user or where the building contains a combination
of commercial or industrial and residential uses, the county may require
separate service connections for each use.
   (G)   Duty to notify at change of use, ownership, tenant or process. Each
customer is obligated to notify the county when the following occurs in
connection with any premises from which such customer receives water service
from the county:
      (1)   Any structure or dwelling is to be sold, quit claimed, traded or
otherwise transferred;
      (2)   The use of the property has or will change from its existing use;
      (3)   There is a change in process that impacts or can significantly
impact the amount of water used or creates a new potential cross-connection as
described in §
52.05;
      (4)   There is a building expansion;
      (5)   There is a change of tenant;
      (6)   There are interior or exterior building changes that affect the use
or water usage upon the premises.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 USE OF WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Meters required.
      (1)   All premises using the Water Facilities shall pay a meter fee for
the county to install a water meter. Existing non-metered customers shall be
required to install a water meter upon (a) change of use, or (b) at the time
the property is transferred.
      (2)   All meters placed in service on any premises connected directly or
indirectly to the Water Facilities will be provided and owned by the county.
The county retains the right to inspect, repair and replace the meters upon
reasonable notice to the owner of the premises. If a customer fails or refuses
to allow the county reasonable access to premises on which a water meter is
located, the county reserves the right to terminate water service to such
premises.
      (3)   The property owner shall bear the entire expense of all repairs on
water meters on their premises due to freezing or from any other cause owing to
the negligence of the the property owner or his or her tenant. The Director
shall make the repairs and the cost thereof shall be billed at time and
material to and be paid by the property owner.
   (B)   Resale of water and unauthorized use. No water supplied by the county
Water Facilities shall be resold by any customer, unless expressly provided
otherwise by an agreement approved by the approving authority. No customer may
supply water to other houses, buildings or properties except for use on the
premises and for the purpose specified in such customer's approved application.
No person shall make or employ any other person to make any tap or connection
to a water service or undertake work upon a water service for alterations,
repairs, extensions or attachments without written permit from the county.
Resale or unauthorized use of water shall be grounds for discontinuance of
water service to the customer, or the premises, or both.
   (C)   Restrictions on water use. The following mandatory water conservation
regulation shall be applicable to all customers of the Public Works Department.
      (1)   Summer general water use restriction.
         (a)   The use of water from the county water supply system for
landscape irrigation (including shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers,
plants, vines, gardens vegetables and flowers) and all outside water use
including washing cars and vehicles and filling pools is prohibited between the
hours 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., from May 15 through September 15 of each year.
New lawns (less than three months old) and hand held water cans shall be
exempted from this provision.
         (b)   Customers with even-numbered addresses shall be limited to
watering lawns and gardens and other landscape uses, washing cars and vehicles,
and using water for outside use only on even-numbered days. Occupants with odd-
numbered addresses shall be limited to watering lawns and gardens and other
landscape uses, washing cars and vehicles, and using water for outside use only
on odd-numbered days. Addresses shall be determined based on billing address.
   (D)   Emergency water shortage.
      (1)   The Director is authorized, when the circumstances warrant, to
issue a declaration of chronic water shortage, in order to ensure the
maintenance of an adequate water supply to meet residential, business and
firefighting requirements. Upon the declaration of a chronic water shortage,
the following authorities or restrictions shall immediately be in force and
effect.
         (a)   Following the initial declaration of a chronic water shortage,
the Director is authorized, for all landscape water use, washing of cars and
vehicles, and outside water usage, to restrict or limit water usage to specific
hours or to totally prohibit such outside water usage.
         (b)   Public use conservation programs. When a chronic water shortage
situation arises, the Director is authorized to order all public users to
restrict activities calling for high water consumption. The high water
consumption category includes, but is not limited to, the testing and clearing
of fire hydrants, the cleaning of water mains, the conduct of fire drills,
street washing (except in emergencies), sewer flushing, and the watering of
public areas.
         (c)   Administration. The authority to administer and enforce this
chapter shall be with the Director or his or her designees as provided in §
52.99 . Because the county provides public water services in some
municipalities, the Director is authorized to delegate in writing enforcement
of this chapter within municipal boundaries to officers or employees of that
municipality, including court enforcement, if necessary.
         (d) Emergency response plan. The Public Works Department shall
establish an Emergency Response Plan for implementation during declared
emergency water shortages.
   (E)   Water conservation requirements.
      (1)   Plumbing fixtures.
         (a)   The Department will follow the Plumbing Code adopted by the
county.
         (b)   Plumbing fixtures in all new construction, as well as
replacement fixtures in existing construction, shall be labeled a WaterSense
product, as specified by the USEPA. If no USEPA WaterSense labeled products
exist for a type of plumbing fixture, then the fixture shall comply with
applicable water conservation provisions of the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill.
Adm. Code 890).
      (2)   Lavatories for public use. Restrooms intended for public use shall
be equipped with metering or self-closing lavatory faucets. This shall apply to
all new construction as well as to replacement faucets.
      (3)   Car wash facilities. All new commercial car wash facilities shall
be equipped with a water recycling system on both the wash and rinse water
units. All existing commercial car wash facilities shall be equipped with such
recycling systems when the systems are replaced.
      (4)   Water softeners. Residential water softeners shall use no more than
75 gallons during the entire regeneration cycle, and must be sized to
regenerate no more than three times per week.
      (5)   Air conditioning. In all new construction and in all new
remodeling, only closed-loop air conditioning systems shall be installed when
water is used.
   (F)   Requirements and restrictions related to meters.
      (1)   Installation. Meters shall be installed in a location that will
provide unobstructed access to the water meter by county personnel for
maintenance, repair and replacement of the water meter and connections to the
plumbing system. It is the sole responsibility of the owner of the property to
care for the water meter equipment, protect the meter from weather related
damage and from abuse or neglectful damage from occupants, pets, remodeling and
other activities.
      (2)   Reading meters. Lake County shall read or cause to be read every
water meter served by county water supply at such times as are necessary so
that the bills may be sent out at the proper times. If for any reason any
actual meter reading cannot be obtained for a customer during a billing cycle,
a bill may be rendered based on an estimate of water usage.
      (3)   Testing meters. Upon complaint of the consumer and payment of the
meter testing fee, such meter shall be removed and tested. If, upon testing,
the meter is not found to be within AWWA standards for water meter accuracy, it
shall be repaired or replaced and the fee returned to the consumer. If the
meter is found to be within AWWA standards for water meter accuracy the fee
shall be retained by the county and the meter reinstalled.
   (G)   Unauthorized interference or use with Water Facilities.
      (1)   No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stopcock,
hydrant or valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any
street, alley, public ground or place connected with or part of the Water
Facilities, nor pile or place any lumber, brick or building material or other
article, thing or hindrance within 12 feet of such Water Facilities, or so as
to in any manner hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the Fire Department
in reaching such facilities.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with
or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in the
water system, reservoir or plant, or any part thereof, or to injure, deface,
remove or displace any water main, hydrant, service pipe, water meter, shutoff
box, public fountain, valve, building or any part of the county's waterworks or
supply system.
      (3)   Unless approved in writing by the Director, no person except
authorized members of the county or authorized members of local fire protection
districts shall connect to any hydrant or other water source owned by the
county.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 LIABILITY.
   Service failures and interruptions. The right is hereby reserved to shut off
the service to any customer at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other
necessary purpose, any permit granted or regulation to the contrary
notwithstanding, provided that, except in emergencies, the county will attempt
to provide reasonable notice prior to such shutoff. These limitations are a
condition of service and a contractual limitation of liability.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 52.05 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of these rules and regulations regarding cross-
connection controls are:
      (1)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollutants by preventing backflow through the customer's water service
connection and into the public water supply system.
      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable
water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      (3)   To provide a cross-connection control program to ensure that
installed backflow prevention devices are adequately maintained and operating
properly to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water
supply systems.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   These rules and regulations regarding cross-connection controls
shall apply to all premises served directly or indirectly by the Water
Facilities.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of each customer to protect the Water
Facilities from contamination and to prevent backflow into the Water Facilities
by ensuring that all cross-connections are removed or that approved cross-
connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-
siphonage.
   (C)   Water system.
      (1)   Water system components. 
         (a)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts:
the Water Facilities and the consumer's water system.
            1.   For the purposes of this section, the Water Facilities shall
consist of the source facilities, the distribution system, and the service
lateral up to and including the corporation stop and shall include all those
facilities under the control of the Director up to the point where the
consumer's water system begins.
               A.   The source facilities shall include all components of the
facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of
water to the public water supply distribution system.
               B.   The public water supply distribution system shall include
the network of conduits and pipes used to deliver water from the source
facilities to the consumer's water system.
               C.   For purposes of section, the service lateral under the
control of the Director shall include the service pipe from the main up to and
including the corporation stop at the b-box.
            2.   For purposes of this section, the consumer's water system
shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the corporation stop used to
convey water into the building from the public water supply distribution system
to points of use.
   (D)   Cross-connection prohibited. Connections between public water supply
systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of
unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved
isolation methods or cross-connection control devices are installed, tested and
maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis.
      (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the Water
Facilities and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency. No
physical connection shall be allowed between the Water Facilities and any other
water supply except as authorized in writing by the Director.
      (2)   There shall be no arrangements or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter the Water Facilities.
   (E)   Protection required.
      (1)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on connections to
the public water supply in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill.
Adm. Code 890.1130 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system where, in the judgment of the
Director, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist.
      (2)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where one or more of
the following conditions exist:
         (a)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Director and the source is
approved by the Agency.
         (b)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the Water Facilities. This shall include premises
having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from
the Water Facilities but which are no longer under the sanitary control of the
Director.
         (c)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment
of the Director, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which
make it impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
         (d)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
         (e)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
      (3)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the Director determines that no
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
         (a)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
         (b)   Laboratories;
         (c)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
         (d)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations;
         (e)   Food or beverage processing plants;
         (f)   Chemical plants;
         (g)   Metal plating industries;
         (h)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
         (i)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
         (j)   Car washes;
         (k)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks;
         (l)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks;
         (m)   Golf courses;
         (n)   Irrigation;
         (o)   Fire suppression system.
      (4)   If in the judgment of the Director or his or her authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the Water Facilities, the Director shall give notice to the consumer
to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection
to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his or her own expense. If the consumer fails, refuses or is unable
to install such device or devices immediately, or if the Director reasonably
believes that an imminent danger of harmful contamination of the Water
Facilities exists, water service to the premises shall be discontinued until
such device or devices have been installed or until the imminent danger to the
public water supply has been eliminated. Water service to such premise shall
not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and until the applicable
reconnection fee is paid to Lake County. The consumer may submit a written
appeal of decisions in this section to the Director.
   (F)   Surveys and investigations. In the interest of the public health
safety and welfare, the IEPA requires the Department to administer a cross-
connection control program which is designed to protect the integrity of the
Department's drinking water system. To comply with IEPA regulations, the
Department is required to:
      (1)   Survey all public water system customers, to determine whether a
cross-connection may exist in their home or business. The survey requests the
home or business to identify the plumbing fixtures present, and how the water
is being used. The survey aids the Department in identifying actual or
potential cross connections, as well as any plumbing fixtures installed to
protect against backflow.
      (2)   Review the survey information to determine whether, or not, a
follow-up inspection of the customer's plumbing system is required. If a
follow-up inspection is required, the customer will be notified to arrange a
meeting at their residence or business.
   (G)   Type of protection required.
      (1)   The type of protection required under divisions (E)(1), (E)(2), and
(E)(3) above shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
         (a)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
         (b)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed
where the Water Facilities may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
         (c)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the Water Facilities may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
         (d)   A lawn irrigation installation shall use a reduced pressure zone
(RPZ) device per Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
         (e)   All exterior hose bibs shall have a vacuum breaker or air gap.
      (2)   The type of protection required under divisions (E)(4) and (E)(5)
above of these regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation
or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
      (3)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used
for a fire protection pressure system, reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public
water supply when:
         (a)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or
other chemicals;
         (b)   Water is pumped into the fire safety system from another source;
or
         (c)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source, or water can
be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
         (d)   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced
into the fire safety system.
      (4)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve.
      (5)   Booster pumps. Where a booster pump has been installed on the
service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a
double check valve and a low pressure cut-off device designed to shut-off the
booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the
pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (H)   Backflow prevention devices.
      (1)   Only approved backflow prevention devices may be employed for
purposes of complying with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Installation of an approved backflow prevention device shall be
made in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall be tested and
approved by a Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector prior to initial
operation. The consumer shall ensure that maintenance as recommended by the
manufacturer of the device is performed and that the manufacturer's maintenance
manual is available on-site.
   (I)   Inspection and maintenance.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by this chapter are installed to have the
devices inspected, tested, maintained and repaired in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Testing shall occur in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or as
specified in the manufacturer's instructions.
         (a)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or by-
passed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
         (b)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at
time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five days.
         (c)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall
be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently
if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
         (d)   Low pressure cut-off devices shall be tested at the time of
installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer, and required service performed within five days.
      (2)   Inspection and testing shall be performed by a licensed plumber who
is a Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector. Proof of inspection and
approval shall be provided to the Director in writing within 20 calendar days
of the inspection.
      (3)   Device testing and records.
         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         (b)   Records submitted to the Public Works Department shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with applicable law.
         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, type and date of repairs.
         (d)   The test report shall include:
            1.   Date of each test;
            2.   Name and license number of person performing the test;
            3.   Test result;
               A.    Device serial number;
               B.    Physical location;
               C.   Test pass or fail;
               D.   Test kit used and calibration date;
            4.   Repairs or servicing required;
            5.   Repairs and date completed; and
            6.   Service performed and dated completed.
         (e)   The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing and repair as required by this chapter for a period of at least five
years.
         (f)   CCCDIs shall submit a copy of each test report directly to the
Public Works Department within 20 calendar days of each test. However, the
owner shall bear the ultimate responsibility to ensure that all reports are
submitted to the county as prescribed by the provision of this chapter. CCCDIs
shall submit test reports for both passing and failing test results.
      (4)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations
are found to be defective, the Director shall be notified of the results of the
testing in writing within three days of the test/inspection and the defective
backflow prevention device shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer within ten days. Written notice of the repair or replacement and
results of the post-repair re-testing shall be provided in writing to the
Director within three days of such corrective action.
      (5)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the Director.
      (6)   Any backflow prevention device that does not have a manufacturer's
serial number shall be replaced immediately.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 INSPECTION.
   Right of access and inspection.
   (A)   The Director, with the consent of the property owner, shall access any
premises connected directly or indirectly to the Water Facilities for purposes
of reasonable inspection to ascertain whether such premises are connected to
the county water system, to inspect the plumbing within the building and the
number and type of water connections to the water system, and to inspect the
water meter on the premises.
   (B)   Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, or where the Director has reasonable cause to believe that
there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to
or in violation of this chapter which makes the structure or premises unsafe,
dangerous or hazardous, the Director is authorized to enter the structure or
premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by
this chapter, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that
credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure
or premises be unoccupied, the Director shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or
premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Director shall have
recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 VALIDITY; SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
   (B)   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter, which
can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 52.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.09 VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Variances from the regulatory standards of this chapter may be granted
in accordance with the requirements provided below. Any application for a
variance shall be made to, and decided by, the Engineering Supervisor.
   (B)   Individuals seeking a variance must submit a letter addressed to the
Engineering Supervisor. The letter must contain:
      (1)   A request for a variance;
      (2)   Citation to the relevant section of this chapter;
      (3)   A narrative describing the reason for the variance request.
   (C)   The Public Works Department shall grant or deny the variance request
if the Engineering Supervisor finds that all of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances that apply to
the subject of the request that do not apply to similar properties, projects or
requests.
      (2)   The variance will not threaten public health, safety, or welfare,
or create a nuisance.
      (3)   No additional public expense will result
      (4)   Cost to the applicant of strictly complying with this chapter is
not the primary reason for granting the variance.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Fines. Any person or user who violates any provision or section of
this chapter shall be subject to a fine as authorized by the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance, the Rate Ordinance, or by statute of the
State of Illinois. Each violation of a separate provision or section of this
chapter shall be a separate offense and subject to a separate fine. Each day
that a violation exists or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Any fine or fines for these separate offenses shall be assessed in accordance
with applicable ordinances or state statute.
   (B)   Administrative adjudication.
      (1)   Enforcement Officer. All sections of this chapter may be enforced
by the Director, Director of the Lake County Planning, Building and Development
Department, or the designee of either of the above.
      (2)   Warning of ordinance violation. The Enforcement Officer, as defined
in division (B)(1) above shall have the authority to issue a warning of
ordinance violation when an individual has been found to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter. The warning shall, at a minimum, identify the
violation for which it is being issued, shall include the address in which the
violation has occurred, shall require the violator to cease the violation(s) or
take such action required to abate the violation(s) within a reasonable time
for the performance of any act it requires, and shall state that a notice of
ordinance violation may be issued if the warning is not adhered to as
specified.
      (3)   Notice of ordinance violation. If an individual has previously been
issued a warning of ordinance violation and the individual fails to abate the
violation by the date specified in the warning, the Enforcement Officer shall
have authority to issue a notice of ordinance violation. If administrative
adjudication is found to be the appropriate remedy to resolve the violation,
the notice must be served in accordance with and shall contain all information
specified and required in the Lake County Administrative Adjudication
Ordinance. Prior to the hearing date documented on the notice of ordinance
violation, the respondent may elect to abate or cease the violation for which
the notice of ordinance violation was issued, pay the fine listed on the notice
of ordinance violation, and not participate in the hearing.
   (C)   Injunctive relief. The Director may also take any other available
legal action necessary to prevent or to remedy any violation, including seeking
injunctive relief or pursuing the disconnection of water service as specified
in division (D) below.
   (D)   Water service disconnection.
      (1)   (a)   The Director shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises for either
(i) nonpayment of permit fees, water service charges, or any other costs or
expenses that a customer is obligated to pay under this chapter but has failed
or refused to pay, or (ii) nonpayment of fees, charges, or other costs or
expenses that a customer is obligated to pay under the Sewer Use Ordinance
(Chapter 53) or any applicable agreement that the county has entered into
relating to sanitary sewerage services. Prior to disconnection the county will
mail three notices to the service address on file and the customer may contact
the Director to settle the outstanding balance or make payment arrangements to
avoid service disconnection. The third and final notice shall state "No further
notices will be sent to you prior to disconnection."
         (b)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, any
property found to be in violation of this chapter or the County's Sewer Use
Ordinance (Chapter 53) for reasons other than nonpayment shall be subject to
discontinuation of water service in the event such violation is not corrected
within 48 hours after written notice identifying the violative conditions.
         (c)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected deficiencies in conformance with this chapter and to the
satisfaction of the Director, and all fees are paid.
      (2)   In cases where, in the Director's judgment, a health hazard exists
or such disconnection is necessary to protect the public health, welfare and
safety no prior notice shall be required. This may include that a backflow
prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested,
maintained, inspected and repaired in a manner acceptable to the Director, or
if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a
low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and
maintained in working order.
      (3)   For any premises where water service has been disconnected, water
service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected
or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this chapter and
to the satisfaction of the Director, and all required fees are paid.
      (4)   Neither Lake County nor or its employees, agents or designees shall
be liable to any customers of the county public water supply system for any
injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of the
customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether
or not the termination of the water supply was with or without notice.
      (5)   Where violations of this chapter result in impacts to the public
water supply (including, but not limited to, the contamination of the public
water supply system through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly
installed, maintained or repaired backflow prevention device, or a device which
has been bypassed), the consumer responsible for the impact shall bear the cost
to repair and/or clean-up the Water Facilities.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect or turn on any
water service which has been disconnected by the county without written
approval of the Director. Any person found guilty of violating this section may
be fined in accordance with division (A) above. In addition, when the county is
notified that water service has been unlawfully reconnected, the county shall
have the power to immediately disconnect such service without notice.
      (7)   All costs incurred by the county in disconnecting water service may
be borne by and be the responsibility of the owner of the property served. All
such costs shall be paid to the county before service is restored to the
property.
      (8)   Disconnection. A customer whose service has been disconnected can
have that service restored on the same day, provided that all outstanding fees
are paid and reconnection can be performed before 5:00 p.m.
      (9)   Service suspension. A minimum bill (2,000 gallons/month) will be
charged for services that have been temporarily suspended. If turn-on/turn-off
service is requested by the property owner, a fee will be assessed per the
county's Rate Ordinance.
   (E)   Liability. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
in addition to the fine provided shall become liable to the county for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the county by reason of such violations,
whether the same was caused before the notice.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Introductory provisions
Sewer Use
   
53.05   Use of public sewers
   
53.06   Connections to public sewer
   
53.07   Capacity, management, operation and maintenance (CMOM)
   
53.08   Residential septage and holding tank waste discharge permit
   
53.09   Fats, oil and grease (FOG)
   
53.10   Inspection
   
53.11   Validity; severability
   
53.12   Effective date
   
53.13   Variance procedure
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be officially known and cited as the Sewer
Use Ordinance of Lake County, Illinois. References made herein to "this
chapter" shall be interpreted as referring to the Sewer Use Ordinance.
   (B)   Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the statutory authority
conferred by 55 ILCS 5/5-15021.
   (C)   Applicability and jurisdiction. This chapter shall apply to all
premises served directly or indirectly by the public sewerage system owned and
operated by Lake County.
   (D)   Minimum requirements. The standards of this chapter are minimum
requirements. The issuance of any permit, certificate or approval in accordance
with the standards and requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the
recipient of such permit, certificate or approval from the responsibility of
complying with all other applicable requirements of any other local, county,
state or federal agency, having jurisdiction over the structures or land uses
for which the permit, certificate or approval was issued.
   (E)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to define and set forth the
regulations of the county concerning connection to, use, and maintenance of its
public sewerage system and inspection and the required maintenance of all
public and private sewer services connected thereto.
   (F)   Word usage and construction of language.
      (1)   Meanings and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this chapter shall be construed according to the purpose set out
in division (E) above.
      (2)   Headings, illustrations and text. In case of any difference of
meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any heading,
drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control.
      (3)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists
of items or examples that use terms such as "including", "such as," or similar
language are intended to provide examples. They are not intended to be
exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
      (4)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last
day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the county, that day shall be
excluded.
      (5)   References to other regulations, publications and documents.
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or
document, that reference shall be construed as referring to the most recent
edition of such resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document or to
the relevant successor document, unless otherwise expressly stated.
      (6)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the county to perform an
act or duty, that provision shall be construed as authorizing such officer,
department head or employee to delegate that responsibility to others over whom
they have authority.
      (7)   Technical and nontechnical terms. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
      (8)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies, and
agencies to which references are made are those of Lake County, unless
otherwise expressly provided.
      (9)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall," "will," and
"must" are mandatory, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The
words "may" and "should" are advisory and discretionary terms.
      (10)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
         (a)   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events apply; and
         (b)   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events may apply.
      (11)   Tenses and plurals. Words used in one tense (past, present, or
future) include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (12)   Numerical calculations. Unless otherwise specifically indicated,
for standards involving the use of numbers, all calculations shall be rounded
to the nearest hundredth.
   (G)   Conflicting provisions.
      (1)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of
this chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government,
the more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law.
      (2)   Conflict with other county regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions
found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the county, the more
restrictive provision will control. No text amendment, variance or condition of
approval placed on a permit or other form of county approval under this chapter
shall have the effect of nullifying, abrogating or diminishing the provisions
of any other county ordinance.
      (3)   Violations continue. Any violation of the previous sewer use
ordinance of the county shall continue to be a violation under this chapter and
shall be subject to penalties and enforcement under § 53.99, unless the use,
construction or other activity is consistent with the express terms of this
chapter, in which case enforcement action shall cease, except to the extent of
collecting penalties for violations that occurred before the adoption of this
chapter.
   (H)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
AIRD  Active interior recovery device
BMPs  Best management practices
BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR   Code of Federal Regulations
CMOM  Capacity, management, operation, and maintenance
DFU   Drainage fixture unit
IEPA  Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
FOG   Fats, oils, and grease
FSE   Food service establishment
gpd   gallons per day
GRS   Grease removal system
LCPW  Lake County Public Works
mg/l  milligrams per liter
NFD   Non-food service establishment FOG discharger
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
PE    Population equivalent
PED   Passive exterior device
PID   Passive interior device
RCE   Residential customer equivalent
SSO   Sanitary sewer overflow
TSS   Total suspended solids USEPA
POTW  Publicly owned treatment works
 
   (I)   Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
      ACCESSIBLE. When applied to required pretreatment monitoring or treatment
equipment, shall mean direct access without the necessity of removing any
panel, door, vehicle, equipment, materials, or other similar obstruction.
      ACTIVE INTERIOR RECOVERY DEVICE (AIRD). A GRS that has provision to
automatically remove separated FOG and/or settled solids from the tank and
collect them for disposal.
      ADDITIVE. Any material, in any physical form, put into a GRS or any drain
lines or appurtenances discharging to a GRS intended in any way to modify the
operation of the GRS.
      ADMINISTRATIVE FINE. A punitive monetary charge unrelated to treatment
cost, which is assessed by the Director or his or her representative rather
than a court.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent
or reduce the pollution of "waters of the United States" as defined by the
Clean Water Act 40 CFR 230.3. BMPs also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control water reclamation facility site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
material storage.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/
l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of carbonaceous (organic) matter using
laboratory procedures as described in Standard Methods for the examination of
water and wastewater, latest approved edition or other methods approved by 40
CFR 136.
      BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.4 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall. The BUILDING DRAINS from the ground level or upper floors
flows by gravity to the building sewer. The BUILDING DRAINS below the basement
floor flow to and ejector pit and is pumped to the building sewer via an
overhead sewer.
      BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal. Also referred to as the BUILDING'S SEWER SERVICE.
The BUILDING SEWER typically exits the structure approximately four feet above
the basement floor elevation.
      CLEAN-OUT. A pipe that extends from the ground surface to the interior of
the passive exterior device (PED), or other GRS device, so as to allow access,
maintenance, and inspection of the interior of the device.
      CMOM (CAPACITY, MANAGEMENT, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE). The program that
provides direction and sets goals for a collection system operation and
maintenance.
      CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR). The official compilation of rules and
regulations of the agencies of the United States government.
      COLLECTION SYSTEM. The sewers and appurtenances for collecting,
transporting, pumping, metering, sampling, and treating wastewater that are
part of the LCPW sewerage system, but are not owned by the county. A lateral
and its connection to the LCPW sewerage system are part of a COLLECTION SYSTEM.
      COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
      CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which wastewater is
discharged through. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an external drop.
The purpose of the CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
      COUNTY. The County of Lake, a political subdivision of the State of
Illinois.
      COUNTY SANITARY SEWER. Any sanitary sewer owned and operated by the
county.
      CUSTOMER. Any person, municipality or user that discharges wastewater
into the county sewerage system.
      DEMAND INSPECTION. An inspection at any time from an SSO or blockage that
occurs at or downstream of a user to determine the cause of the SSO and who is
liable for any costs incurred by the county.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Lake County Public Works or his or her duly
authorized deputy or designee.
      DISCHARGE AUTHORIZATION. A wastewater discharge permit authorizing users
to discharge wastewater to the LCPW.
      DOMESTIC SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER. The liquid and water borne wastes derived
from ordinary living processes, free from industrial wastes, and of such
character to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the
water reclamation facility.
      DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT (DFU). means a value used to determine the required
drainage capacity from the fixtures and their service systems as defined in the
Illinois Plumbing Code.
      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
      EFFLUENT TEE-PIPE. A tee-shaped pipe extending from the ground surface
below grade into the PED to a depth allowing recovery of water located under
the layer of fats, oils, and/or greases to be discharged.
      EXISTING SOURCE. An existing user who is discharging wastewater prior to
the effective date of this chapter.
      FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG). Refers to the sum of polar hexane
extractable material (P-HEM) (polar hydrocarbons such as vegetable oils, animal
fats, and other highly biodegradable oils) and of silica gel treated hexane
extractable material (SGT-HEM) (non-polar hydrocarbons such as petroleum oil,
non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin) as determined by
HEM and SGT-HEM analyses. FOG is interchangeable with HEXANE EXTRACTABLE
MATERIAL (HEM).
      FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of
1972 (Public Law 92-500 and Public Law 93-243) and the Clean Water Act of 1977
(Public Law 95-217).
      FOG HAULER. Any waste disposal firm licensed by the Illinois Department
of Agriculture that hauls and disposes of fats, oils, and grease wastes as
described in this chapter.
      GALLONS PER DAY (gpd). A rate of water, wastewater or other flow.
      GARBAGE. The solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration
of time.
      GREASE/GREASES. See FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG).
      GREASE INTERCEPTOR. Any relatively large in-ground or above-ground tank
with internal plumbing and baffling intended to act as a GRS to serve one or
more fixtures and which shall be remotely located.
      GREASE REMOVAL SYSTEM (GRS). Any device designed for, and intended for,
separating, collecting, and removing waterborne FOG and settleable solids prior
to discharging to the water reclamation facility. This includes any automatic
GRS.
      GREASE TRAP. Any relatively small appurtenance with internal
configuration and internal or external flow control intended to function as a
GRS or automatic GRS.
      HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL (HEM). The oil and grease extracted from a
wastewater sample using USEPA Method 1664 as found in USEPA document EPA-821-B-
94-004, October, 1994.
      IMMEDIATE SERVICE AREA. The area of a specific residential or
nonresidential development delineated on a conceptual, preliminary or final
engineering plan proposed to be directly serviced by a specific size and
quantity of public sewer connected to an existing or proposed sanitary sewer
interceptor. This area is exclusive of the ultimate service area.
      INTERCEPTOR SEWER. Any public sewer 12 inches in diameter or larger that
collects sewage flows from local sewers and conveys them to the water
reclamation facility.
      INTERCEPTOR SEWER CAPACITY. The total flow rate through an interceptor
sewer segment that the LCPW determines is available for allocation to its
customers, expressed in population equivalents.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, either: (1) inhibits or disrupts the water
reclamation facility, its treatment processes or operations; (2) inhibits or
disrupts its biosolids (sludge) processes, use or disposal; and (3) is a cause
of a violation of the county's water reclamation facility NPDES permit or of
the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/ regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder:
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA),
including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act;
the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and
Sanctuaries Act.
      LAKE COUNTY PUBLIC WORKS (LCPW). Lake County (Illinois) Department of
Public Works.
      LOCAL LIMITS. Limits on specific pollutants in wastewater discharged to
local sewers, developed by the LCPW, and applied to the user types.
      LOCAL MUNICIPAL SEWER. A sanitary sewer and related appurtenances and
facilities, not owned or operated by the county, which is in a municipality or
other jurisdiction, and which eventually discharges to a county sanitary sewer
or a county water reclamation facility. Also referred to as a MUNICIPAL SEWAGE
COLLECTION SYSTEM.
      MANIFEST. A log or document record of the hauler name, address, and state
license/permit number; and, the volume, date of removal and disposal
destination of pumped materials or wastes from a grease trap or other grease
interceptor device. (See 415 ILCS 5/22.30(d) and (e).)
      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l).A unit of concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any non-manmade discharge into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake, or other body of surface water.
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. Any
permit or equivalent document to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant
to Section 402 of the Federal Act.
      ORDINANCE. The Lake County Sewer Use Ordinance (this chapter) as amended
from time to time by Lake County Board.
      OVERHEAD SEWER. Piping that conveys pumped flows from the ejector pit
below the basement floor level up to the building sewer. All plumbing fixture
flows that are collected below the level of the basement or crawl space floor
are to be directed to an ejector pit and pumped up the level of the service
sewer exiting the house.
      PASSIVE EXTERIOR DEVICE (PED). An oil/water separating container with no
moving parts that requires pumping and is housed outside a building or
structure.
      PASSIVE INTERIOR DEVICE (PID). An oil/water separating container with no
moving parts that requires normal manual cleaning, by pumping or bailing, and
is housed inside a building or structure.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the water reclamation facility into
the receiving water in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the county's permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation).
      PERMITTEE. A person or user given written authorization to discharge into
a county sewer.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental
entities.
      pH. The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated
by taking the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      POLAR HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL (P-HEM). Vegetable oils, animal fats,
other highly degradable oils and other polar hydrocarbons as determined by
subtracting a sample's SGT-HEM content from its HEM content. POLAR FOG is
defined as floatable oils, fat or grease of animal or vegetable origin.
      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial, agricultural waste,
or any other contaminate.
      POPULATION EQUIVALENT (PE). A term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other wastes on a treatment works or stream. ONE POPULATION
EQUIVALENT is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and
0.20 pounds of suspended solids.
      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the
county's sewerage system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on a user.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Any Lake County prohibitive
discharge standard as set forth in §
54.05 of this Title V, Lake County specific limitation on discharge as set
forth in §
54.05(A) of this Title V, a State of Illinois pretreatment standard, or a
national categorical pretreatment standard (when effective).
      PRIVATE SEWER. A sanitary sewer not owned by the county or other public
agency.
      PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
54.05(A) of this Title V.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sanitary sewer owned, operated and maintained by a public
agency. PUBLIC SEWERS are inclusive of both county sanitary sewers and local
municipal sewers.
      PUMP-AND-RETURN METHOD. The method of decanting or discharging of removed
waste back into the GRS from which waste was removed or to any other GRS or
sanitary sewer connection.
      RATE ORDINANCE. An ordinance setting charges, fees, and rates for
customers served by the county water and sewer system.
      RECEIVING WATER. A surface body of water into which wastewater or
effluent is discharged.
      RECORD. Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual, or
electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical
form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an
authority. A RECORD includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or
printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recording, tapes (including
computer tapes), computer printouts, and optical disks. A RECORD does not
include drafts, notes, preliminary computations, and like materials prepared
for the originator's personal use, or prepared by the originator in the name of
a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the
personal property of the custodian, and have no relation to his or her office;
materials to which access is limited by copyright or patent; and published
materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which
are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public
library.
      RECORD DRAWING. Construction drawings revised to reflect all changes made
in the specifications and design drawings during the construction process, and
showing the exact dimensions, geometry, and location of all elements of the
work completed under the contract.
      REMODELED. Any facility that requires a building permit to make planned
changes to an existing or a new FOG producing facility.
      RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER EQUIVALENT (RCE). A unit basis for billing sewage
collection and treatment service which is equivalent to a single-family
residential customer with an average sewage load of two and one-half times that
of a "population equivalent", unless defined otherwise by an intergovernmental
agreement with the county.
      RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.
      SAMPLING CHAMBER. A clean out or small sampling box located after the
effluent pipe of a GRS that is used to obtain a representative sample of
effluent to be used to demonstrate compliance with the local limits of the
county.
      SANITARY SEWER. Any pipe conduit, or other device used that collects and
conveys sewage and polluted industrial wastes and to which stormwater, surface
drainage, groundwater or unpolluted wastewater are not intentionally admitted.
      SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW (SSO). Any unplanned discharge from the sanitary
sewer system.
      SANITARY SEWER/WATER PERMIT. A written permit issued to a customer
granting authorization to connect to the LCPW sewerage system.
      SEPTAGE. Wastewater from a septic tank, soil absorption field, holding
tank, vault toilet, or privy. SEPTAGE does not include the waste from a grease
trap.
      SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any domestic and/or residential sewage from holding
tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
      SETTLEABLE SOLIDS. The solids that sink to the bottom of water,
wastewater, or other liquid, and which is amenable to measurement by the
methods described in Standard Methods for the examination of water and
wastewater, latest approved edition or other methods approved by 40 CFR 136.
      SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, food preparation, and the like).
      SEWER SERVICE PIPE. See BUILDING SEWER.
      SEWERAGE SYSTEM. All facilities of the county for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes, including sanitary
sewers, interceptor sewers, sanitary pumping facilities, and water reclamation
facilities.
      SILICA GEL TREATED HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL (SGT-HEM). The total
petroleum hydrocarbons extracted from a wastewater sample using USEPA Method
1664 as found in USEPA document EPA-821-B-94-004, October, 1994.
      SLUDGE. Any material or solids, either organic or inorganic, that has
settled to the bottom of a grease trap, tank, lagoon, clarifier, and the like.
      SOLIDS TRANSFER/GREASE RECOVERY DEVICE. An active automatic pretreatment
device, which macerates coarse solids and separates/recovers free floating
grease, fats and oils from effluent. The device cleans itself of accumulated
grease, fats and oils at least once every 24 hours, utilizing electromechanical
apparatus to accomplish recovery and removal.
      STATE. The State of Illinois.
      STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A conduit or pipe that conveys stormwater
runoff and surface water drainage but excludes sewage and polluted industrial
wastes.
      STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended matter that floats on
the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering and is amenable to measurement by
the methods described in Standard Methods for the examination of water and
wastewater, latest approved edition or other methods approved by 40 CFR 136.
      TWENTY FIVE PERCENT RULE (25% RULE). The rule by which all grease traps
and/or grease interceptors shall be cleaned. For example: If the total depth
(TD) of the PED is 40 inches, the maximum allowable depth (d) of floatable
grease and settled sludge equals 40 inches multiplied by 0.25 or d = TD x 0.25
= 10 inches. Therefore, the maximum allowable depth of floatable grease and
sludge of the vessel should not exceed ten inches.
      ULTIMATE SERVICE AREA. The total area delineated in the vicinity of an
immediate service area that is tributary to an existing or proposed sanitary
sewer interceptor serving the immediate area. This is inclusive of the
immediate service area.
      U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (USEPA). The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division
Director, or other duly authorized official of that agency.
      USER. The type of user "residential, institutional/governmental,
commercial," or "industrial" as defined herein.
         Commercial User. Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
         Institutional/Governmental User.
            1.   Includes schools, churches, penal institutions, and users
associated with federal, state, and local governments.
            2.   Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities
involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance
into products. Industrial Users may be classified as follows:
               A.    CAT IU. Categorical industrial user.
               B.   FS E. Food service establishment.
               C.   NS FE. Non-food service establishment.
               D.   SIU . Significant industrial user. Except as provided in
division 3.A.(ii) of this definition below, the term SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL
USER means:
                  (i)    All industrial users subject to Categorical
Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N;
and
                  (ii)    Any other industrial user that: discharges an average
of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding
sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a
process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as
such by the Control Authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) on the basis that
the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)).
                  (iii)    Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the
criteria in division 3.D.(ii) of this definition above has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Control Authority (as defined in 40
CFR 403.12(a)) may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40
CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant
industrial user.
         Residential User. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, and permanent multi-family dwellings.
      WASTE HAULER. Any person or waste disposal firm who transports waste to a
receiving station.
      WASTEWATER. The combination of the liquid and water carrying industrial
or domestic wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions including polluted cooling water,
whether treated or untreated.
      WATER RECLAMATION FACILITY. Structures, equipment, and processes required
for the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of domestic and
industrial wastes and to transport treated effluent to a receiving water.
      WATER RECLAMATION FACILITY EFFLUENT. The discharge from the county's
water reclamation facilities into the receiving water.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
SEWER USE
§ 53.05 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   Use of public sewer required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to
be deposited in an unsanitary manner human waste on public or private property
within any area under the jurisdiction of the county.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within any
area under the jurisdiction of the county any sewage or other polluted waters
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Lake County Health Department and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
      (3)   Except as hereinafter provided and subject to the provisions of
Article V of the County Board of Health Ordinance, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
      (4)   (a)   The owners of all existing houses, building, or properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated
within the county and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer
of the county, is after notice from the county hereby required to install at
the owner's expense suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The connection shall be made within 180 days after
the date of official notice to do so provided that the public sewer is within
300 feet from the nearest property line of a single family dwelling and 1,000
feet from the nearest property boundary of a nonresidential, multi-family, or
subdivision property boundary.
         (b)   The county will not issue any permit or approval to repair or
upgrade an existing private disposal system where the public sanitary sewer is
within 300 feet of the property line of a single family dwelling and 1,000 feet
from the nearest property boundary of a non-residential, multi-family, or
subdivision property boundary. Owners whose private disposal system requires
repairs or upgrades, plans to sell or have a change of use of the property
shall notify LCPW and the Lake County Health Department, and then abandon the
existing system in accordance with the Lake County Health Department
regulations and connect to the public sewer within one 180 days of the
notification.
         (c)   The owner shall pay all costs of connection and sewer main
extension fees.
   (B)   Private sewage disposal.
      (1)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions
of division (A) above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of the Lake County Health
Department.
      (2)   When a public sanitary sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer within 180 days after the date
of official notice to do so and the private sewage disposal system shall be
abandoned in accordance with Lake County Health Department regulations.
      (3)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the building
or zoning authority having jurisdiction over the property.
   (C)   Building sewers and connections.
      (1)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written sanitary sewer/water permit from the
Director.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater to any public sanitary
sewer except those wastewaters that are in compliance with standards
promulgated pursuant to the federal Act, the state Act, or any rules,
regulations, ordinances or standards of the county.
      (3)   The owner of a building or his or her agent seeking to connect to
the public sewer shall complete a sanitary sewer/water permit application as
furnished by the county. The sanitary sewer/water permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Director. An industrial user, as a condition
of permit authorization, must complete the industrial user survey (see LCPW
website for a copy) and provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics, flow and type of activity.
      (4)   Each sanitary sewer which is designed and is to be connected so as
to be an integral part of the public sanitary sewer system shall be constructed
pursuant to a sanitary sewer/water permit issued by the county and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, where required.
      (5)   A new or supplemental sanitary sewer/water permit, connection fee
and/or Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit may be required for
existing buildings or premises when there is a change of use, a change in
process, a change of the constituents or flow of the sewage discharged from
such premises.
      (6)   A sanitary sewer/water permit will only be issued and a building
sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage system, including sewers, pump stations and water
reclamation facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
      (7)   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The person installing,
maintaining or repairing the building sewer for the owner shall (a) be a
licensed plumber or sewer contractor and (b) indemnify the county for any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation.
      (8)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building, except that where an existing building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and the rear lot does not have frontage and no
private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through
an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
building sewer.
      (9)   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only after an internal video inspection of the building sewer has
been completed and either provided to (in digital format) or witnessed by the
Director and has been found by the Director to meet all of the requirements of
this chapter.
      (10)   Each unit of a multi-unit residential (e.g., condos and townhomes)
or commercial establishment (e.g., strip malls) must have its own building
drain and building sewer.
      (11)   The connection of the building sewer into a county sanitary sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes, this
chapter, and other applicable rules and regulations of the county and the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois by Illinois Society
of Professional Engineers, et al. All such connections shall be made gastight
and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the Director before installation.
      (12)   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off or sub-surface drainage
to any building sewer or building drain which is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
         (b)   The above requirements and prohibitions shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
            1.   Downspout s. No downspouts or roof drains shall be connected
to the sanitary sewer system.
            2.    Footing/foundation drains. No footing drains or drainage
tiles shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
            3.   Sump pumps. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge
ground waters or other storm waters shall not be discharged to a public
sanitary sewer. Ejector pumps installed to receive, and discharge floor drain
flow or other wastewater shall be connected to the sanitary sewers.
            4.   Window well and area drains. No window well or area drains
shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. Area drains include, but are
not limited to, dumpster drains, stairwell drains, yard drains and dock drains.
            5.   Drain tiles. Discharge from drain tiles shall not be directed
to the sanitary sewer system.
   (D)   Prohibitive discharge. The user/permitee shall not discharge any
pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance
of the wastewater treatment or sludge disposal process of the water reclamation
facilities. Prohibitive discharges include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the
water reclamation facilities, including, but not limited to, waste streams with
a closed flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees
Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases, including herbicides and insecticides, in sufficient quantity either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, so as to injure or interfere with
the wastewater treatment or sludge disposal process , or to constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, or create a public nuisance in the receiving waters of
the water reclamation facility, or to exceed the limitations set forth in any
local, state or national discharge standards.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than
9.5.
      (4)   Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction of the
flow in sanitary sewers, or other interference with the operation of the water
reclamation facilities such as, but not limited to animal guts, tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, wax, grease, tar,
plastics, wood, ungrounded garbage, paper (wipes, towels, dishes, cups, and the
like), milk containers, and the like, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
      (5)   Debris removed from municipal or industrial stormwater catch
basins, commercial grease traps, industrial processes, shop basins or car wash
basins.
      (6)   Any radioactive wastes with combined radium (Ra 226/Ra 228) greater
that 5.0 pCi/l.
      (7)   Any other biological or chemical agents that may interfere with the
operation or performance of the wastewater treatment or sludge disposal process
of the water reclamation facilities.
      (8)   The discharge of the following described substances, materials,
waters, or wastes shall be limited to concentrations or quantities which will
not harm either the treatment processes or equipment of the water reclamation
facility, and will not have an adverse effect on the receiving water, or will
not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
         (a)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade).
         (b)   Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l)
of non-polar (SGT-HEM) FOG defined as petroleum oil, non- biodegradable cutting
oils, grease or other mineral oils.
         (c)   Wastewater containing more than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l)
of polar (P-HEM) FOG defined as floatable oils, fat or grease of animal or
vegetable origin.
         (d)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, with no
particle greater than one-half inch in any direction.
         (e)   Any waters or wastes containing color producing or odor
producing substances that will inhibit, interfere or pass through the treatment
process.
         (f)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
the treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the water reclamation facility's effluent cannot meet the
requirements of the agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
         (g)   Any waters or wastes which result in the release of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, and/or
form suspended solids which interfere with the wastewater treatment system, or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
         (h)   Materials which exert or cause:
            1.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute an excessive load on the water reclamation
facility, in the opinion of the LCPW.
            2.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate).
         (i)   Waters or wastes containing chlorine above 2 mg/l.
      (9)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged a wastewater
containing items or pollutants that could clog or damage the county's sewerage
system including (but not limited to) the following items:
         (a)   Wet/dry cleaning cloths (Swiffer, and the like);
         (b)   Any plastics (bags, gloves, condoms);
         (c)   Sanitary napkins and tampons;
         (d)   Antibacterial wipes (Lysol, and the like);
         (e)   Cooking oil, fat and grease;
         (f)   Diapers and diaper wipes;
         (g)   Cloth, rags and string;
         (h)   Laundry dryer sheets;
         (i)   Pharmaceutical drugs;
         (j)   Over-the-counter medicines;
         (k)   Household cleaning chemicals;
         (l)   Hygiene or personal care products;
         (m)   Fuels, motor oil and antifreeze;
         (n)   Paints and paint thinners;
         (o)   Perfumes and cosmetics;
         (p)   Lawn care chemicals.
   (E)   Application for connection. If requested sewer service requires the
installation of any sewer main, any applicant whose building, structure or
premises directly benefits from such main extension shall pay with such
application the cost to install the main (including, but not limited to
construction cost, permit fees, and all engineering, administrative and legal
expenses). Such payment shall be made in addition to any other connection fees
in force at the time of the application. Any extension of the main shall be
installed in accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Department and
shall be installed along the entire frontage of the premises to be served to
the next adjacent property as determined by the Director.
      (1)   No connection shall be made to the county's sanitary sewer system
or to any tributary sanitary sewer system, and no additional use shall be made
of an existing connection until an appropriate sanitary sewer/water permit for
such connection or additional use has been issued by the county. Prior to the
issuance of such permit by the county, an application shall be properly
completed and filed with the county and all applicable fees and charges paid in
full. In addition, the applicant shall submit plans and specifications for the
proposed construction in accordance with the provisions of §
53.06(C).
      (2)   After a connection has been made according to the provisions of the
sanitary sewer/water permit issued the construction excavation shall be left
open until the county has inspected and approved the connection.
      (3)   All building sewers (whether new installation or replacing or
repairing existing services) within the service area of the county shall be
constructed in accordance with Title 77 Illinois Administrative Code, part 890,
"Illinois Plumbing Code", latest edition or materials as required by the
municipality and approved by the county.
      (4)   All sanitary sewer/water permits issued by the county shall expire
after two calendar years from the date of issuance. If the permit has expired,
the applicant shall be required to obtain a new permit. Additional permit fees
may be incurred by the owner if the fee amount at the time of re-applications
is larger than the original amount paid.
      (5)   When any work to any building sewer is necessary (including lining
or repairs requiring excavation), a sanitary sewer/water permit shall be issued
prior to commencement of any such work.
   (F)   Connection fees and credit.
      (1)   Sanitary sewer connection fees. Sanitary sewer connection fees
shall be as set forth in the county's then-applicable Retail Water/Sewer Rate
Ordinance.
      (2)   Credit toward connection fees. Credit towards connection fees may
be issued by the county for the circumstances where specific documentation
either exists in the county's records or is presented to the county by the
developer.
      (3)   For residential property the connection charges can be found in the
county's Retail Water/Sewer Rate Ordinance.
      (4)   For nonresidential property the connection charges can be found in
the county's Retail Water/Sewer Rate Ordinance.
      (5)   Where it has been determined by the county that there are existing/
unpaid connection fees, user fees, fines, penalties, or other specific use
charges in any nonresidential building, any permit(s) applied for within the
building shall be held and not issued by the county until restitution of unpaid
amounts has been made in full to the county by either the tenant or the owner
of the building.
   (G)   Duty to notify at change of use, ownership, tenant or process. Each
customer is obligated to notify the county when the following occurs in
connection with any premises from which such customer receives sewer service
from the county:
      (1)   Any structure or dwelling is to be sold, quit claimed, traded or
otherwise transferred;
      (2)   The use of the property has or will change from its existing use;
      (3)   There is a change in process that impacts or can significantly
impact the volume or characteristics of discharge;
      (4)   There is a building expansion;
      (5)   There is a change of tenant;
      (6)   There are interior or exterior building changes that affect the
sewer discharge upon the premises.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.06 CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   (A)   General conditions. A connection to a county sanitary sewer will be
allowed only if:
      (1)   The existing county sanitary sewer has adequate capacity to
transport the additional flow from the proposed connection;
      (2)   The county has an existing intergovernmental agreement in place
with the local municipal sewer authority to provide service to the property or
properties to be connected; and
      (3)   The local municipal sewer authority shall implement a county-
approved CMOM program in accordance with the provisions of §
53.07.
   (B)   County sanitary sewer/water permits.
      (1)   A sanitary sewer/water permit shall be obtained before any
connection is made to a county sanitary sewer and before alterations or
modifications of existing connections are made unless the connection is
approved as part of a public sewer extension (see division (H) below).
      (2)   A sanitary sewer/water permit must also be obtained if the existing
building use has an addition or expansion, has a change in use, or is
demolished or reconstructed.
      (3)   No person or agency shall hereafter connect to any county sanitary
sewer without having first applied for and obtained a permit from the county.
      (4)   No sanitary sewer/water permit shall be issued unless it has been
determined by the applicable municipality, county, and/or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (or other) documentation, that there is
adequate capacity available in all downstream sewer facilities.
      (5)   Connection of building sewers to county sanitary sewers must be
done by a bonded contractor. Connection of building drains to building sewers
must be done by a bonded Illinois licensed plumber.
      (6)   After a sanitary sewer/water permit has been received, the owner
shall notify the Director a minimum of 48 hours in advance when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director.
   (C)   Building connection requirements.
      (1)   Construction of building sewers and connections shall be in
compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and then-current
specifications.
      (2)   Building sewers shall enter the public sewer by way of any existing
manhole, wye or tee. In the event of the absence of a manhole, wye or tee, an
approved equivalent shall be installed.
      (3)   Any connection to a public sewer or building sewer shall be made in
accordance with methods and materials that have been approved by the county.
      (4)   Building sewers which are connected directly to a public sewer
shall be watertight, gastight, clean, repaired, rebuilt or otherwise kept
flowing freely by the property owner.
      (5)   All building sewers shall be designed to convey the design flow,
under gravity conditions, without surcharge unless approved otherwise.
      (6)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the county.
      (7)   Overhead sewers. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall
discharge at an elevation below the basement floor to the public sewer via
gravity. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by the building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
      (8)   Overhead sanitary sewers must be provided to all floor levels that
are less than one foot above the elevation of the rim of the sanitary sewer
manhole immediately upstream of the point of connection of the building to the
sanitary sewer system. Plumbing fixtures on a building floor level below an
overhead sewer shall drain into an ejector pit.
   (D)   Direct connections to county interceptor sewers. No connections of a
building sewer or private sewer directly to a county interceptor sewer shall be
made.
   (E)   Connections to local municipal sewers not owned by the county.
Sanitary sewer/water permit applications to connect a building sewer or private
sewer to a local municipal sewer shall be made to the municipality/sanitary
district in which the connection is being made. At the time of connection, each
building sewer shall be inspected by a civil engineer or inspector of the
municipality/sanitary district in which the connection is being made. The
applicant shall pay the municipality the prescribed fees. Copies of all permit
applications, including Illinois Environmental Protection Agency applications,
schedules and supporting documentation shall be provided to the Director prior
to connecting to any local municipal sewer, subject to such conditions as the
Director may require. At the request of a municipality/sanitary district, the
county may review and issue sanitary sewer/water permits. A nonrefundable
connection fee shall be paid to the county at the time a sanitary sewer/water
permit is issued by the county for a municipality/sanitary district.
   (F)   Connection of a local municipal sewer to an existing county sanitary
sewer. Application for permission to connect any public sewer to an existing
county sanitary sewer contributory to the county's water reclamation facilities
shall be made in writing to the Director. The application shall describe the
location of the requested connection and the character of the wastewater to be
transmitted. The application shall be accompanied by at least three sets of
plans for the connecting public sewerage system. The plans shall be prepared by
a professional engineer and shall conform to state and local plumbing codes and
the requirements of the IEPA. The plans shall be accompanied by a complete and
signed IEPA sanitary sewer extension submittal form. The plans shall be subject
to review and approval of the county. The plans, upon being approved by the
Director, shall be transmitted to the IEPA and any other government agency
having appropriate jurisdiction thereof. Upon receiving the approval of the
IEPA and any such governmental agency, the applicant shall provide the county
with one set of plans, if not already supplied by the IEPA, together with
evidence of approvals by the IEPA and any such governmental agencies.
   (G)   Extensions to local municipal sewers.
      (1)   Permitted extensions and enlargement. The municipality shall be
permitted to extend, enlarge, or otherwise modify or improve the local
municipal sewer in any manner that the municipality determines is necessary and
appropriate in order to serve customers within the municipal service area;
provided that any such extension, enlargement, modification, or improvement
shall be undertaken in accordance with the terms of the current
intergovernmental sewer agreement in place between the county and municipality
and provided that the municipality shall implement a CMOM program in accordance
with the provisions of §
53.07.
      (2)   Standards for extensions or enlargements. In the event that the
municipality elects to extend, enlarge, or otherwise modify or improve the
local municipal sewer, either directly or by owners, sub-dividers, or
developers of any lot, tract, or parcel within the municipal service area in
connection with the development of any such lot, tract, or parcel, the
municipality shall require any such extension, enlargement, modification, or
improvement, to be designed, constructed, and installed in accordance with the
current intergovernmental sewer agreement, this chapter, all other requirements
of law, and sound engineering practices. In fulfilling its responsibilities
hereunder, the municipality shall, at a minimum, undertake or cause to be
undertaken, at no cost to the county, the following:
         (a)   Obtain engineering services, from a firm experienced in the
design of public sewerage systems, for the design, plans and specifications,
and construction of any portion of the local municipal sewer;
         (b)   Obtain all easements, rights-of-way, licenses, and other
property rights that are necessary or convenient to construct, install,
operate, and maintain any portion of the local municipal sewer, including the
preparation of appropriate surveys, agreements, and other relevant documents;
         (c)   Enter into contracts with firms experienced in the construction
and installation of public sewerage systems;
         (d)   Secure all permits, approvals, and authorizations that may be
necessary or appropriate to construct, install, and operate the portion of the
local municipal sewer; and
         (e)   In cases where the Director is required to execute an Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency permit application, submit to the county, for
the county's review and approval, all preliminary and final engineering plans
and specifications and all permit applications for such new portions of the
local, municipal sewer.
      (3)   Further, the municipality shall permit the county to conduct such
reviews and inspections of the work required to be performed pursuant to this
section as the county may deem necessary or appropriate to protect its
interests.
   (H)   Extensions of sanitary sewers.
      (1)   To provide adequate sanitary sewer service for possible future
connections, the extension of any existing eight-inch diameter or larger
sanitary sewer within the public right of way or an easement for public sewer
shall be treated as a public sewer extension and itself be a minimum of eight
inches in diameter.
      (2)   Public sewer extensions shall be constructed so as to extend to the
furthest point of the parcel or development being serviced and shall terminate
at a manhole. Design criteria shall include proper line, grade, depth as well
as maximum sanitary sewer segment lengths.
      (3)   Public sewer extensions shall be designed to provide adequate
capacity and maximize gravity service to all potential properties ultimately to
be served by the sanitary sewer extension.
      (4)   All proposed public sewers shall be designed to the appropriate
size, depth and gradient practicable to reasonably provide service for the
ultimate service area(s), as well as to provide for gravity connections from
all of the properties which are potentially tributary to the sanitary sewer
extension as directed by the county. The design engineer may be required to
provide documentation if the sanitary sewer is not proposed as required above.
      (5)   Prior to the acceptance any sanitary sewer, the developer shall
conduct an internal video inspection of all sanitary sewers, eight inches in
diameter and larger, whether public or private, and submit in digital format
the video inspection (with accompanying log or report) to the Director for
approval. For inspection purposes, the developer and contractor shall provide
proper access to each new manhole.
      (6)   Prior to acceptance, all sewers shall be inspected and tested to
ensure there are no sags, leaks, structural defects, or other related issues.
Sanitary sewer mains shall be subject to air and mandrel testing, as well as
internal video inspection. Sanitary sewer manholes shall be vacuum tested.
Accompanying reports shall be submitted for review. All defects shall be
repaired by the developer's contractor at the direction of the county. The
developer's contractor shall re-inspect all repaired sanitary sewers and shall
either provide the re-inspection data to the Director in accordance with
division (H)(5) above or shall have the appropriate municipality confirm in
writing to the Director that the repairs have been completed satisfactorily.
      (7)   No variance in the line and grade of any proposed public sewer
shall be made between manholes. No bends or elbows shall be used except at drop
manhole connections. Any variance requires written approval by the Director.
   (I)   Submittal requirements. Any applicant seeking county approval pursuant
to this section shall submit the following documents:
      (1)   Civil engineering plan submittals. Subdivisions/extensions/new
building site design.
         (a)   Plans, drawings and documents shall be submitted to the county
at the applicant's sole expense and shall include three complete sets of 24-
inch by 36-inch plans and profile drawings, signed and sealed by a professional
engineer registered in Illinois. Electronic copies shall be submitted in PDF
format. Plans shall contain the following information:
            1.   The length, size and material of pipe; horizontal location;
elevations of new and existing inverts; clearly identified distances and slopes
between manholes; and manhole types and locations including unique numbers
assigned to each for identification.
            2.   All existing and proposed underground structures or facilities
that may affect the location of the sanitary sewer lines or are in the general
area of construction.
            3.   Elevation of the existing and proposed ground surfaces over
the sanitary sewer centerline.
            4.   The county's specifications, general notes, notice and details
for sanitary sewer construction.
            5.   Site location map, showing the project site or area in
relation to the surrounding area.
            6.   An approved preliminary plan and plat for the county's use in
determining the applicable connection fee charges for the subject site.
            7.   Four copies of the original applications to the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency's Division of Water Pollution Control where a
sanitary sewer extension is being proposed. These applications shall indicate
design calculations including population equivalents (PE), peak design flow,
pipe slope, pipe capacity, minimum and maximum pipe cover, and the like. These
applications shall be submitted to the county only after all appropriate
signatures have been procured by all other parties.
            8.   An accurate map depicting the service areas for all
subdivision or sanitary sewer extension requiring an Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency permit.
            9.   Plan and profile views for all public sewers. Recommended
scales for these plans are as follows:
               A.    Horizontal: 1 inch = 50 feet; and
               B.    Vertical - 1 inch = 5 feet.
            10.   An overall utility plan showing all of the proposed public
sewers. This plan shall be of a readable scale and have sanitary sewer manhole
numbers which are consistent with those shown on the plan and profile pages.
            11.   A grading plan indicating the location of the county
interceptor sewer and applicable easement for proposed developments in which an
existing county interceptor sewer is located. Within this area, the exposed
manholes shall be rehabilitated and adjusted to grade per county
specifications.
            12.   A landscaping plan indicating the location of the county
interceptor sewer and applicable easement for proposed developments in which an
existing county interceptor sewer is located. Any landscaping within a county
easement must be approved by the county. Continuous access to all manholes must
be provided at all times throughout the length of the easement.
            13.   A final plat of subdivision shall be submitted prior to
approval of the project. In order for the county to allow connections to any
newly constructed public sewer, the developer shall submit a recorded plat of
subdivision and all testing.
      (2)   Architectural plan submittals. New or existing buildings.
         (a)   The county requires that architectural plans, site plans,
plumbing drawings and documents be submitted to the LCPW when making
application for a sanitary sewer/water permit. Electronic copies shall be
submitted in PDF format.
         (b)   All architectural plans for new buildings shall have the
appropriate "pre-review" checklist comments incorporated into the initial
submittal. This checklist, with each item marked off, shall be included with
the plan set.
      (3)   Projects for which architectural plans are submitted to the county
for review may be required to be accompanied by applications to the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency's Division of Water Pollution Control. These
applications shall only be submitted to the county when domestic loads are
expected to exceed 15 P.E. and/or non-domestic waste is proposed. These
applications shall be submitted to the county only after all appropriate
signatures have been procured by all other parties. Where allowed, schedule
F.T.P. (fast-track permit) may be submitted along with form WPC-PS-1. Other
cases will require Schedule A/B to accompany WPC-PS-1, along with all other
applicable schedule forms.
      (4)   All architectural submittals shall be accompanied by appropriate
plumbing plans, including riser diagrams. Fixture schedules for nonresidential
facilities such as food service establishments (FSEs) shall also be submitted
for review.
      (5)   A separate grease line and grease removal system (GRS) shall be
required for all nonresidential facilities.
      (6)   Garbage grinders shall not be installed in non-residential
facilities. The purpose of which is to reduce not only the amount of food
debris entering any given GRS, but also the frequency in which a GRS must be
cleaned. In addition, this also aids in reducing the biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS) loading at all county water reclamation
facilities.
      (7)   Record drawings.
         (a)   Following the completion of all public improvements and at least
two months prior to final acceptance, the applicant shall provide to the
Director for review and approval either:
            1.   Three paper sets and one Adobe PDF copy of record drawings; or
            2.   One digital copy of the record drawings in either ArcGIS
(preferred), Microstation, or AutoCAD format with one paper copy and one Adobe
PDF copy.
         (b)   Drawings must be sealed by a professional engineer or land
surveyor registered in the State of Illinois. If corrections are found to be
necessary, revised drawings shall be submitted in accordance with division (I)(
(7)(a) above.
         (c)   The record drawings shall include any and all field changes and
shall include state plane coordinates, Eastern Zone, NAD 83 NSRS2007, with
minimum sub foot accuracy.
      (8)   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit application. The
applicant and design engineer shall sign and submit the required Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency documents to the municipal government which has
initial jurisdiction. After all other remaining parties have signed these
applications, the municipal government shall sign the documents and the
applicant shall then submit four sets of original applications to the county
for evaluation, review and signature. After any applicable fees have been paid,
the county shall retain one original application and return the remaining three
signed original applications to the applicant or design engineer, who shall
forward them to the Springfield office of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency. The county reserves the right to retain the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency documents until any/all possible issue(s) deemed important by
the county, such as execution of intergovernmental agreements, service area,
size of pipe, depth of pipe and payment of fees for example, have been
resolved.
      (9)   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit exemptions and
requirements.
         (a)   A building sewer constructed to serve a single family home or a
building producing less than 1,500 gpd domestic sewage flow may be exempt from
being required to apply to the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for a
permit from the Bureau of Water, Division of Water Pollution Control, subject
to specific standards hereinafter provided.
         (b)   A building which formerly produced less than 1,500 gpd of
domestic sewage flow and increases flows greater than 1,500 gpd shall be
required to apply to the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of
Water, Division of Water Pollution Control.
         (c)   A building producing any amount of non-domestic flows, even
though the building generates less than 1,500 gpd (15 P.E.) of domestic flows,
shall be required to obtain a permit from the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, Bureau of Water, Division of Water Pollution Control.
      (10)   Consultation with the county. The design engineer is encouraged to
consult with the county to ensure adequacy and conformance of the drawings to
the applicable requirements. In cases which involve the design of water
reclamation facilities and any project involving industrial waste, the design
engineer should confer with the county prior to the preparation of the final
plans and Illinois Environmental Protection Agency applications.
      (11)   Seals and signatures. The seal and signature referred to shall be
those of the professional engineer responsible for the design. The seal shall
be affixed on the title sheet that includes the index of sheets. Where no index
sheet is provided, the seal and signature shall be affixed on each sheet.
      (12)   Permits for construction.
            (a)   No public sewer construction shall commence without both an
approved Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit and a sanitary sewer/
water permit. Contact the LCPW office for the sanitary sewer/water permit.
            (b)   No building construction shall commence without a sanitary
sewer/water permit and, if applicable, an approved Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency permit on file.
      (13)   Construction. The county has developed design and performance
standards for the installation, rehabilitation and repair of the sanitary
sewers. Any person, firm or municipality constructing, repairing,
rehabilitating, or maintaining any new or existing sanitary sewers, building
sewers or building drains tributary to the county shall be subject to these
standards as amended from time to time.
      (14)   Rules and regulations.
         (a)   Any person, firm or municipality constructing, repairing,
rehabilitating, or maintaining any new or existing sanitary sewers, building
sewers or building drains tributary to the county shall be subject to the rules
and regulations as set forth by this chapter.
         (b)   All final engineering and/or building plans, which are submitted
to the local municipality for their review, shall also be submitted to the
county for review. Once the county review has been successfully completed, the
county connection fees shall be collected by the local municipality and paid to
the county in order to release their building permit.
         (c)   All sanitary sewer construction shall have an Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency permit and plan approval letter on file at the
county prior to commencing any construction.
         (d)   During any construction activity that requires the disconnection
of an existing sanitary sewer service line, the portion of the existing service
line to be reused shall be certified before the reconnection is made. This is
usually done by a CCTV inspection in the presence of a LCPW inspector, but
ultimately will be done by whatever means necessary.
      (15)   Advance notice. All persons, firms, or municipalities shall notify
the county a minimum of 48 prior to starting any construction, connections,
repairs, or rehabilitation as required or approved by the county.
      (16)   Conformance to plans and specifications. The rules, regulations,
ordinances and policies listed herein, and issued by the authorities indicated,
are incorporated herein by reference.
         (a)   The LCPW regulations, policies, directives, specifications,
general notes, contractor notice, construction details, permit forms and
instructions that may be adopted or issued from time to time.
         (b)   Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972 as amended
(33 USC 1251 et seq.).
         (c)   The Illinois Pollution Control Board including all orders, rules
and regulations thereof.
         (d)   Environmental Protection Act, including all orders, technical
releases, rules and regulations issued from time to time.
         (e)   Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois, latest edition.
         (f)   Title 35: Environmental Protection, Subtitle C: Water Pollution,
Chapter II: Environmental Protection Agency Part 370: Illinois Recommended
Standards for Sewage.
         (g)   77 Illinois Administrative Code, part 890, Illinois Plumbing
Code, latest edition.
         (h)   The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (O.S.H.A.)
Regulations Standards, 29 CFR – Standard Number 1926.652.
      (17)   The county reserves the right to adopt continuous rules and
regulations in order to adhere to the policies and directives of those
organizations that have been listed in division (I)(16)(a) through (h). These
rules are in place for the protection of those who are serviced by the county's
water reclamation facilities and are detailed as follows. Any person, firm or
organization shall be subject to these rules and regulations if deemed
necessary by the county in order to provide for the safety and welfare of the
public.
   (J)   Septic tank Connections. No connection shall be made to any county
sanitary sewer or local municipal sewer if the connection pipe is carrying any
contents from a septic tank.
   (K)   Trench drain, triple basins, sand interceptors.
      (1)   Exterior trench drains, triple basin oil separators, and sand
interceptors shall not connect to the sanitary sewer. Petroleum based oils are
not regulated as a FOG issue, rather these are prohibited substances, that
maybe flammable or toxic. The oil separator is an engineering spill control
measure that is not a regulated industrial waste.
      (2)   Interior trench drain, triple basin oil separator, and sand
interceptors shall not connect via a blind connection to the sewer. Lake County
Public Works may monitor these entry points and act in the event of an
emergency spill.
      (3)   Docks are typically sloped to allow trucks to be loaded and
unloaded at grade level. Storm waters will collect in the dock carrying with it
dirt and debris and any spilled fluids from vehicles using the dock area.
Additionally, in the event that a fuel or oil spill were to occur in the dock
area, the material will pass through an oil separator to retain the oils, where
the oil can be recovered.
      (4)   If at any time these structures are plumbed to the sanitary sewer
system, the potential of a hazardous substance entering the system exists.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 CAPACITY, MANAGEMENT, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (CMOM).
   General conditions. Local municipal sewer authorities that have an
intergovernmental sewer agreement with the county that are operating local
municipal sewer systems that are tributary to the county's sewerage system
shall adopt and implement a CMOM program that meets or exceeds the minimum
requirements contained in the capacity, management, operations and maintenance
(CMOM) program; refer to the Director for updated copy.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 53.08 RESIDENTIAL SEPTAGE AND HOLDING TANK WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit conditions.
      (1)   No waste hauler shall discharge septage or holding tank waste into
any county water reclamation facility without first obtaining a discharge
permit from the Director. Any violation of the terms and conditions of the
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Obtaining a discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of his obligation to comply with all
federal, state, county or local standards, ordinances or regulations.
      (2)   As a condition of the permit, the permittee agrees to abide by the
following operating procedures:
         (a)   All discharges shall be in compliance with this chapter. The
LCPW reserves the right to modify discharge limits on a case-by-case basis to
prevent pass through or interference of the Water Reclamation facilities'
treatment processes.
         (b)   Discharge at any location other than the Mill Creek water
reclamation facility receiving station is prohibited and shall be deemed a
permit violation.
         (c)   The permit shall remain in effect for one year from the date of
issuance.
         (d)   Each discharge shall be subject to sampling, inspection and
testing as necessary to determine the characteristics and concentration of the
waste to be discharged. The determinations shall be made as often as may be
deemed necessary by the LCPW.
         (e)   The permittee shall provide a representative sample of the waste
to be discharged for laboratory analysis. The cost of this analysis shall be
borne by the permittee if any parameter exceeds the established concentration
limit.
         (f)   The LCPW operational staff may direct the permittee to cease the
discharge of any waste determined to be incompatible with the water reclamation
facility treatment system. In addition, the permittee may be required to
provide full disclosure on the origin of each load discharged.
         (g)   The permittee's truck driver shall sign and complete the water
reclamation facility's discharge log in a clear and legible manner at the time
of each discharge.
         (h)   The permittee shall be responsible for the cleanup of all spills
or other deposits resulting from their activity while on county premises.
   (B)   Prohibitive discharges for septage or holding tank haulers.
      (1)   Dischargers shall adhere to the list of restrictive waste discharge
cited in §
53.05(D).
      (2)   Each discharged load shall not exceed the maximum concentration
limits for any parameter established for the individual permittee.
      (3)   In order to protect the integrity of the water reclamation facility
the Director reserves the right to modify the maximum concentration limit of
any parameter or to add additional parameters of concern.
      (4)   Adequate notice will be given to the permittee whenever the maximum
concentration limit or parameters are modified, unless conditions at the water
reclamation facility require more immediate modifications to protect and
preserve the public health and safety, to maintain the operational integrity or
capabilities of the facility, or to ensure regulatory compliance of the
facility.
   (C)   Application and fee.
      (1)   All commercial and private sanitary waste haulers shall secure a
permit from the LCPW authorizing the discharge of septage and holding tank
waste to the Mill Creek water reclamation facility. Applications for permits,
obtained from the LCPW shall contain such information as the LCPW determines
necessary including the number of vehicles to be used to transport septage,
name of driver(s), capacity of each vehicle, license number for each vehicle,
and the assigned LCHD license number. Permits shall be issued for a one year
period and shall expire 12 months from the date signed.
      (2)   Contact the LCPW Department or visit their website for a copy of
the septage and holding tank waste discharge permit application.
   (D)   Service charges.
      (1)   All septage and holding tank waste discharged into the water
reclamation facility shall be billed in accordance with the county Rate
Ordinance. Additional charges may be levied by the county for the following:
wastewater discharges of unusual strength; damage to the water reclamation
facility, its structures or apparatus; or restoration of the discharge area
required as a result of spills or other waste hauler activities.
      (2)   Service charges shall be billed on a monthly basis, and shall be
due and payable within 30 days of the invoice date. Unpaid balances remaining
beyond 30 days of the invoice date shall be assessed a 10% charge. In addition,
after the notice and an opportunity to be heard, the Director may suspend the
discharge privileges of the permittee, if an invoice remains unpaid for more
than 45 days after the invoice date.
   (E)   Insurance conditions and requirements. The permittee shall maintain
insurance for the duration of the permit that meets all conditions and
requirements set forth by the county. Contact the Department or visit the LCPW
website for a copy of the application package.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG).
   (A)   Purpose. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for food service
establishments (FSEs) and non-food service establishment FOG dischargers (NFDs)
(collectively FOG producing facilities) that discharge wastewater into the
county sanitary sewer. The objectives of this section are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the county's
sewerage system by FOG producing facilities that will interfere with the
operation of the water reclamation facilities;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the county's
sewerage system by FOG producing facilities that could cause sanitary sewer
overflows (SSOs); and
      (3)   To protect the environment from pollution resulting from SSOs.
      (4)   This chapter shall apply to all nonresidential users (as defined
herein as FSEs or NFDs) that discharge or may discharge excess FOG to the
county's sewerage system. This chapter authorizes inspection and regulation of
these users; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires user record keeping;
provides for the implementation of control mechanisms if deemed necessary by
the Director; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the administration of the program
established herein (if deemed necessary by the Director).
   (B)   Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   General requirements.
      (1)   State requirements. The Illinois Pretreatment Program requirements,
found in Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code, Parts 307 & 310, are
hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference.
      (2)   Maximum discharge limits.
 
FOG Polar (P-HEM)       200 mg/L
FOG Non-Polar (SGT-HEM) 100 mg/L
pH                      5.0 to 9.5
 
         (a)   FSEs and NFDs shall also comply with the compatible pollutant
level in §
53.05(D) and the local limits of the Lake County Pretreatment Ordinance
(Chapter 54).
         (b)   In addition, the county may establish best management practices
(BMPs) for particular groups of users. These BMPs may include, but are not
limited to, types or methods of pretreatment technology to be used, methods of
source control, minimum maintenance requirements, spill prevention practices,
or other requirements as deemed necessary by the Director.
         (c)   If a failure to maintain any grease recovery system (GRS)
results in partial or complete blockage of the building sewer or private sewer
system discharging to the county, or adversely affects the treatment or
transmission capabilities of the county sewer system, or requires excessive
maintenance, or poses a possible health hazard, the FOG producing facility
responsible for maintaining the GRS shall be subject to the remedies herein,
including cost recovery, enforcement and penalties.
      (3)   Grease removal system (GRS) requirements.
         (a)   All food service establishments (FSEs) and non-food service
establishment FOG dischargers (NFDs) shall have an adequate GRS installed and
shall exercise proper kitchen BMPs to ensure that excess concentrations of FOG
are not discharged to the water reclamation facility.
         (b)   New construction or remodeled facilities.
            1.   All new construction or remodeled food service establishments
(FSEs) and non-food service establishment FOG dischargers (NFDs) shall submit
plumbing plans for all potential grease discharging lines, all GRSs, and
connecting piping to the county for approval prior to construction. The
plumbing shall be installed in accordance with the approved plans. Failure to
submit plans or construct in accordance with approved plans is a violation of
this chapter.
            2.   All kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease-
laden waste shall be connected to the GRS. This includes but is not limited to:
vegetable sinks, prep sinks, hand sinks, mop basins, floor drains, bar sinks,
chemical rinse dishwashers and temperature rinse dishwashers that have been
tempered to under 150 degrees Fahrenheit. No domestic sewage may be connected
to the GRS.
            3.   All new construction or remodeled food service establishments
(FSEs) and non-food service establishment FOG dischargers (NFDs) that discharge
water or wastes to a county sanitary sewer or to a county water reclamation
facility shall be required to install, operate, clean and maintain a GRS of
appropriate size and design to achieve compliance with requirements of this
chapter. Each FOG producing facility shall have a control manhole or sampling
chamber installed and located at a point downstream of the GRS. No person shall
construct or install a GRS without the prior approval of the Director and
issuance of a permit. Such approval shall include both the approval of a plan
for the proposed GRS construction or installation and permission to conduct the
work required. Upon completion of the work and approval by the Director, a
discharge license shall be issued to the user by the Director. Each user
facility shall secure a valid discharge license issued by the Director prior to
any discharge into a county sanitary sewer.
         (c)   New construction multi-tenant buildings. All new construction
multi-tenant buildings (e.g., strip centers) shall include a separate waste
line for all leasable spaces that discharges to a common external 1,500 gallon
or larger GRS. When a space is leased, sold, or rented to a food service
establishment (FSE) or non-food service establishment FOG discharger (NFD), all
kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease-laden waste shall be
connected to the GRS. This includes but is not limited to: vegetable sinks,
prep sinks, hand sinks, mop basins, floor drains, bar sinks, chemical rinse
dishwashers and temperature rinse dishwashers that have been tempered to under
150 degrees Fahrenheit. No domestic sewage may be connected to the GRS. A
separate domestic sewage service is required to be connected to the public
sewer from each unit in accordance with § 53.05(C)(10) The property owner shall
be responsible for proper maintenance of this GRS in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
         (d)   Existing facilities.
            1.   Every existing food service establishment (FSE) or non-food
service establishment FOG discharger (NFD) shall have a GRS. An existing food
service establishment (FSE) or non-food service establishment FOG discharger
(NFD) serviced by a GRS that is non-compliant with the technical or design
standards of this chapter shall be permitted to continue discharging to the
county sewerage system provided that the user's FOG discharge, as measured at
the control manhole, does not exceed the county's daily maximum discharge limit
(s), as set forth in the county's Pretreatment Ordinance (Chapter 54). The
Director or his or her representative may include conditions, restrictions, or
performance standards on any existing user discharge license where that user is
served by a non-compliant GRS to minimize the risk of discharges exceeding
maximum pollutant discharge standards.
            2.   Any existing food service establishment (FSE) or non-food
service establishment FOG discharger (NFD) not equipped with a GRS required for
the type of business shall be required to install one within 180 days after
notification. A FSE or NFD may make a request to the Director for a longer
period of time to achieve compliance, which the Director may authorize based on
the conditions of the non-compliant GRS, the nature of the business, and such
conditions as the Director may deem necessary or appropriate.
            3.   The type and size of GRS required will be reviewed by the
county. If the sizing differs from the Plumbing Code, a variance must be
obtained from the state. Where feasible, all kitchen drains and any other
drains that may carry grease-laden waste shall be connected to this GRS. This
includes but is not limited to: vegetable sinks, prep sinks, hand sinks, mop
basins, floor drains, bar sinks, soup pots, chemical rinse dishwashers and
temperature rinse dishwashers that have been tempered to under 150 degrees
Fahrenheit. No domestic sewage may be connected to the GRS.
      (4)   New businesses within existing facilities.
         (a)   New businesses which will occupy an existing facility and which
are required by this chapter to maintain a grease trap or grease interceptor
shall install such unit prior to commencement of discharge to the county's
sewerage system.
         (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, a new business shall include a
change in business (whether or not the owner changes), a new business in a
previously unoccupied space, and new ownership of an existing business.
      (5)   All users. Each user shall register its GRS system with the
Director. Each user shall maintain and possess a valid discharge license issued
by the Director for each FOG producing facility. The discharge from each GRS,
as measured from the control manhole or sampling chamber, shall not exceed the
county maximum discharge limit(s) as set forth in division (C)(2) above.
Discharge license registration information shall include name, address, and
telephone number of owner and on-site manager (if different); a scaled sketch/
drawing of the location of the GRS on the FOG producing facility premises;
location of the access manhole (and control manhole/sampling chamber, if
different); the components, design, and size/capacity of the GRS; and such
other information as may be applicable.
   (D)   System maintenance.
      (1)   General. All GRSs, both existing and new, shall be maintained in a
safe and sanitary condition and in good working order so that any discharge
therefrom, as measured from the control manhole, does not exceed the county's
maximum discharge limit(s).
      (2)   Maintenance responsibility. The owner or the owner's designated
agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the GRS for a FSE or NFD at
all times. All costs and expenses relating thereto shall be the responsibility
of the owner.
      (3)   Maintenance requirements.
         (a)   All users shall maintain any GRS so that the FOG discharged
therefrom, as measured from/at the control manhole, does not exceed the
county's maximum discharge limit(s).
         (b)   In the case of a multi-tenant building, the owner of the multi-
tenant building is responsible for all maintenance and repair of the GRS. All
costs associated with the GRS of the multi-tenant building are the building
owner's responsibility.
         (c)   Owners of any buildings that are used as an FSE or NFD are
responsible for the maintenance and repair of the GRS serving the buildings
even when the units are being leased by a second party for such use. All costs
associated with the GRS are the building owner's responsibility.
         (d)   All grease traps and all other GRSs shall have all floating
material removed at a minimum of every 90 days. All grease traps and all other
GRSs shall be completely pumped out semi-annually, or when the contents of the
trap exceed the 25% Rule. Semi-annual maintenance and maintenance due to
exceeding the 25% Rule shall include the complete recovery of all contents
including floating materials, wastewater and bottom sludge and solids. The
frequency of maintenance shall be increased to comply with the county's maximum
discharge limit(s) or the manufacturer's recommendations. The frequency of
removal shall be as often as necessary to prevent overflows of FOG entering
into the county's sewerage system.
         (e)   The pump-and-return method of decanting or discharging of
removed waste back into the GRS is prohibited.
         (f)   Any removal and hauling of FOG shall be performed by a waste
disposal or rendering firm licensed by the State of Illinois.
         (g)   If any GRS discharge wastes fail to meet the county's maximum
limit(s), the Director is authorized to demand or order the user to repair,
replace, or upgrade its GRS, at the sole expense of the user.
      (4)   Maintenance records.
         (a)   The owner of each FOG producing facility shall maintain and keep
available on the premises a continuous log of manifests (and other similar
record(s)) regarding each cleaning or maintenance of the GRS for the previous
24 months. The log shall be available for inspection or review by LCPW.
         (b)   If the manifest is unavailable upon request, then the FSE will
have 48 hours to provide the document to LCPW.
         (c)   The owner of each FOG producing facility shall also send a copy
of the manifest to the LCPW after every cleaning of the GRS or every 90 days.
Manifests shall be submitted via fax or email.
         (d)   The following records shall be kept on-site at the FOG producing
facility:
            1.   Haulers. Each hauler shall provide the user, at the time of
service, a manifest conforming to all state statutes and regulations (see, 415
ILCS 5/22.30(e)) and the provisions of this chapter.
            2.   Manifests. The removal of a GRS contents shall be recorded on
a manifest that identifies the pumping, hauling and disposing of the wastes. A
copy of the manifest must be sent to the LCPW after each cleaning.
            3.   Manifest information. Each manifest shall contain the
following information and such other information as may be required by statute:
               A.    User information including name, address, the volume or
weight of waste pumped from each GRS, and date and time of the pumping;
               B.    Hauler information including company name, address, state
license/permit number, and disposal/receiving facility location information;
and
               C.    Disposal/receiving facility information, including the
facility name and address, date and time of disposal/receiving, and waste
manifest number.
   (E)   Grease removal systems (GRS) – design and performance standards.
      (1)   Where required a registered GRSs shall be installed, operated and
maintained in each FOG producing FSE or NFD facility that discharges into the
county sewerage system. Each FOG producing FSE or NFD facility shall have a
control manhole where a representative sample can be taken of the FSE or NFD
discharge.
         (a)   The GRS shall be located in an area freely accessible for
maintenance and inspection.
      (2)   An approved GRS shall consist of one or a combination of the
following methods:
         (a)   Passive technology that is an approved exterior GRS. (Standard
details of approved GRSs can be obtained from the LCPW office).
         (b)   Active technology including:
            1.   An approved grease recovery device; or
            2.   An approved solids transfer/grease transfer device.
      (3)   Prohibited discharges into a GRS.
         (a)   Wastewater that does not contain FOG and that otherwise does not
require grease separation treatment shall not be discharged into the GRS.
         (b)   Wastewater from a dishwasher machine or wastewater that
otherwise exceeds 150 degrees Fahrenheit shall be tempered prior to being
introduced into any GRS. The wastewater once tempered is then required to be
discharged into the approved exterior GRS. An interior GRS shall not be
allowed.
      (4)   Dumpsters/dumpster pads. Dumpsters and dumpster pad drains shall
not connect to the sewerage system.
      (5)   General requirements – GRSs. Specifications outlined in this
section shall be considered minimum requirements only. It shall be the
responsibility of each user to have a GRS installed and maintained that will
produce an effluent in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or
other applicable ordinance.
         (a)   New GRSs shall meet or exceed the more stringent of
specifications and requirements set forth in this chapter and other applicable
local, state, or federal requirements.
         (b)   An existing GRS which is upgraded shall meet or exceed the
specifications set forth in this chapter and other applicable local, state, or
federal requirements.
         (c)   GRSs shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature and capable of
withstanding the traffic load where installed.
         (d)   GRSs shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection and shall be equipped with easily removable covers.
         (e)   GRSs shall have a total liquid capacity of not less than 500
gallons.
         (f)   The installation or use of all GRSs must be approved by the
Director.
         (g)   GRSs shall receive all grease-laden waste discharge from the
major point sources.
         (h)   All civil engineering and architectural plans submitted to the
county for approval of a GRS shall contain a schedule of drainage fixture units
(DFUs) with values tributary to the GRS. Failure to include this required
information shall result in the submitted plans being rejected for review as
required for a county sanitary sewer/water permit and/or discharge license.
      (6)   Passive exterior device (PED) requirements.
         (a)   Each PED or other GRS device design (including size, type and
location) shall be reviewed and approved by the Director and comply with the
following standards:
            1.   Shall be sized and engineered based upon the anticipated load
and/or conditions of actual use and be a minimum of 500 gallons and a maximum
of 3,000 gallons.
            2.   Shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature and capable of
withstanding a H-20 traffic load where installed.
            3.   Shall have accessibility to both the influent and effluent tee
pipes.
            4.   Shall contain baffles constructed of impervious material
sufficient to allow a proper separation of grease from water.
            5.   Multiple PEDs or other approved GRSs are allowed.
         (b)   All standard details for PEDs approved by the county can be
obtained from the LCPW office.
      (7)   Passive interior devices (PIDs). PIDs are prohibited.
   (F)   Sizing of PEDs.
      (1)   The design shall be in compliance with the following table, where
the total number of drainage fixture units determines the grease trap size:
Number of Drainage Fixture Units DFUs Minimum Grease Trap Size Unit Size
                                      (gallons)
Number of Drainage Fixture Units DFUs Minimum Grease Trap Size Unit Size
                                      (gallons)
<8                                    500
9-21                                  750
22-35                                 1000
36-90                                 1250
91-172                                1500
173-216                               2000
217-307                               2500
>308                                  3000
 
      (2)   The inlet chamber of the PED shall incorporate an open sanitary-
tee, which shall extend at least 12 inches below the water surface. The outlet
chamber of the vessel shall incorporate an open sanitary-tee that extends two-
thirds of the total depth below the water surface. The sanitary-tees (both
inlet and outlet) shall not be capped and shall remain to allow visual
inspection of the waste stream.
      (3)   Exemptions to PED sizing. FSEs that serve 18 or fewer meals per day
or serve only continental breakfast may be granted an exemption from the sizing
requirements for PEDs listed in division (F)(2) above.
      (4)   Active interior recovery device (AIRD) requirements.
         (a)   AIRDs may be allowed through a variance process.
         (b)   AIRDs shall be Big Dipper® or approved equal and shall be sized
based upon the anticipated load and/or conditions of actual use and
manufacturer's recommendation.
         (c)   Detail and specifications for the AIRD, including sizing
calculations, shall be provided on the plans. Failure to include this required
information shall result in the submitted plans being rejected for review as
required for a county sanitary sewer/water permit and/or discharge license. The
Director or his or her representative shall be the sole authority on whether an
AIRD may be allowed in lieu of a PED.
   (G)   Alternative methods and treatment agents.
      (1)   Alternative technology/methods. Engineered alternative technology
or methods may be permitted, provided the technology or method meets the
minimum performance standards set forth by this chapter. Approval of an
alternative technology or method is at the sole discretion of the Director.
      (2)   Biological or chemical treatment agents. The use of biological or
chemical agents that dissolve grease to allow it to be discharged into the
sanitary sewer is not permitted.
   (H)   Permits and licenses, procedures, inspection and fees.
      (1)   Permits and licenses. Permits and discharge licenses issued under
this chapter are not transferable.
         (a)   Installation permits. A permit shall be required for all newly
constructed FOG producing FSE and NFD facilities, all remodeled FOG producing
FSE and NFD facilities, and for the replacement of any existing GRS. Repairs to
a GRS with a valid discharge license issued by the Director do not require a
permit. A permit shall be valid for a 365-day period following the date of
issuance.
         (b)   Discharge licenses. A discharge license is required for each FOG
producing FSE and NFD facility and shall be valid for a five-year period
following the date of issuance. Renewal of a discharge license shall be in
accordance with the FOG discharge application in the form approved by the
Director. Each user shall keep and maintain a valid, current discharge license
issued by the Director as one of the documents in the manifest/maintenance log
required to be kept on the FOG producing facility premises.
      (2)   Procedures.
         (a)   Applications. The Director is authorized to develop application
forms as may be required for users to obtain permits and discharge licenses, or
renewals thereof. The Director is authorized to establish any minimum submittal
requirements to accompany any such applications or renewals. Any refusal to
issue a permit or license, where the applicant has submitted a complete permit
or license application, shall be in writing and shall specify any and all
reasons for non-issuance.
         (b)   Authority to revoke. Where the Director finds that a permittee
or licensee is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter, following
issuance of a notice of violation and continued noncompliance or continuing
violation by the permittee or licensee, or its agent, after 30 days from the
notice of violation (or such shorter time frame as may be reasonably
established by the Director in the notice of violation in the event the
violation poses a threat of damage to the county sanitary sewer system or
violation of the county's IEPA permitting requirements), the Director may
revoke such permit or license. Any revocation of a permit or license by the
Director shall be in writing and shall specify any and all reasons for such
revocation. Any construction work or wastewater discharge subject to or covered
by a revoked permit shall immediately cease and no construction or installation
work or wastewater discharge shall occur or be allowed until such time as a new
permit or license has been applied for and all fees, charges and costs have
been paid by the owner, permittee or licensee, and the Director has issued a
new permit or license.
         (c)   Appeals. The licensee/permitee shall have the right to appeal
should their license/permit be revoked for any of the reasons cited above. The
appeal should be placed in writing to the Engineering Supervisor for review. If
there is no resolution at that level then final appeal can be made to the
attention of the Director.
      (3)   Fees. The user shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
permits, licenses, and inspections, and for all other charges as may be imposed
by this chapter in accordance with the provisions of the county's Retail Water/
Sewer Rate Ordinance.
      (4)   Inspections. Inspections will be coordinated with the managers/
owners of FSE and NFD facilities.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.10 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Right of access and inspection.
      (1)   The Director, with the consent of the property owner, shall access
any premises within the service area for purposes of reasonable inspection to
ascertain whether such premises are connected to the county sewer system, to
inspect the plumbing within the building and the number and type of connections
to the sewer system for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, or where the Director has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which
is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Director is authorized to enter
the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the
duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such structure or premises be
occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If
such structure or premises be unoccupied, the Director shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control
of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the
Director shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   (B)   Inspections specific to food service establishments (FSEs) and non-
food service establishment FOG dischargers (NFDs).
      (1)   FOG annual inspections. Any refusal of access for inspection shall
be grounds for termination of a discharge license and are subject to fines.
         (a)   Existing FOG producing FSE and NFD facility inspections. The
Director shall make or conduct periodic inspections and such other or
additional inspections as the Director may deem necessary of each FOG producing
FSE and NFD facility to evaluate and enforce compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
         (b)   New or remodeled FOG producing FSE and NFD facility inspections.
The Director shall make or conduct those inspections deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with permits issued. These inspections shall, at a minimum, consist
of an initial or in-progress construction or installation site inspection, and
a final inspection following completion of the permitted installation.
         (c)   Follow-up inspections. A user issued a notice of ordinance
violation by the Director shall be inspected at any time within 30 days of the
date of notice of ordinance violation issuance. Subsequent re-inspections may
occur at any time for as long as the user is non-compliant under the original
notice of ordinance violation. The user shall be responsible for payment of a
re-inspection fee for all re-inspections in accordance with the approved fee
schedule.
         (d)   Demand inspections. Any time an SSO or blockage occurs at or
downstream of a FOG producing FSE or NFD facility, a demand inspection shall be
made or conducted by the Director. If the user or FOG producing facility is
found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, and that violation
caused or resulted in the SSO or blockage, the user shall be responsible for
the payment of the demand inspection fee, as well as the labor, equipment, and
material costs incurred by the county to correct the SSO or blockage, in
accordance with the approved Rate Ordinance.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.11 VALIDITY; SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
   (B)   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter, which
can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
   (C)   If there are any conflicting ordinances, the more strict, as
determined by the Director, shall control.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 53.12 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 53.13 VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Variances from the regulatory standards of this chapter may be granted
in accordance with the requirements provided below. Any application for a
variance shall be made to, and decided by, the Engineering Supervisor.
   (B)   Submit a letter addressed to the Engineering Supervisor of Public
Works. Indicate:
      (1)   The desire for the variance;
      (2)   Cite the section herein;
      (3)   List the reason for the variance.
   (C)   The Department shall grant or deny the variance request if the
Engineering Supervisor finds that the following criteria are met:
      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances applicable to
the subject request that do not apply to similar properties, projects or
requests.
      (2)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, or
welfare or the creation of a nuisance.
      (3)   No additional public expense will result.
      (4)   Cost to the applicant of strict compliance with the ordinance is
not the primary reason for granting the variance.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Fines. Any person, customer or user who violates any provision or
section of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as may be authorized under
the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance, or by statute of the
State of Illinois. Each violation of a provision or section of this chapter
shall be a separate offense and subject to a separate fine. Each day that a
violation exists or continues shall be considered a separate offense. Any fine
or fines for these separate offenses shall be assessed in accordance with
applicable ordinances or state statute.
   (B)   Administrative adjudication.
      (1)   Enforcement Officer. All sections of this chapter may be enforced
by the Director of the Lake County Public Works.
      (2)   Warning of ordinance violation. The Director shall have the
authority, but not the obligation, to issue a pre-enforcement warning of
ordinance violation when an individual has been found to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter. The warning shall, at a minimum, identify the
violation(s) for which it is being issued, shall include the address at which
the violation has occurred, shall require the violator to cease the violation
(s) or abate the violation(s) within a reasonable time for the performance of
any act it requires, and shall state that a notice of ordinance violation may
be issued if the warning is not adhered to as specified.
      (3)   Notice of ordinance violation. In the event of a violation of this
chapter, the Director shall have authority to issue a notice of ordinance
violation.
         (a)   The notice of ordinance violation shall contain the particulars
of such violation(s) and at a minimum may order the offending customer to:
explain the cause(s) of the violation(s), submit a plan or schedule for the
satisfactory correction of the violation(s) and the prevention of similar
violation(s) in the future, pay an administrative fine, or any additional
remedies deemed necessary by the county to bring the customer into compliance
within the shortest time feasible.
         (b)   Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the
customer to the Director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
customer of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the notice of ordinance violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the county to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement remedies, without first issuing a notice of ordinance
violation.
         (c)   If administrative adjudication is found to be the appropriate
remedy to resolve the violation, the notice must be served in accordance with
and shall contain all information specified and required in the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance. Prior to the hearing date documented on
the notice of ordinance violation, the respondent may elect to abate or cease
the violation for which the notice of ordinance violation was issued, pay the
fine listed on the notice of ordinance violation, and not participate in the
hearing.
   (C)   Other relief. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary above,
nothing shall preclude the county from taking any other available legal action
necessary to prevent or to remedy any violation, including but not limited to
seeking injunctive relief, declaratory relief, fines, or money damages in a
court of competent jurisdiction or the disconnection of water service and/or
sewer service as specified in division (E) below.
   (D)   Service charges. In addition to division (A) above, any sanitary sewer
or manhole overflow, or sanitary sewer backup, resulting from a violation(s) of
any provision or section of this chapter, or an inadequately operating GRS, or
lack of an approved GRS, or any faulty pretreatment system shall result in the
imposition of a service charge to the responsible owner or customer. The
service charge shall include the costs of cleaning up the overflow or backup
and all costs of cleaning the blockage out of the immediately adjacent county
sewerage system. Imposition of a service charge under this section shall not
preclude other enforcement actions. In addition, the responsible customer shall
be responsible for payment of any fine levied by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency against the county as a result of any overflow or blockage in
the county sewerage system, or national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) permit discharge violation attributable to the customer violation(s) of
any provision or section of this chapter, or an inadequately operating GRS, or
lack of an approved GRS.
   (E)   Sewer and/or water service disconnection.
      (1)   The Director shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to
the occupants thereof, the sewer and/or water service to any premises for
violations of this chapter or without prior notice where, in his or her
judgment, a public health risk exists. Water shut off and/or disconnection of
the sanitary sewer of the individual user's property will result for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties and/or violation of this chapter. Prior to
disconnection the county will mail three notices to the service address on file
and the customer may contact the Director to settle the outstanding balance or
make payment arrangements to avoid service disconnection. Third and final
notice shall state "No further notices will be sent to you prior to
disconnection."
         (a)   Any violation under this chapter shall be subject to
discontinuation of water service to any premise served by a public water
supply. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected deficiencies in conformance with this chapter and to the
satisfaction of the Director, and all fees are paid.
         (b)   Payment for service is required even if the home/building is
vacant. Payment will be suspended if the home/building is uninhabitable, if a
demolition permit has been issued or if a disconnection permit has been issued
and the sewer service has been capped and inspected.
      (2)   Sewer and/or water service to such premises shall not be restored
until the customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in
conformance with this chapter and any required fees are paid.
      (3)   Neither the county nor or its employees, agents or assigns shall be
liable to any customers of the county sewerage system for any injury, damages
or lost revenues which may result from termination of the customer's sewer and/
or water service in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not
the termination of the sewer and/or water service was with or without notice.
      (4)   Where violations of this chapter result in impacts to the county's
sewerage system, the customer responsible for the impact may bear the cost to
repair and/or clean-up the sewerage system and any discharges therefrom.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person
to reconnect or turn on any sewer or water service which has been disconnected
by the county without written approval of the Director. In addition, when the
county is notified that sewer or water service has been unlawfully reconnected,
the county shall have the power to immediately disconnect such service without
notice.
      (6)   All costs incurred by the county in disconnecting sewer and/or
water service may be borne by and be the responsibility of the owner of the
property served and/or the customer. All such costs shall be paid to the county
before service is restored to the property.
   (F)   Liability. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, in
addition to the fine provided shall become liable to the county for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the county by reason of such violations,
whether the same was caused before the notice.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
CHAPTER 54: PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
Section
   
54.01   Introductory provisions
   
54.02   General sewer use requirements
   
54.03   Wastewater discharge permit
   
54.04   Validity; severability
   
54.05   Effective date
   
54.06   Variance
 
   
54.99   Penalty
§ 54.01 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be officially known and cited as the
Pretreatment Ordinance of Lake County, Illinois. References made herein to
"this chapter" shall be interpreted as referring to the Pretreatment Ordinance.
   (B)   Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the statutory authority
conferred by 55 ILCS 5/5-15021.
   (C)   Applicability and jurisdiction.
      (1)   This chapter shall apply to anyone whose waste stream is treated by
a Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facility. This chapter authorizes
the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permit, provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
      (2)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of Lake
County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities and enables the county to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water
Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR
403).
   (D)   Minimum requirements. The standards of this chapter are minimum
requirements. The issuance of any permit in accordance with the standards and
requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the recipient of such permit,
certificate or approval from the responsibility for complying with all other
applicable requirements of any other county, state or federal agency, having
jurisdiction over the structures or land uses for which the permit, certificate
or approval was issued.
   (E)   Purpose. The purposes of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Lake County
Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities that will or could interfere with the
operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludges and biosolids;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Lake County
Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities that will pass through the treatment
process and be discharged into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible
with the system;
      (3)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Lake County
Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities that will pose a health or safety
threat to the general public or to the Lake County industrial pretreatment
program, collection system field crew or Water Reclamation Facilities
personnel;
      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
biosolids from the Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities;
      (5)   To establish how surcharges for excessive strength wastewater
discharged into the Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities are
calculated and evaluated;
      (6)   To enable the Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities
to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit
conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or
state laws to which the Water Reclamation Facilities are subject.
   (F)   Word usage and construction of language.
      (1)   Meanings and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this chapter shall be construed according to the purpose set out
in division (E) above.
      (2)   Headings, illustrations and text. In case of any difference of
meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any heading,
drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control.
      (3)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists
of items or examples that use terms such as "including," "such as," or similar
language are intended to provide examples. They are not intended to be
exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
      (4)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last
day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the county, that day shall be
excluded.
      (5)   References to other regulations, publications and documents.
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or
document, that reference shall be construed as referring to the most recent
edition of such resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document or to
the relevant successor document, unless otherwise expressly stated.
      (6)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the county to perform an
act or duty, that provision shall be construed as authorizing officer,
department head or employee to delegate that responsibility to others over whom
they have authority.
      (7)   Technical and nontechnical terms. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
(See also division (J), "Definitions.")
      (8)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies, and
agencies to which references are made are those of Lake County, unless
otherwise expressly provided.
      (9)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall," "will," and
"must" are mandatory, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The
words "may" and "should" are advisory and discretionary terms.
      (10)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
         (a)   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events apply; and
         (b)   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events may apply.
      (11)   Tenses and plurals. Words used in one tense (past, present, or
future) include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (12)   Numerical calculations. Unless otherwise specifically indicated,
for standards involving the use of numbers, all calculations shall be rounded
to the nearest whole number.
   (G)   Conflicting provisions.
      (1)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of
this chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government,
the more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law.
      (2)   Conflict with other county regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions
found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the county, the more
restrictive provision will control. No text amendment, variance or condition of
approval placed on a permit or other form of county approval under this chapter
shall have the effect of nullifying, abrogating or diminishing the provisions
of any other county ordinance.
   (H)   Transitional provisions.
      Violations continue. Any violation of the pretreatment provisions of any
previous county ordinance, or any previously permitted or enforced local limit
shall continue to be a violation under this chapter and shall be subject to
penalties and enforcement under § 54.99, unless the use, construction or other
activity is consistent with the express terms of this chapter, in which case
enforcement action shall cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties
for violations that occurred before the adoption of this chapter.
   (I)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BMPs    Best management practices
BOD     Biochemical oxygen demand
CBOD5   Carbonaceous 5-day biochemical oxygen demand
CFR     Code of Federal Regulations
CIU     Categorical industrial user
COD     Chemical oxygen demand
GPM     Gallons per minute
HEM     Hexane extractable material
IEPA    Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
µg/L   Micrograms per liter
mg/L    Milligrams per liter
NORM    Naturally occurring radioactive material
NPDES   National pollutant discharge elimination system
NSCIU   Non-significant categorical industrial user
O&G     Oils and grease
P-HEM   Polar hexane extractable material
POTW    Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA    Resource Conservation Recovery Act
SGT-HEM Silica gel treated hexane extractable material
SIC     Standard industrial classification
SIU     Significant industrial user
SWDA    Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
TENORM  Technically enhanced naturally occurring radioactive material
TSS     Total suspended solids
TTO     Total toxic organics
USC     United States Code
USEPA   United States Environmental Protection Agency
WRF     Water reclamation facility
 
   (J)   Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
      ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean
Water Act and the Water Quality Act of 1987. (33 USC 1251 et seq.)
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. With respect to an industrial user:
         (a)   Principal executive officer or at least the level of vice-
president, or proprietor if the user is a corporation; or
         (b)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or
         (c)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above. A person is a duly authorized representative only if the authorization
is made in writing to Lake County by a person described in divisions (a) or (b)
above of this definition.
      BASELINE MONITORING REPORT. The report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-7).
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent
or reduce the pollution of "waters of the United States" as defined by the
Clean Water Act 40 CFR 230.3. BMPs also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control water reclamation facility site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
material storage.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5). The measurement of the amount of
organic pollution that can be oxidized biologically in a sample of water,
expressed in mg/L, over a five-day period using laboratory procedures as
described in Standard Methods.
      BIOSOLIDS. The liquid containing solids or semi-solid Water Reclamation
Facilities byproduct that has been processed to allow its disposal or land
application in accordance with applicable federal and state regulations.
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility.
      CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD5). The same standard method
test as defined in BOD5 where the contribution from nitrogenous bacteria has
been suppressed.
      CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (CIU). An industrial user that is currently
subject to a categorical pretreatment standard.
      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The measure of oxygen consuming capacity,
expressed in mg/L, of inorganic and organic matter present in wastewater. It is
expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a
specific test using procedures as described in Standard Methods.
      CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR). The official compilation of rules and
regulations of the agencies of the United States government.
      COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA. The combined waste stream formula as found
at 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The numerical average of all grab samples or the result
of an analysis of a single sample formed by combining all individual aliquots.
A daily COMPOSITE SAMPLE must be based upon at least four grab samples taken at
different times and representative of the user's flow.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Ammonia ntrogen, CBOD5, fats, oils and grease by
HEM, TSS, pH, COD and fecal coliform bacteria.
      DENTAL DISCHARGER. Any non-mobile company or firm that removes amalgam
(mercury and silver amalgam). DENTAL DISCHARGERS shall not be governed or
classified as a categorial or significant industrial user as defined herein.
These dischargers will be subject to the rules and regulations set forth in 40
CFR 441.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Lake County Public Works or his or her duly
authorized representative.
      ECONOMIC BENEFIT. The difference between the cost of on-time compliance
and delayed compliance. ECONOMIC BENEFITS realized by a user who fails to
comply by a required deadline can be measured by:
         (a)   The money that the user would expect to earn by delaying the
purchase of pretreatment equipment and investing the money in more profitable
projects; or
         (b)   The annual cost the user avoids, and the expected return on
avoided costs during the period of noncompliance; or
         (c)   Any competitive advantage the user may gain, such as increased
market share over competitors already in compliance, because of cost advantages
attributed to delayed compliance.
      EXISTING SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge, which is not a new source.
      FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG).The sum of polar hexane extractable material
(P-HEM) (polar hydrocarbons such as vegetable oils, animal fats, and other
highly biodegradable oils) and of silica gel treated hexane extractable
material (SGT-HEM) (non-polar hydrocarbons such as petroleum oil, non-
biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin) as determined by HEM
and SGT-HEM analyses. FOG is interchangeable with HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL
(HEM).
      FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
      FLOW. Volume of wastewater per unit of time.
      GALLONS PER MINUTE (GPM). A rate of water, wastewater or other flow.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from commercial handling, storage and sale
of produce.
      GRAB. A sample which is collected from a waste stream on a one-time basis
without regard to the waste stream flow and without consideration of time.
      HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL (HEM). The oil and grease extracted from a
wastewater sample using USEPA Method 1664 as found in USEPA document EPA-821-B-
94-004, October, 1994.
      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. All pollutants other than the compatible
pollutants as defined herein.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities from any non-domestic source regulated
under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, state law, or this chapter.
      INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge including, but not
limited to, a manufacturing or process facility or other facility engaged in
the purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business or who otherwise renders
services to the public.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, that both:
         (a)   Inhibits or disrupts the Lake County Water Reclamation
Facilities, including, but not necessarily limited to: the collection and
conveyance of wastewater to the Water Reclamation Facilities, the processes or
operations of the Water Reclamation Facilities, or the use or disposal of
sludges and biosolids produced by the Water Reclamation Facilities; and
         (b)   Is therefore a cause of a violation of any requirement of Lake
County's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued there
under(or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean
Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, most
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and
including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries
Act.
      LAKE COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois including the Lake County Department
of Public Works.
      MEDICAL WASTE. Any isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiological
agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/L). A unit of concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 m/L of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
      MICROGRAMS PER LITER (µg/L). A unit of concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.000001 g of the constituent in 1,000 m/L of
water.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any pretreatment regulation
specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants which may be discharged
to a Water Reclamation Facilities by industrial users promulgated by the USEPA
in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317). This term
includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5 or
any revision thereto.
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued for the direct discharge to waters of the United States pursuant to
Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1342).
      NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act
which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section.
         (a)   If national categorical pretreatment standards are not
applicable, NEW SOURCE shall mean any building, structure, facility, or
installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the
remodeling (if that remodeling results in a new SIC code being assigned to the
industrial user by Lake County) or the construction of which commences after
the effective date of this chapter.
      NON-SIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (NSCIU). A categorical
industrial user, who does not discharge a regulated waste, or meet the
definition of a SIU.
      NORM. Naturally occurring radioactive materials as defined in Section 3.1
of the Guidance on Radioactive Materials in Sewage and Ash at Publicly Owned
Treatment Works Interagency Steering Committee on Radiation Standards.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the Lake County Water Reclamation
Facilities into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations
which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Lake County's NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the
plural where indicated by context.
      pH. The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated
by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
      POLAR HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL (P-HEM). Vegetable oils, animal fats,
other highly degradable oils and other polar hydrocarbons as determined by
subtracting a sample's SGT-HEM content from its HEM content. POLAR FOG is
defined as floatable oils, fat or grease of animal or vegetable origin.
      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial, agricultural waste, or any
other contaminant.
      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the Lake County Water Reclamation
Facilities. This can be accomplished by physical, chemical or biochemical
processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR
403.6(d).
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an
industrial user.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Any Lake County prohibitive discharge standard as
set forth in §
54.02(A), Lake County specific limitation on discharge as set forth in §
54.02(E), or a national categorical pretreatment standard.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used
in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature that convey wastewater to the POTW
regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other
conveyances not connected to the POTW.
      RECEIVING WATER. A surface body of water into which wastewater or
effluent is discharged.
      RESOURCE CONSERVATION RECOVERY ACT (RCRA). The federal law in the United
States governing disposal of solid and hazardous waste.
      SANITARY SEWER. Any pipe conduit, or other device used that collects and
conveys sewage and polluted industrial wastes and to which stormwater, surface
drainage, groundwater or unpolluted wastewater are not intentionally admitted.
      SELF-MONITORING REPORT.The report required by 40 CFR 403.12(e) to be
submitted by the industrial user every six months to Lake County.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to the Water
Reclamation Facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).
         (a)    Any industrial user of the Lake County Water Reclamation
Facilities who meets any of the following criteria:
            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater into the Water Reclamation Facilities (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater); or
            2.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more
of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the Water
Reclamation Facilities; or
            3.   Is designated as such by Lake County on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting Lake
County's Water Reclamation Facilities' operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6));
or
            4.   Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR
403.6 and 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N.
         (b)   Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
divisions (a)(1) through (3) of this definition has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities or violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement, Lake County may, at any time, on its
own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user,
and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(F)(6), determine that such industrial user
is not an SIU.
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. Violations by point source dischargers of
sufficient magnitude or duration to be a regulatory priority. An IU is in
significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following
criteria:
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-
month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3 (l); or
         (b)   Technical review criterion (TRC) violations defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
monitoring period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment
standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR
403.3(l) maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by an applicable TRC
factor. The TRC factor for CBOD5, TSS, O&G is 1.4. The TRC factor for all other
pollutants except pH, is 1.2.; or
         (c)   Any other discharge violations that Lake County believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interferences or pass
through (including endangering the health of Lake County personnel or the
general public); or
         (d)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in Lake
County's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge under §
54.99; or
         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement action for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance; or
         (f)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, self-
monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; or
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations which Lake County
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the Lake
County pretreatment program.
      SLUDGE. The settleable solids separated from liquids during the
wastewater treatment process.
      SLUG. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
      SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL ACT OF 1965 (42 USC 6901 et seq.) (SWDA). The law
passed by Congress to regulate methods for disposal of household, municipal,
commercial and industrial wastes.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). The system used by government
agencies to classify industry areas.
      STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Environment Federation; and other procedures as recognized by the USEPA and
IEPA.
      STATE. The State of Illinois.
      SURCHARGE. The fee Lake County assesses to industrial user for the
treatment of excessive or high strength sewage, without incurring a violation
for one or more pollutants.
      TENORM. Technically enhanced naturally occurring radioactive materials,
technologically enhanced by human activity as defined in Section 3.1 of the
Guidance on Radioactive Materials in Sewage and Ash at Publicly Owned Treatment
Works Interagency Steering Committee on Radiation Standards.
      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or (TSS). The total filterable residue, expressed
in milligrams per liter that either floats on the surface of, or is in
suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by filtration
as prescribed in Standard Methods.
      TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS (TTO). The sum of the masses or concentrations of
specific toxic organic compounds at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/L.
Each categorical standard lists the specific toxic organic compounds that are
to be included in the summation to define TTO for the category.
      TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants identified as
toxic pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or
other federal statutes or in regulations promulgated by the state under state
law.
      UNITED STATES CODE (USC). The collection of the general and permanent
laws of the United States.
      UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (USEPA). An independent
federal agency established to coordinate programs aimed at reducing pollution
and protecting the environment.
      UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
quality criteria set forth in Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code,
Part 304 or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards set forth in Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code, Parts 302
and 303 and would not be benefitted by discharge to sanitary sewers and Water
Reclamation Facilities provided.
      UPSET. An incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the Industrial User. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
Water Reclamation Facilities, inadequate Water Reclamation Facilities, lack of
preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities.
      WASTEWATER. The combination of the liquid and water carrying industrial
or domestic wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, or
institutions including polluted cooling water, whether treated or untreated.
      WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. The document(s) allowing discharge into the
Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities and issued to a user by Lake County in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
      WATER RECLAMATION FACILITY. A treatment works as defined by Section 212
of the Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the
storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature that convey wastewater to the Water Reclamation
Facility regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other
conveyances not connected to the Water Reclamation Facility. Also referred to
as PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW).
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 54.02 GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibited discharge standards. An industrial user that discharges to
a county-owned interceptor that is tributary to a POTW owned and operated by an
outside agency shall be subject to the local POTW's pretreatment requirements
      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, sub-surface drainage, non-contact
cooling waters, or any other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer, unless
specifically authorized by the Director or his or her representative.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to bypass if not in accordance with §
54.02 (E).
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to violate any
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (4)   (a)   The general prohibition found in division (A)(5) below and
specific prohibitions found in division (A)(6) below shall apply to all users
of the Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities whether or not a
user is subject to national categorical standards or any other national, state
or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
         (b)   A user shall have an affirmative action defense in any action
brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established
in division (A)(5) below and the specific prohibitions in divisions (A)(6)(c),
(A)(6)(d), (A)(6)(e), (A)(6)(f) and (A)(6)(g) below where the user can
demonstrate that:
            1.   It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or other discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference; and
            2.   A local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or
interference, as the case may be, was developed for each pollutant in the
user's discharge that caused pass through or interference, and the user was in
compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass
through or interference; or
            3.   If a local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or
interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the pollutant that
caused the pass through or interference, and the user's discharge directly
prior to and during the pass through or interference did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge
activity when the Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities were
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of
interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal.
      (5)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
or performance of the Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities or
will pass through the Water Reclamation Facilities.
      (6)   In addition, the following pollutants shall not be introduced into
the Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities:
         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the
wastewater collection system, including, but not limited to:
            1.   Waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140
degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in
40 CFR 261.21; or
            2.   Waste streams that create two successive lower explosion limit
(LEL) readings of 5% or any single reading of 10% occur at any point in the
Water Reclamation Facilities.
         (b)   Any wastewater which will cause corrosive structural damage to
the water feclamation racilities, or any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0
Std. units, or any wastewater having a pH greater than 9.5 Std. units which is
not in accordance with the notification requirements of division (P) below.
         (c)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the Water
Reclamation Facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with
particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts, or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, towels, excessive non-biodegradable products,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud, glass, grinding or
polishing wastes, tumbling or deburring stones, or any material which can be
disposed of as trash.
         (d)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, released at a flow or
concentration, either singly or by interaction with other sources, to injure or
cause interference with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, cause pass through resulting in a violation of the water
quality standards of the receiving waters of the Lake County Public Works Water
Reclamation Facilities, exceed any limitation set forth in a national
categorical pretreatment standard (when effective) or in division (E) below or
create a public nuisance.
         (e)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the Water Reclamation Facilities resulting in
interference. In no case shall wastewater be discharged which causes
temperatures at the head of any of the Lake County Public Works Water
Reclamation Facilities to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit or 40 degrees
Centigrade.
         (f)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
         (g)   Any pollutant(s), which either singly or by interaction with
other wastewater, result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes in the
Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities in a quantity that may
cause acute worker health and safety problems to occur.
         (h)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Lake County Public Works Department in accordance with
division (S) below.
         (i)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastewaters are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
         (j)   In no case shall a substance be discharged into the Lake County
wastewater collection system which causes Lake County to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act or any criteria guidelines or regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the RCRA, SWDA, the Clean Air Act,
or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
         (k)   Any waters or wastes containing color producing or odor
producing substances that will inhibit, interfere or pass through the treatment
process.
         (l)   Materials which exert or cause:
            1.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute an excessive load on the Water Reclamation
Facility, in the opinion of the Lake County Public Works.
            2.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate).
         (m)   Any wastewater containing compatible pollutants of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the Water Reclamation Facilities; provided, however, that a
User may be permitted by specific written agreement with Lake County, which
agreement to discharge such compatible pollutants may provide for special
charges, payments or provisions for treating or testing equipment.
         (n)   Any discharge exceeding the standards established in Title 35 of
the Illinois Administrative Code, Part 307.
         (o)   Any slug discharged into the Lake County Public Works Water
Reclamation Facilities.
         (p)   Any regulated medical waste as defined by 40 CFR 259.30(a), or
residues resultant from treatment and destruction processes of said waste,
except as specifically authorized by the Director or his or her representative
in a wastewater discharge permit.
         (q)   Any wastewater containing detergents, surface active agents
(surfactants), or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
Lake County Public Works Water Reclamation Facilities.
         (r)   Any waters or wastes containing chlorine above 2 mg/L.
      (7)   Compliance with the provisions of this section shall be required on
the effective date of promulgation of this chapter.
   (B)   Sampling and analysis procedures to be used. Wastewater sampling and
analysis procedures to determine compliance with the limits found in this
chapter shall conform to those specified at 40 CFR 136. Lake County may
designate sampling and analysis procedures for those pollutants not specified
at 40 CFR 136.
   (C)   Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
      (1)   The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated into
this chapter by reference.
      (2)   Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment
standard for a particular user, the said standard, if more stringent than the
limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that category, shall,
when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and conditions imposed
under this chapter. Lake County shall notify all known affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-6)
   (D)   State requirements. Illinois Pretreatment Program requirements, found
at Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code, Parts 307 and 310, are hereby
incorporated into this chapter by reference.
   (E)   Local limits.
      (1)   Compliance with the provisions of this division (E) for new sources
shall be required on the effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   Compliance with the provisions of this division (E) for existing
sources shall be required within two years of the effective date of this
chapter where such limits for a given pollutant(s) are new or are more
stringent than the limits they are superseding. Limits which are being
superseded shall remain in effect until two years past the effective date of
this chapter.
      (3)   Unless otherwise indicated, concentrations in this division (E) are
expressed in mg/L and refer to the total amount of the constituent present in
all phases, whether solid, suspended or dissolved, elemental or combined,
including all oxidation states. Where constituents may be measured as other
than total, the word "total" is indicated for clarity.
      (4)   Fats, oils and grease, or hexane extractable material (HEM),
indicated in this section and division (E)(6), refers to the sum of polar
hexane extractable material (P-HEM) (polar hydrocarbons such as vegetable oils,
animal fats, and other highly biodegradable oils) and of silica gel treated
hexane extractable material (SGT-HEM) (non-polar hydrocarbons such as petroleum
oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin) as
determined by HEM and SGT-HEM analyses.
      (5)   Each discharge from an industrial user, as measured under the
provisions of this chapter and 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed the daily maximum
for each pollutant listed below:
Des Plaines River POTW
Table 1
Pollutant Parameters
Pollutant Daily Maximum
Des Plaines River POTW
Table 1
Pollutant Parameters
Pollutant         Daily Maximum
Arsenic, Total    0.25 mg/L
Cadmium, Total    0.95 mg/L
Chromium, Total   4.20 mg/L
Chromium+6, Total 1.0 mg/L
Copper, Total     1.0 mg/L
Iron, Total       20 mg/L
Lead, Total       1.0 mg/L
Mercury, Total    0.0005 mg/L
Nickel, Total     1.0 mg/L
Selenium, Total   1.5 mg/L
Silver, Total     0.5 mg/L
Zinc, Total       1.5 mg/L
 
New Century Town POTW
Table 2
Pollutant Parameters
Pollutant Daily Maximum
New Century Town POTW
Table 2
Pollutant Parameters
Pollutant         Daily Maximum
Arsenic, Total    0.25 mg/L
Cadmium, Total    0.95 mg/L
Chromium, Total   4.20 mg/L
Chromium+6, Total 1.0 mg/L
Copper, Total     1.0 mg/L
Lead, Total       1.0 mg/L
Mercury, Total    0.0005 mg/L
Nickel, Total     1.0 mg/L
Selenium, Total   1.5 mg/L
Silver, Total     0.5 mg/L
Zinc, Total       1.5 mg/L
 
Mill Creek POTW
Table 3
Pollutant Parameters
Pollutant Daily Maximum
Mill Creek POTW
Table 3
Pollutant Parameters
Pollutant         Daily Maximum
Arsenic, Total    0.25 mg/L
Cadmium, Total    0.95 mg/L
Chromium, Total   4.20 mg/L
Chromium+6, Total 1.0 mg/L
Copper, Total     1.0 mg/L
Lead, Total       1.0 mg/L
Mercury, Total    0.0005 mg/L
Nickel, Total     1.00 mg/L
Silver, Total     0.5 mg/L
Zinc, Total       1.5 mg/L
Selenium, Total   1.5 mg/L
 
 
(Foot notes apply to all three tables)
1.   Discharges exceeding the numeric standard for Total Mercury shall be allowed if
all of the following conditions are met:
   a.   The discharger does not use mercury; or, the discharger uses mercury and
this use cannot be eliminated; or, the discharger uses mercury only in chemical
analysis or in laboratory or other equipment and takes reasonable care to avoid
contamination of wastewater; and
   b.   The discharger is providing the best degree of treatment consistent with
technological feasibility, economic reasonableness and sound engineering judgment.
This may include no treatment for mercury; and
   c.   The discharger has an inspection and maintenance program likely to reduce or
prevent an increase in the level of mercury discharges.
   However, in no case shall any discharge of mercury, alone or in combination with
other sources, cause pass through or interference at the POTW as prohibited by 40-
CFR-403.5(a)(1).
2.   Discharges exceeding the numeric standard for Total Silver shall be allowed if
all of the following conditions are met:
   a.   The discharger does not use silver; or, the discharger uses silver and this
use cannot be eliminated; or, the discharger uses silver only in chemical analysis
or in laboratory or other equipment and takes reasonable care to avoid contamination
of wastewater; and
   b.   The discharger is providing the best degree of treatment consistent with
technological feasibility, economic reasonableness and sound engineering judgment as
indicated in the most current version of the "Code of Management Practice for Silver
Dischargers," as published by the Association of Metropolitan Sewerage Agencies
(AMSA) and the Silver Council; and
   c.   The discharger has an inspection and maintenance program likely to reduce or
prevent an increase in the level of silver discharges.
   However, in no case shall any discharge of silver, alone or in combination with
other sources, cause pass through or interference at the POTW as prohibited by 40-
CFR-403.5(a)(1).
 
 
      (6)   Each discharge from an industrial user, as measured under the
provisions of this chapter and 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed the maximum
concentration for each pollutant listed below:
 
Pollutant               Maximum Concentration
Cyanide, Total          0.15 mg/L
FOG Polar (P-HEM)       200 mg/L
FOG Non-Polar (SGT-HEM) 100 mg/L
Phenol, Total           15 mg/L
 
      (7)   Each discharge from an industrial user, as measured under the
provisions of this chapter and 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed the maximum
concentration level for each pollutant listed below:
 
Pollutant                 Maximum Concentration
Biochemical Oxygen Demand 470 mg/L
Chemical Oxygen Demand    1250 mg/L
Total Phosphorus          24 mg/L
Total Suspended Solids    460 mg/L
Ammonia, Nitrogen         25 mg/L
Chloride                  500 mg/L
 
   (F)   TENORM dischargers.
      (1)   If a user as defined herein is required by federal or state
drinking water regulations to remove NORM, and the process chosen by the
municipality requires periodic discharge of TENORM to the sanitary sewer, the
user must petition Lake County to accept the waste under §
54.03.
      (2)   The accumulation of TENORM in the bio-solids is a major concern.
The discharge of combined radium (Ra 226/Ra 228) to the sanitary sewer in
excess of 5.0 pCi/L shall not be acceptable and is a violation of this chapter.
      (3)   Current users shall have a mutually agreed upon action plan within
two years after the effective date of this permit. The action plan should
address the steps that will be taken to discontinue the discharge of TENORM to
the county's treatment facility.
   (G)   Notice of violation/resampling requirement. The user shall notify Lake
County within 24 hours of becoming aware of any violation of the wastewater
discharge limits noted in divisions (C), (D), or (E) above if such violation
was discovered through sampling performed by the usa er. The user shall also
conduct an additional sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
additional analysis to Lake County within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation, except if:
      (1)   Lake County performs sampling of the industrial user at least once
per month; or
      (2)   Lake County performs sampling at the user between the time when the
user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the
results of this initial sampling.
   (H)   Surcharge program. Lake County has determined that certain pollutants
are compatible with the Water Reclamation Facilities. Lake County reserves the
right to recover the treatment costs for those compatible pollutants that
exceed the surcharge levels listed in this division (H).
 
Compatible Pollutant              Surcharge Level
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD5) 470 mg/L
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD)      1250 mg/L
Total Suspended Solids (TSS)      460 mg/L
Ammonia Nitrogen (NH3-N)          25 mg/L
 
The excessive strength sewage surcharges for these pollutants shall be
calculated using the following formula:
   PS= (PAVG – PSL) X Q X 8.34 X TCP
where:       
PS =   the excessive strength surcharge for the given compatible pollutant.
PAVG =   the average concentration of the compatible pollutant for the
wastewater discharge in question.
PSL =   the surcharge level concentration of the compatible pollutant as
indicated in any Lake County Ordinances or Rate Schedules in effect at the time
the surcharge is calculated.
Q =   the Industrial User wastewater flow in millions of gallons per day (MGD).
8.34 =   a factor which converts the product of concentration (mg/L) and flow
(MGD) into pounds of compatible pollutant.
TCP =   the treatment cost charge per pound of the compatible pollutant, such
charge being stipulated by any Lake County ordinances or Rate Schedules in
effect at the time the surcharge is calculated.
Lake County reserves the right to include, at its discretion, other parameters
which it determines are compatible with the wastewater treatment process. Lake
County does not consider industrial wastewater concentrations of compatible
pollutants above the surcharge levels listed to be discharge violations except
for those concentrations or slug loadings which would cause interference or
pass through at the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities.
   (I)   Right of revision. Lake County reserves the right to establish, by
ordinance or in wastewater discharge permit, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges into the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities.
   (J)   Inspection, sampling and records keeping.
      (1)   The county will coordinate with owners/directors or their designee
to conduct inspection of industrial facilities to ascertain whether the
purposes of this chapter are being met and if all requirements of this chapter
are being complied with pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(v). Persons or occupants
of premises where wastewater is discharged, or a treatment system is located,
or where records required by this chapter are kept, shall cooperate with Lake
County or its representatives to allow access upon presentation of credentials,
at reasonable times to all parts of said premises where wastewater is
generated, treated, or discharged, or chemicals are stored, or records are
kept, for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying of
records required to be kept by this chapter, and in the performance of their
duties.
      (2)   Lake County shall have the right to set up on the user's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, monitoring and metering
operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require
suitable identification, necessary arrangements must be made with their
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel
from Lake County shall be permitted to enter immediately for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities. Unreasonable delays in allowing
access to the commercial and industrial user's premises shall be a violation of
this chapter.
      (3)   The Director or his or her representative shall not turn over or
release property such as cell phones, cameras or other electronic devices to
the user and shall be allowed access to inspect the facilities. These are
inspection tools, used to document waste streams, pretreatment units or
processes that are difficult to describe or explain. The Director or his or her
representative shall be allowed to take pictures and photographs of waste
stream(s) and pretreatment units to document processes or violation(s).
      (4)   The Director or his or her designee will work with the IU during
the inspection to ensure that confidentially is protected and the information
needed for the investigation is obtained. Confiscation of the Director's or his
or her designated representative's property, shall be classified as theft and
tampering with the property shall be considered vandalism.
      (5)   Users and Lake County shall maintain records of all information
resulting from any monitoring activities required by this chapter or, in the
case of industrial users, by 40 CFR 403.12(n). Lake County and industrial users
shall maintain such records for a minimum of three years. This period of
retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation
regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user or operation of
Lake County's pretreatment program or when requested by the Regional
Administrator or the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
(IEPA).
   (K)   Monitoring facilities. Lake County shall require monitoring facilities
to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or
internal drainage systems be provided and operated at the user's own expense.
      (1)   Whenever required by Lake County, an industrial user shall install
a large manhole or sampling chamber for each separate discharge in the
building's sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by Lake
County. Each manhole or sampling chamber shall be installed and maintained at
all times at the User's expense and shall have ample room to permit Lake County
to take accurate composite samples for analysis.
         (a)   The monitoring facilities shall be situated on the user's
premises. However, when such a location is impractical or causes undue hardship
to the user, Lake County may allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping, parked vehicles, or other activities of the user.
         (b)   The monitoring facility shall be safely, easily and
independently accessible to authorized representatives of Lake County any time
or day of the week.
      (2)   Where required by Lake County, additional control manholes or
sampling chambers shall be provided at the end of each industrial process
within an industrial user's facility suitable for the determination of
compliance with "end of process" pretreatment standards.
   (L)   Dilution. No user shall increase the use of process water or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained
within the national categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), or in
any other pollutant-specific limitations developed by Lake County.
   (M)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in divisions
(A) and (E) above within the time limitations specified by the USEPA or Lake
County, whichever is more stringent. An industrial user with a pretreatment
process shall keep that process operated and maintained at the user's expense.
An industrial user may need to upgrade their facility to be in compliance with
this chapter. Detailed plans, describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to Lake County for review before such facilities
are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no
way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to Lake County under the provisions
of this chapter.
   (N)   Slug/spill prevention control and countermeasure plans (SSPCC).
      (1)   Each industrial user having the ability to cause Interference with
the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities or to violate the regulatory
provisions of this chapter shall provide protection from accidental discharge
into the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities of prohibited materials. Such
protection shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost
and expense.
      (2)   The industrial user shall control either its production or its
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable
regulations in the event of reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment
is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost
or fails.
      (3)   The county shall evaluate each significant industrial user (SIU) at
least once every two years, and other industrial users as necessary, to
determine whether such users need an SSPCC plan. If Lake County determines an
SSPCC plan is required, the plan shall contain at a minimum the following
elements:
         (a)   A description of discharge practices including periodic or non-
routine discharges;
         (b)   A description of stored chemicals;
         (c)   The procedures for immediately notifying Lake County Public
Works of a slug/spill in accordance with the procedures outlined in division
(O) below; and
         (d)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control
of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
      (4)   Industrial users that store hazardous materials shall not discharge
into the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities after the effective date of
this chapter unless an SSPCC plan has been approved by Lake County. Approval of
such plans shall not relieve the industrial user from complying with all other
laws and regulations governing the use, storage, and transportation of
hazardous materials.
   (O)   Notification.
      (1)   Slug/spill incidents.
         (a)   In the case of an accidental or deliberate discharge of
compatible or incompatible pollutants which may cause interference or pass
through at the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities or violate any
requirements of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of the industrial
user to immediately telephone and notify Lake County Public Works of the
incident. The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location
and time of the discharge, the type of wastewater, the concentration and volume
discharged, and any corrective actions taken by the user.
         (b)   Within five days following such an accidental or deliberate
discharge, the industrial user shall submit to Lake County a detailed written
report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Follow-up reports may be
required by Lake County as needed.
         (c)   Such report(s) shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities, fish kills, or any damage to person
or property; nor shall such report(s) relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or
otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate discharges may, in
addition to any other remedies available to Lake County, result in the
revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   All industrial users shall give a 30-day notice in writing to Lake
County in the event that the type, quality, or volume of wastewater, including
hazardous waste notification, from the property is expected to materially and
substantially change.
      (3)   SIUs are required to notify the Director or his or her
representative immediately of any changes at its facility creating the
potential for a slug discharge.
   (P)   Notification of hazardous waste discharge.
      (1)   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify Lake County, the IEPA, and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA) Region 5 authorities in writing of any discharge into
the sanitary sewer of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
listed or characteristic hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.
         (a)   Such notification shall include:
            1.   The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261;
            2.   The EPA hazardous waste number; and
            3.   The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
         (b)   All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after
the discharge commences. Any notification under this division (P) need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notification
of changed discharges must be submitted in accordance with division (O) above.
         (c)   In addition, if the industrial user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month into the Lake County Water
Reclamation Facilities, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is readily available to the
industrial user:
            1.   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in
the wastes;
            2.   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharged during the calendar month; and
            3.   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
      (2)   Industrial users are exempt from the requirements of division (P)
(1) above during the calendar months in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 40 CFR
261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous waste in
a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous waste, requires a one-
time notification.
      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste, the industrial user
must notify Lake County, IEPA, and USEPA Region 5 authorities of such substance
within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this division (P), the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
   (Q)   Confidential information.
      (1)   Information and data relating to an industrial user obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and
from inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless
otherwise restricted in division (Q)(4) below, or the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of Lake County, that
the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.
All information and data, confidential or otherwise, shall be made available to
the IEPA and the USEPA for use in judicial review and enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report.
      (2)   Effluent data provided to Lake County shall not be recognized as
confidential and shall be made available to the public, IEPA, and USEPA without
restriction unless otherwise restricted in division (Q)(4) below.
      (3)   Investigatory records or compliance information gathered for
federal, state, or Lake County enforcement purposes shall be allowed to be
inspected and copied upon request of the governmental agency, to be used in
enforcement proceedings related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program.
      (4)   Information accepted by Lake County as confidential shall not be
transmitted to the general public by Lake County unless agreed to by the
industrial user.
      (5)   The Director or his or her representative shall implement measures
to prevent the negligent release of confidential information. However, Lake
County and the Director or his or her representative shall not be held legally
responsible for release of information if they acted in good faith.
   (R)   Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to
any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the
owner or tenant is an industrial user, either or both shall be held responsible
for compliance with this chapter.
   (S)   Hauled wastewater.
      (1)   Domestic septage tank wastes may be accepted into the Lake County
Water Reclamation Facilities at a designated receiving structure within the
Water Reclamation Facility area, and at such times as are established by the
Director or his or her representative, provided such wastes do not violate
division (A) above or any other requirements established or adopted by Lake
County. Wastewater hauler discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such
facilities shall be issued in accordance with the Lake County Sewer Use
Ordinance (Chapter 53) or its successors, and any amendments made thereto.
      (2)   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as "industrial septage"
requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
54.03. The Director or his representative shall have the authority to prohibit
the disposal of such wastes in accordance with §
54.03(C). Waste haulers shall be subject to all other sections of this chapter.
   (T)   Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment, or other part of the Lake County Water
Reclamation Facilities or wastewater collection system. Any person found in
violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions (enforcement
remedies) set forth in §
54.99.
   (U)   Batch discharge. A user is allowed to discharge non-domestic
wastewater as a batch. However, that batch shall meet all local limits as
specified within the ordinance prior to discharge. Lake County Public Works
reserves the right to sample batch discharge.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 54.03 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   (A)   Prohibition of discharge without a permit.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge
wastewater into the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities without a
wastewater discharge permit issued by Lake County or be in violation of the
conditions of their permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   In areas where the county provides sewer and treatment service and
communities in those areas have an existing pretreatment program, they shall
continue to issue permits to industrial users until the county has an approved
pretreatment program.
      (3)   Communities with approved pretreatment programs shall be the
control authority responsible for permitting and monitoring IUs tributary to
locally owned sewers. The community shall enforce the more restrictive limits
established in the Lake County local limits or their respective ordinances for
sewers tributary to Lake County WRFs until such time as the Lake County
pretreatment program has been approved by USEPA. Once the Lake County
pretreatment program is approved by USEPA Lake County shall become the control
authority for IUs tributary to Lake County WRFs.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit. All industrial users proposing to connect
to sewers that discharge into the Lake County WRFs shall obtain a wastewater
discharge permit at least 90 days prior to such connection or discharge. All
existing industrial users shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within 30
days after notification by Lake County.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permit application.
         (a)   Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit shall complete and file with Lake County, an application form,
prescribed by Lake County, and accompanied by a fee as outlined in the Rate
Ordinance. The application form shall be duly signed and certified by an
authorized representative of the industrial user.
         (b)   If additional user operation and maintenance or pretreatment
techniques or installations will be required to meet pretreatment standards,
the industrial user shall submit to Lake County the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
pretreatment standards.
            1.   The schedule for compliance shall, at a minimum, contain
increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion
of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing
final plans, executing contracts for the purchase of major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, and the like).
            2.   No increment of progress referred to herein shall exceed nine
months.
            3.   No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to Lake
County including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps
being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established.
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to
Lake County.
         (c)   The applicant shall provide any other information as deemed by
Lake County to be necessary to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, Lake County
may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions
provided herein.
         (d)   All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user
reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain
the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permit
shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by Lake County. A
wastewater discharge permit shall contain the following terms and conditions:
         (a)   A statement of duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be
issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. The permittee
shall file an application for renewal of its permit at least 90 days prior to
expiration of the existing permit. The user shall apply on a form provided by
Lake County for the reissuance of the permit. Upon reissuance, any applicable
provisions of the permit issued during the term of the expiring permit shall be
incorporated as conditions of the reissued permit.
         (b)   A statement of non-transferability. A wastewater discharge
permit is issued to a specific user for the process activity specified in the
permit. A permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner or
new user in different premises or to a new or changed operation in the same or
different premises without the prior approval of Lake County. If the premises
are sold or otherwise transferred by the permittee to a new owner who will
maintain the operation in the same premises, then the permit held by the seller
shall be reissued by Lake County to the new owner as a temporary permit,
provided that the new owner shall immediately apply for a new permit in
accordance with this chapter and further provided that the temporary permit
shall only be effective for 90 days after the date of sale or transfer. Lake
County shall have the same remedies for violation of temporary permit as it has
for violation of another permit.
         (c)   Effluent limitations, including best management practices, on
average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics based upon the
more stringent of federal, state, or local discharge limits as established by
Lake County ordinances, which may include requirements for time, flow
regulation or equalization prior to discharge for each separate discharge of
the user.
         (d)   Specifications and requirements for the establishment of
compliance monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency
of sampling, number and type of standard testing, submission of technical or
discharge reports, or the installation and operation of monitoring facilities
for each separate discharge of the user.
         (e)   Requirements to retain for a minimum of three years any records
of monitoring activities and results relating to wastewater discharge and for
affording Lake County access to said records in accordance with §
54.02(J).
         (f)   A statement that any user found to have violated any provision
of this chapter is subject to the enforcement remedies found at §
54.99. Such enforcement shall include, but shall not be limited to, the fines
and civil penalties found at §
54.99(G) and (J).
         (g)   A compliance schedule(s), if necessary.
         (h)   Requirements for notification of accidental or deliberate
discharge of pollutants which may cause problems in the Lake County Water
Reclamation Facilities, including, but not limited to slug loadings, bypasses,
upsets, or any violations in accordance with §
54.02(O).
         (i)   Requirements for industrial users to give a 30-day notice in
writing to Lake County in the event that the type, quality, or volume of
wastewater, including hazardous waste notification, from the property is
expected to materially and substantially change in accordance with §
54.02(O)(2).
         (j)   Requirements for the industrial users to allow the Director or
his or her representative ready access, upon presentation of credentials, at
reasonable times to all parts of its premises in which a discharge source or
treatment system is located or in which records required by this chapter are
kept for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examination, and photocopying of
said records and for the performance of any other duties in accordance with §
54.02(J).
         (k)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by Lake County to ensure
compliance with this chapter, state, and federal pretreatment standards and
requirements.
         (l)   The terms and conditions of the wastewater discharge permit may
be subject to modification by Lake County during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements of Lake County's pretreatment program are modified
or other just cause exists. Where the national categorical pretreatment
standards are modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 407.7) or the combined
waste stream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)) or net/gross calculations (40 CFR
403.15) or fundamentally different factor variance for non-toxics (40 CFR
403.15) of the general pretreatment regulations, the limits as modified shall
be made a part of the permit and shall be adjusted consistent with USEPA
guidelines and regulations.
      (3)   Changes in conditions. In the event that the type, quality, or
volume of wastewater from the property or which a wastewater discharge permit
was previously granted is expected to materially and substantially change as
reasonably determined by the user or Lake County, the user shall give a written
30-day notice to Lake County and shall submit a new application to Lake County
prior to the change. Information previously submitted that has not changed does
not need to be resubmitted by the user. No user shall materially and
substantially change the type, quality, or volume of the wastewater beyond that
allowed by its permit without the prior approval of Lake County.
      (4)   Plans and specifications. Detailed plans and specifications,
prepared by an Illinois registered professional engineer, of the pretreatment
facilities proposed to be constructed shall be submitted to Lake County for
review and must be acceptable to Lake County before construction of the
facility is commenced. The review of such plans shall in no way relieve the
user from the responsibility of modifying the pretreatment facility as
necessary to comply with this chapter. The user shall submit, within a
reasonable time after the completion of the pretreatment facility, a copy of
the facility's operations and maintenance procedures to Lake County.
   (C)   Denial of wastewater discharge permit application.
      (1)   No wastewater discharge permit shall be issued by Lake County to
any person whose discharge of material to the sanitary sewers, whether shown
upon his or her application or determined after an inspection and testing
conducted by Lake County, is not in conformity with Lake County ordinances and
regulations, or whose application for a wastewater discharge permit is
incomplete or does not comply with the requirements of division (B) above. Lake
County shall state the reason(s) for denial in writing, which shall be mailed
or personally delivered to the applicant within five days after denial.
      (2)   If the application is denied, the user may submit within 30 days
after receipt of the denial a written request for a just cause process to
determine why the wastewater discharge permit should be granted pursuant to §
54.99(D).
   (D)   Reporting requirements for permittee.
      (1)   Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new
source, within 45 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities, any user subject to
pretreatment standards shall submit to Lake County a report indicating the
nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
process which are limited by pretreatment standards and the average and maximum
daily flow for these process units in the user's facility which are limited by
such pretreatment standards. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional user operation and maintenance, pretreatment techniques or
installations are necessary to bring the user into compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and shall be certified by an
Illinois registered professional engineer.
      (2)   Self-monitoring report.
         (a)   Any user subject to an applicable pretreatment standard, after
the compliance date of such applicable pretreatment standard (or, in the case
of a new source, after discharge of wastewater into the Lake County Water
Reclamation Facilities begins) shall submit to Lake County, on or before the
15th day of January and July each year and for the prior two calendar quarters,
a certified report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
effluent which are limited by such applicable pretreatment standards. In
addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average
and daily wastewater flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with best management practice or
pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required
by the Director or his or her representative or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
         (b)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that the sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
         (c)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this division
(D) monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Director or his or her representative, using
the procedures prescribed in §
54.02(B), the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(g)(6).
         (d)   At the discretion of Lake County, and in consideration of such
factors as a local high or low flow rate, holidays, budget cycles, Lake County
may agree to alter the months during which self-monitoring reports are
submitted.
         (e)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
wastewater to which reference is made in this division (D) shall be determined
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(g), as amended from time to time.
      (3)   Industrial wastewater survey.
         (a)   Dischargers to any of the Lake County Public Works Wastewater
Reclamation Facilities shall periodically be requested to complete and file a
wastewater survey report. At a minimum, a description of processes and
wastewater characteristics for the facility will be required to be submitted or
updated. The survey may serve as the wastewater discharge permit application or
permit renewal documentation.
         (b)   The completed survey shall include information necessary for
Lake County to make decisions on the applicability of any regulations and
requirements of Lake County Public Works, State of Illinois and the federal
government.
         (c)   Nonresidential dischargers may be required to file the
wastewater survey report upon request by the Director.
         (d)   Prior to issuing a wastewater discharge permit, Lake County
Public Works shall classify nonresidential discharges into one of the following
categories based on the response from the survey, and/or physical site
inspection:
            1.   Industrial user (IU). A facility that has waste other than
domestic waste with flow less than 25,000 gpd average daily flow when in
operation;
            2.   Categorical industrial user (CIU). These are industries that
are defined by the federal code as being subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards. They operate a regulated process that utilizes water
that if discharged to the sanitary sewer are known to cause pass through or
interfere with the treatment process. Since this is a regulated waste, they are
required to meet the discharge limits set forth in the regulation. The intent
is to insure such discharge meets Lake County Public Works local limits as well
as the federal limits.
            3.   Significant industrial user (SIU). A significant industrial
user discharges process wastewater to the sanitary sewer where the flow (volume
of wastewater) is greater than or equal to 25,000 gpd average daily flow when
in operation, or contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more
of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the receiving
treatment plant, or is designated significant by Lake County Public Works on
the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the treatment operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)).
            4.   Categorical industrial user with zero discharge (CIU-0). These
are industries that:
               a.    Operate a regulated process that generates categorical
wastewaters on site as defined by the federal code for national categorical
pretreatment standards. And has opted not to discharge the waste stream to the
sanitary sewer. The spent waste stream may be hauled off site for treatment or
the process wastewater is treated and re-used; or
               b.   Do not utilize water and it does not have the potential to
discharge regulated categorical process wastewater.
      (4)   Baseline monitoring reports. Industrial users subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to Lake County a complete
baseline monitoring report meeting the requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.12
(b).
         (a)   Existing industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled
to discharge into the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities shall submit a
baseline monitoring report within 180 days after the effective date of a
national categorical pretreatment standard or 180 days after the final
administrative decision made upon a categorical determination submission,
whichever is later.
         (b)   New sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent
to the promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard
shall submit a baseline monitoring report at least 90 days prior to the
commencement of discharge.
   (E)   Bypass.
      (1)   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
violate any pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if such bypass is
for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. Such bypasses are not
subject to §§
54.99(E)(2) and (E)(3).
      (2)   Notice.
         (a)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior written notice to Lake County, if possible, at least ten
days prior to the date of the bypass.
         (b)   An industrial user shall verbally notify Lake County of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. Such notice shall be given within 24 hours of the industrial user
becoming aware of such a bypass. The industrial user shall, within five days of
becoming aware of such a bypass, submit a written report to Lake County
containing: a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact times and dates; and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and the steps taken
or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent a recurrence of the bypass.
      (3)   Prohibition of bypass.
         (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and Lake County may take enforcement
against a user for a bypass unless:
            1.   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage; and
            2.   There are no feasible alternatives to bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of wastewater, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment down time. This condition is not satisfied
if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed to prevent bypass
which occurred during normal periods of equipment down time or preventative
maintenance; and
            3.    The user submitted notices as required by §
54.99(E)(2).
               (a)    Lake County may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if Lake County determines that the bypass will
meet the three conditions required by §
54.99(E)(3)(a).
   (F)   Upsets.
      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative action defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with the national categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements contained within this division (F) are met.
      (2)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative action
defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred, and the industrial user can identify the
specific cause(s) of the upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
         (c)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to
Lake County verbally, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset, and in
writing, within five days of becoming aware of the upset:
            1.   A description of the upset and the cause(s) of noncompliance;
and
            2.   The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times;
and, if not already corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is
expected to continue; and
            3.   The steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent the recurrence of the non-compliance.
      (3)   Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user
seeking to establish the occurrence of upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (4)   User responsibility in case of upset. The industrial user shall
control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with all applicable regulations in the event of reduction, loss, or
failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation. Any industrial user who is
found to have violated any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permit, enforcement remedy issued under §
54.99 , or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), is subject to
having its wastewater discharge permit revoked.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permit shall be voidable upon nonuse,
cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge
permit.
      (2)   Following an order of revocation, the industrial user shall
immediately cease discharging into the Lake County Water Reclamation
Facilities. Failure of the industrial user to comply voluntarily with the order
shall be evidence of continuing harm to the Lake County Water Reclamation
Facilities and provide grounds for escalated enforcement actions to be taken by
Lake County in accordance with §
54.99, or any such steps as deemed necessary by Lake County, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities or danger to any individuals or to
the environment.
      (3)   The Director or his or her representative shall reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit and/or allow the industrial user to resume its
discharge following a show cause hearing held in accordance with §
54.99.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 54.04 VALIDITY; SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
   (B)   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter, which
can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 54.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 54.06 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Variances from the regulatory standards of this chapter may be granted
in accordance with the requirements provided below. Any application for a
variance shall be made to, and decided by, the Engineering Supervisor.
   (B)   Submit a letter addressed to the Engineering Supervisor of Public
Works. Indicate:
      (1)   The desire for the variance.
      (2)   Cite the section herein.
      (3)   List the reason for the variance.
   (C)   The Department shall grant or deny the variance request if the
Engineering Supervisor finds that the following criteria are met:
      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances applicable to
the subject request that do not apply to similar properties, projects or
requests.
      (2)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, or
welfare or the creation of a nuisance.
      (3)   No additional public expense will result.
      (4)   Cost to the applicant of strict compliance with this chapter is not
the primary reason for granting the variance.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Public notification of industrial users in significant non-compliance.
Lake County shall annually publish in the largest local newspaper within Lake
County, a list of industrial users who were in significant non-compliance of
any applicable pretreatment requirement or standard during the previous 12
months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against the industrial user(s) during the same 12 months.
   (B)   Notices of ordinance violation. Whenever Lake County finds that any
user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permit, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or
requirement(s), the Director or his or her representative may serve upon the
user a written notice of ordinance violation.
      (1)   The notice of ordinance violation shall contain the particulars of
such violation(s) and order the offending user to at a minimum: explain the
cause(s) of the violation(s); submit a plan or schedule for the satisfactory
correction of the violation(s) and the prevention of similar violation(s) in
the future; pay an administrative fine; or any additional remedies deemed
necessary by Lake County to bring the user into compliance within the shortest
time frame feasible.
      (2)   Submission of any information, plan, or schedule for corrective
action, or fine payments in no way shall relieve the user of liability for any
violation(s) occurring before or after receipt of the notice of ordinance
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of Lake County to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement remedies,
without first issuing a notice of ordinance violation.
      (3)   If administrative adjudication is found to be the appropriate
remedy to resolve the violation(s), the notice must be served in accordance
with and shall contain all information specified and required in the Lake
County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance. Prior to the hearing date
documented on the notice of ordinance violation, the respondent may elect to
abate or cease the violation for which the notice of ordinance violation was
issued, pay the fine listed on the notice of ordinance violation, and not
participate in the hearing.
   (C)   Consent orders. The Director or his or her representative is hereby
empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for
non-compliance.
      (1)   Such orders shall include a schedule containing specific increments
of progress or remedial actions to be completed for compliance by the user
within the time period(s) also specified by the order, any stipulated fines,
and signatures of authorized Lake County and industrial user representatives.
      (2)   Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as compliance
directives issued pursuant to division (E) below and shall be judicially
enforceable.
   (D)   Show cause orders. The Director or his or her representative may
request any user, which has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, enforcement remedy issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirements, to meet and show cause
why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
      (1)   A written notice shall be delivered on the user specifying the time
and place of the meeting, the proposed enforcement action(s), the reason(s) for
such action(s), and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action(s) should not be taken. The notice shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least five days prior to the meeting. Such notice may be served upon any
authorized representative of the facility.
      (2)   A show cause order shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other
action(s) or enforcement remedies against the user.
   (E)   Compliance directives. Whenever Lake County finds that any user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, wastewater
discharge permit, enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), the Director or his or her
representative may issue a directive to the user responsible for the discharge,
ordering the user to come into compliance within a time period stated in the
compliance directive. If the user does not come into compliance within the
stated time period, sanitary sewer service shall be discontinued unless
adequate pretreatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are
installed and properly operated.
      (1)   The compliance directive may also contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including, but not limited to: additional self-
monitoring, management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged, payment of any stipulated fines, or any other additional remedies
deemed necessary by Lake County to bring the user into compliance within the
shortest time frame feasible.
      (2)   A compliance directive shall not exceed the deadline for compliance
established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   A compliance directive shall not release the user of liability for
any violation(s), including continuing violation(s), nor shall the issuance of
a compliance directive be a prerequisite for taking any other enforcement
action or enforcement remedies against the user.
   (F)   Cease and desist orders. Whenever Lake County finds that any user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, wastewater
discharge permit, enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), or that the user's past violations
are likely to recur, the Director or his or her representative may issue an
order directing the user responsible for the discharge to cease and desist all
illegal or authorized discharges immediately.
      (1)   In emergency situations, a cease and desist order may be given by
telephone.
      (2)   In non-emergency situations, a cease and desist order may be used
to suspend or permanently revoke an industrial user's wastewater discharge
permit.
      (3)   The cease and desist order may require the user to take such
appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/
or terminating the discharge.
      (4)   The issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a
prerequisite for taking other action or enforcement remedies against the user.
   (G)   Administrative fines.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user that is
found to have violated any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permit, enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard(s)
or requirement(s), shall be fined each day the violation occurs.
      (a)   Fines shall be issued that, at a minimum, remove the economic
benefit to a user by its non-compliance, include an additional monetary amount
reflecting the seriousness or gravity of the violation(s), and ensures the user
has a strong economic incentive to fully comply in a timely manner. Lake County
shall consider any corrective actions taken by the user and the compliance
history of the user prior to the issuance of the fine.
      (b)   For the purposes of this division (G), each day in which any such
violation shall occur shall be deemed a separate violation.
         (c)   Administrative fines and penalties may be added to the user's
next scheduled wastewater billing and Lake County shall have such collection
remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees.
      (2)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall be assessed an
additional penalty of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter
in accordance with Lake County's Retail Water/Sewer Rate Ordinance. A lien
against the individual user's property will be sought for unpaid charges,
fines, and penalties and/or violation of this chapter. In addition Lake County
Public Works may shut off water and/or disconnect the individual user's
property.
      (2)   Each user will have an opportunity to dispute the fines during the
adjudication procedure.
      (3)   Lake County may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs,
court reporter fees, and any other expenses associated with enforcement
activities, including but not limited to sampling and monitoring expenses, and
the costs of any actual damages incurred by Lake County.
   (H)   Emergency suspensions. The Director or his or her representative may
immediately suspend a user's wastewater discharge treatment service and/or
wastewater discharge permit whenever such suspension is necessary in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or
cause imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons,
the Lake County Water Reclamation Facilities, or the environment.
      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater discharge
treatment service and/or wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate its discharge. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply
with the cease and desist order, the Director or his or her representative
shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer service connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the Lake County
Water Reclamation Facilities, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any
individuals or the environment.
      (2)   The Director or his or her representative shall allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed following a hearing
held in accordance with division (D) above, unless the revocation proceedings
set forth in §
54.03(G) of this chapter are initiated against the user.
      (3)   Any user notified pursuant to this section shall submit to Lake
County, prior to the date of the hearing described above, a detailed written
statement describing the cause(s) of the harmful conditions and the measures
taken to prevent their future recurrence.
   (I)   Injunctive relief.
      (1)   Whenever Lake County finds that any user has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit,
enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or
requirement(s), or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Director or his or her representative may petition the Circuit Court of Lake
County, for the issuance of a temporary restraining order or preliminary
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance
of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the user.
      (2)   Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief
may also be sought by Lake County. A petition asking for injunctive relief need
not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user.
   (J)   Civil penalties. Any user that is found to have violated any provision
of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, enforcement remedy issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), shall be
liable to Lake County for a civil penalty per violation per day, plus any
actual damages incurred by Lake County for as long as the non-compliance
continues. For purposes of this division (J), each day in which any such
violation shall occur shall be deemed a separate violation.
      (1)   Lake County may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs,
court reporter fees, and any other expenses associated with enforcement
activities, including but not limited to sampling and monitoring expenses, and
the cost of any actual damages incurred by Lake County.
      (2)   Lake County shall petition the Court to impose, assess, and recover
such sums. In determining the extent of the liability, the Court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation(s), the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gain through the user's violation(s), corrective actions by
the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factors as justice
requires.
   (K)   Additional remedies.
      (1)   In addition to the remedies available to Lake County set forth
elsewhere in this chapter, if Lake County is fined by the State of Illinois or
USEPA for violation of Lake County's NPDES permit or violation of water quality
standards as a result of a discharge of pollutants, then the fine, including
all of Lake County's legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other
related costs shall be charged to the responsible user(s). Such charge shall be
in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies Lake County may have
under this chapter, statutes, regulations, at law or in equity.
      (2)   If the discharge from any user causes a deposit, obstruction, or
damage to any portion of the Lake County wastewater collection system or Water
Reclamation Facilities, the Director or his or her representative shall cause
the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be
promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and
supervision, shall be borne by the person(s) causing such deposit, obstruction,
or damage.
      (3)   The remedies provided in this chapter shall not be exclusive and
Lake County may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute, at law
or in equity against any person violating the provisions of this chapter. Lake
County is hereby empowered to take more than one enforcement action (remedy)
against any non-compliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 19-1394, passed 9-11-2019)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   SNOWMOBILE SIGNING ACCOMMODATION PROGRAM
      
73.   MOTORBOATS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   (Reserved)
   
70.02   Establishment of speed limits
   
70.03   Vehicles damaging county highways
Highway Weight Control
   
70.15   Weight limits
Special Movement
   
70.20   Permit fee schedule
Operation of Motor Vehicles on Frozen Waters
   
70.30   Title and declaration of intent
   
70.31   Definitions
   
70.32   Prohibitions and exceptions
   
70.33   Enforcement
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   For traffic offense fees, see §
35.15
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 (RESERVED).
§ 70.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Generally. Speed limits shall be as set by Illinois Vehicle Code (625
ILCS 5/11-601 et seq.).
   (B)   Alteration. The County Board may alter speed limits set pursuant to
subsection (A) above in accordance with § 5/11-604 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-604, and the Policy for Establishment and Posting of Speed
Limits on County and Township Highways within Lake County, Illinois.
   (C)   Work zone speed limits. The County Engineer may set and post a reduced
temporary work zone speed limit pursuant to subsections (A) and (B) above in
accordance with § 5/11-605.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-605.2)
and with § 5/11-605.1 and the current Policy for Establishment and Posting of
Speed Limits on County and Township Highways within Lake County, Illinois, and
is to keep records of work zone speed limits as required. After construction on
the county highway is completed, the pre-existing speed limit established by
ordinance of the County Board shall be in effect.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-8) (Ord. passed 10-8-1996)
§ 70.03 VEHICLES DAMAGING COUNTY HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever the County Superintendent of Highways determines that,
because of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions, any county
highway or portions of any county highway will be seriously damaged or
destroyed by the use of certain vehicles thereon, he shall file a report of his
or her determination in the office of the County Clerk of Lake County. This
report shall first identify by accurate description the highways or portions of
highways he or she finds to be in danger of destruction or damage; and further,
the report shall state whether or not said highways or portions thereof are to
be closed to vehicular traffic or restricted in use as to type of vehicle or as
to weight of vehicle and load. The report shall further state the period of
time the restriction shall be in effect, provided however, that no such
restriction shall be in effect for a period of time longer than 90 days in any
one calendar year.
   (B)   Within five days after the filing of the report as provided in
subsection (A) above, the Superintendent of Highways shall cause to be erected
and maintained signs at each end of the highways or portions thereof named in
his or her report, which signs shall be so located and in sufficient number to
acquaint operators or owners of vehicles using the said highways or portions
thereof of the restrictions on use which shall be designated on the signs.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any county highway in Lake
County, Illinois, any vehicle whose use has been determined to be damaging to
the highway and whose use is prohibited by the signs so erected and maintained.
   (D)   This section to be in full force and effect upon its passage and
approval.
(Ord. passed 1-10-1961) Penalty, see §
70.99
HIGHWAY WEIGHT CONTROL
§ 70.15 WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   Designations.
      (1)   Providing for the designation of county highways as Class II truck
routes.
 
No. Road Name*            Lake County Board Action
1.  Casimer Pulaski Drive February 1991
2.  Washington Street     March 1991
* Note:
Refer to the appropriate County Board resolution for the exact detail of
these designations (adopted 2-12-1991).
 
      (2)   Providing for the designation of “no through truck” routes on a
county highway.
 
No. Road Name*       Lake County Board Action
1.  Old McHenry Road April 1988
* Note:
Refer to the appropriate County Board resolution for the exact detail of
these designations (adopted 4-12-1988).
 
      (3)   Providing for the seasonal weight limit reduction on the county
highway system.
 
No. Road Name*         Lake County Board Action
1.  Any county highway January 1961
* Note:
Refer to the appropriate County Board resolution for the exact detail of Lake
County, Illinois.
 
      (4)   Providing for the establishment of oversize and overweight
movements on the county highway system.
 
No. Name*                Lake County Board Action
1.  Initial fee schedule November 1988
2.  Revised fee schedule December 2007
 
   (B)   Designation of six-ton weight limit roads.
      (1)   The following portions of county highways are hereby designated as
to the maximum weight of vehicles to be operated upon said portions of county
highways per axle of six tons.
No. C.H. No. Road Name From To
No. C.H. No. Road Name            From                 To
1.  42       Cuba Road            IL Rt. 59            U.S. Rt. 12
2.  56       Duffy Lane           Riverwoods Road      A point 8,114 feet east
                                                       of Riverwoods Road
3.  52       Everett Road         St. Mary’s Road    Estate Lane
4.  49       Fairfield Road       IL Rt. 132           Petite Lake Road
5.  66       Gelden Road          Deep Lake Road       Grass Lake Road
6.  26       Gilmer Road          A point 6,155 feet   Fremont Center Road
                                  east of IL Rt. 120
7.  2        Miller Road          Kelsey Road          U.S. Rt. 12
8.  32       Old McHenry Road     IL Rt. 22            U.S. Rt. 12
9.  51       Petite Lake Road     IL Rt. 59            IL Rt. 83
10. 58       Riverwoods Road      Deerfield Road       IL Rt. 22
11. 41       St. Mary’s Road    Everett Road         IL Rt. 60
12. 55       Engle Drive          IL Rt. 83            N. Nathan Hale Drive
13. 55       Granada Blvd.        Genoa Drive          IL Rt. 132
14. 55       N. Nathan Hale Drive Engle Drive          Genoa Drive
15. 55       Genoa Drive          N. Nathan Hale Drive Granada Boulevard
 
      (2)   The County Engineer shall have said portions of county highways
posted with appropriate signs as to the maximum weight limit of six tons per
axle and said limitations shall not be effective until such posting is in
place.
   (C)   Designation of Class III truck routes. The following portions of
county highways are hereby designated as Class III truck routes in accordance
with 625 ILCS 5/15-102(a), 625 ILCS 5/15-107(f) and 625 ILCS 5/15-111(g).
 
No. C.H. No. Road Name From To
None
 
   (D)   Designation of Class II truck routes. In addition to the appropriate
designations contained in subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, the following
portions of county highways are hereby designated as Class II truck routes in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5/15-102(e), 625 ILCS 5/15-107(e) and 625 ILCS 5/15-
111(f).
No. C.H. No. Road Name From To
No. C.H. No. Road Name          From                  To
1.  26       Gilmer Road        IL Rt. 120            A point 6,155 feet
                                                      east of IL Rt. 120
2.  20       Peterson Road      U.S. Rt. 45           1,326 feet west of the
                                                      Alleghany Road
3.  31       Rollins Road       IL Rt. 83             A point 3,350 feet
                                                      east of IL Rt. 83
4.  54       Martin Luther King U.S. Rt. 41           IL Rt. 43
             Jr. Drive
5.  33       Aptakisic Road     U.S. Rt. 45/IL Rt. 21 Buffalo Grove Road
6.  22       Delany Road        U.S. Rt. 41           Sunset Avenue
7.  27       Lewis Avenue       IL Rt. 137            24th Street
8.  69       Winchester Rd.     IL Rt. 21             2,075 feet west of IL
                                                      Rt. 21
9.  17       Wadsworth Road     IL Rt. 131            A point 2,000 feet
                                                      east of IL Rt. 131
10. 65       York House Road    IL Rt. 131            McAree Road
11. 57       Butterfield Rd.    Armour Boulevard      Allanson Road
12. 14       Millburn Road      U.S. Route 45         5,600 feet east of
                                                      U.S. Rt. 45
13. 27       Lewis Avenue       IL Rt. 173            27th Street
14. 5        Quentin Road       U.S. Rt. 12           IL Rt. 22
                                                      3,120 feet north of
15. 39       Alleghany          Peterson Rd.          the centerline of
                                                      Peterson Road
16. 45       Washington St.     U.S. Rt. 45           6,100 feet east of
                                                      U.S. Rt. 45
17. 17       Wadsworth Road     U.S. Rt. 41           A point 2,400 feet
                                                      east of U.S. Rt. 41
18. 46       Sunset Avenue      Delany Road           Northwestern Avenue
19. 37       Kilbourne Road     IL Rt. 173            9,545 feet south of IL
                                                      Rt. 173
20. 5        Quentin Road       IL Rt. 22             Ensell Road
21. 26       Gilmer Road        IL Rt. 176            A point 600 feet south
                                                      of Hawley Street
22. 22       Delany Road        Sunset Avenue         York House Road
23. 11       Deerfield Parkway  IL Rt. 21             Commerce Court
 
   (E)   Designation of ten-ton weight limit roads. The following portions of
county highways are hereby designated as to the maximum weight of vehicles to
be operated upon said portions of county highway of ten tons.
 
No. C.H. No. Road Name      From         To
1.  29       Hunt Club Road IL Rt. 173   Kelly Road
2.  17       Wadsworth Road Dilleys Road A point 2,750 feet east of Hunt Club
                                         Road
 
   (F)   Oversize and overweight permits. The County Engineer is authorized by
this section and ordinance to issue special permits for excess size and weight
on the county highway system in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/15-301, as amended,
and with fees as provided by separate resolution of the County Board and as
amended from time to time.
   (G)   Map.
      (1)   The County Engineer may, from time to time, have published a map
illustrating the limitations imposed by this section or any other county
highway ordinances and as they may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   The County Engineer may, from time to time, publish a short
consolidated listing showing the weight limits as codified from the various
County Board resolutions. The County Engineer, in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/
15-116, shall notify the Illinois Department of Transportation of said ten-ton
designations of Wadsworth Road and Hunt Club Road.
   (H)   Posting. The County Engineer shall post signs, as appropriate,
indicating such limitations as imposed by this section or any other related
ordinance and as they may be amended from time to time.
   (I)   Separability. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this section to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
provision of this section not specifically included in the judgment.
   (K)   Amendments. This section may be amended by the County Board; and other
limitations as to the operation of vehicles and weights thereof on the county
highway system, or changes thereto, may be enacted by separate ordinance.
(1977 Code, § 4:1) (Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord. passed 1-14-2003;
Ord. 11-0997, passed 10-11-2011; Ord. passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 14-0464, passed 5-
13-2014) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPECIAL MOVEMENT
§ 70.20 PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Said Special Movement Permit Fee Schedule For Oversize and Overweight
Movements on the County Highway System is hereby amended and shall be effective
upon this approval of the County Board on December 1, 2007.
   (B)   Any and all permit fees received in accordance with said Special
Movement Permit Fee Schedule For Oversize and Overweight Movements on the
County Highway System be deposited in the County Highway Tax Fund.
   (C)   The effective date of this section is December 1, 1989.
   (D)   The following Fee Schedule is based, in part, on the cost of
processing Special Movement Permits, compensation in part for the extra wear
and tear on the County Highway System due to overweight movements, compensation
in part for the special privilege of oversize movements, and compensation in
part for the inconvenience to the general public occasioned by oversize and
overweight movements on the County Highway System.
   (E)   All Special Movement Permits Fees collected shall be deposited in the
County Highway Tax Fund.
   (F)   All fees are non-refundable.
      (1)   Limited continuous operation permits.
 
Maximum Dimensions               Fee For Each Permit
10' wide, 14-1/2' high, 70' long $100 (3-month term)
12' wide, 14-1/2' high, 85' long $150 (3-month term)
14' wide, 15' high, 95' long     $250 (3-month term)
 
      (2)   Telephone permits.
Maximum Gross Weight *Fee For Each Trip
Maximum Gross Weight          *Fee For Each Trip
88,000 lbs. (5 axle minimum)  $20 (single), $40 (round)
100,000 lbs. (5 axle minimum) $30 (single), $60 (round)
110,000 lbs. (6 axle minimum) $20 (single), $40 (round)
120,000 lbs. (6 axle minimum) $30 (single), $60 (round)
143,000 lbs. (6 axle minimum) $75 (single), $150 (round)
143,000 lbs. (7 axle)         $60 (single), $120 (round)
143,000 lbs. (8 axle)         $45 (single), $90 (round)
Oversize only                 $15 (single), $30 (round)
(a) Add $15 (single), $30 (round) if load is over 12' in width.
(b) Annual processing fee to be in the Telephone Permit System shall be $20.
(c) Annual renewal fee shall be $20
 
      (3)   Oversize movement permits.
 
Maximum Dimensions               **Fee For Each Trip
10' wide, 14-1/2' high, 70' long $12 (single), $24 (round)
12' wide, 14-1/2' high, 85' long $15 (single), $30 (round)
14' wide, 15' high, 100' long    $25 (single), $50 (round)
18' wide, 16' high, 120' long    $30 (single), $60 (round)
In excess of maximum dimensions  $50 (single), $100 (round)
** Add appropriate fee for Overweight Movement Permits (if applicable).
 
      (4)   Overweight movement permits.
 
Maximum Axle Weight ***Fee For Each Trip
22,000 lbs.         $5 (single), $10 (round)
24,000 lbs.         $15 (single), $30 (round)
***Add appropriate fee for Oversize Movement Permits (if applicable) and/or
the following additions:
 
 
Items                                        Additional Fee For Each Trip
Each 1,000 lbs. over 24,000 lbs. axle weight $15 (single), $30 (round)
Each bridge crossing (if allowed)            $25 (single), $50 (round)
Each 6 ton per axle posted highway (through  $10 (single), $20 (round)
movement)
(a) Minimum fee for gross weight of over 120,000 lbs. shall be $30
(single), $60 (round).
(b) Minimum foe for gross weight of over 143,000 lbs. shall be $60
(single), $120 (round).
(c) Minimum fee for gross weight of over 165,000 lbs. shall be $90
(single), $180 (round).
 
(Res. passed 11-1-1988; Res. passed 11-14-1989; Res. passed 11-13-2007)
OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON FROZEN WATERS
§ 70.30 TITLE AND DECLARATION OF INTENT.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Operation of Motor Vehicles on Frozen
Waters Ordinance”. It is the policy of this county to promote safety for
persons and property in and connected with the use and operation of all motor
vehicles on the frozen waters of the county. This subchapter shall apply to all
water within the jurisdiction of this county.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-5) (Ord. passed 2-14-1978)
§ 70.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY. Lake County, State of Illinois.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle, which is self-propelled, excluding a seaplane
on the water.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control the
operation of a motor vehicle in any manner, whether or not the motor vehicle is
under way.
   WATERS OF THE COUNTY. Any water within the jurisdiction of Lake County,
State of Illinois.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-5) (Ord. passed 2-14-1978)
§ 70.32 PROHIBITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle upon any frozen
waters of the county.
   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle on any frozen waters of this
county.
   (C)   The following motor vehicles shall not be required to comply with the
provisions of this subchapter if they are:
      (1)   Properly registered by the Illinois Department of Conservation,
under the Illinois Boating Registration and Safety Act;
      (2)   Properly registered by the Illinois Department of Conservation,
under the Illinois Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act;
      (3)   Owned and used by the United States, this state, this county, or
any political subdivision thereof, or motor vehicles owned or used by any
person acting as their agent under their direction;
      (4)   Used only on an approved race track where written permission has
been obtained from the governmental unit having jurisdiction over the location
of any event held in this county; or
      (5)   Used by persons while ice fishing.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-5) (Ord. passed 2-14-1978) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.33 ENFORCEMENT.
   It is the duty of the Lake County Sheriff, Deputy Sheriffs, and all other
duly authorized police officers to arrest and prosecute any person detected in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter. It is further the duty of all
these officers to make prompt investigation of any violation of the provisions
of this subchapter reported by any other person and to cause a complaint to be
filed before the Circuit Court if there seems just ground for the complaint and
evidence procurable to support the same.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-5) (Ord. passed 2-14-1978)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Vehicles damaging highways. Whenever any vehicle is operating in
violation of the provision of §
70.03, the owner or driver, or both, of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of
such violation, and either or both the owner and the driver of such vehicle may
be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates
the provisions of §
70.03 shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $200.
   (C)   Highway weight control.
      (1)   Enforcement. The County Board hereby authorizes the prosecution of
the owner or driver or both of any vehicle operated in violation of §
70.15 in the manner provided by 625 ILCS 5/15-112, as amended.
      (2)   Penalty. The penalty, upon conviction of any provision of §
70.15, in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/15-316, shall be as follows.
         (a)   Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating any
provision of §
70.15 for any weight exceeding the limit posted as provided by §
70.15(H), but not exceeding the axle or gross weight limit allowed a vehicle as
provided for in 625 ILCS 5/15-111(a) or (b), as amended, shall be fined $50.
         (b)   Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating any
provision of §
70.15 for any weight exceeding the limit posted as provided by §
70.15(H) and exceeding the axle or gross weight limit allowed a vehicle as
provided for in 625 ILCS 5/15-111(a) or (b), as amended, shall be fined $50 and
$75 per every 500 pounds or fraction thereof for any weight exceeding 625 ILCS
5/15-111(a) or (b).
         (c)   Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating any
provision of §
70.15 on a highway not required to be posted as provided by §
70.15(H) shall be fined in accordance with the schedule in 625 ILCS 5/15-113,
as amended.
   (D)   Operation of motor vehicles on frozen waters. Any person who is found
guilty of violating any of the provisions of §
70.30 through
70.33 shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-5)
(Ord. passed 1-10-1961; Ord. passed 2-14-1978; Ord. passed 12-22-1992; Ord. 11-
0997, passed 10-11-2011; Ord. passed 3-12-2013)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Applicability
   
71.02   Parking and standing regulations
   
71.03   Stopping regulations
   
71.04   Parking regulations during snow removal
   
71.05   Parking regulations during street cleaning and oiling
   
71.06   Parking regulations near schools
   
71.07   Miscellaneous parking regulations
   
71.08   Manner of parking
   
71.09   Enforcement
   
71.10   Effective date
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The Lake County Superintendent of Highways and the Township Highway
Commissioners in each of the various townships in Lake County, in addition to
the authority to place all other traffic control devices, may place signs or
markings prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles on any highway in their respective jurisdictions where in their
opinion such stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the
highway or where the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would unduly
interfere with the free movement of traffic. Any such prohibition or
restriction regarding the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles upon any
specific highway becomes effective at the time of the erection of appropriate
signs or markings in conformance with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices indicating such prohibition or restriction.
   (B)   The Township Highway Commissioner shall before posting any signs or
markings secure the written permission of the Lake County Superintendent of
Highways as provided by law.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985)
§ 71.02 PARKING AND STANDING REGULATIONS.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall stand or park a vehicle whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
   (A)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (B)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (C)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (D)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any traffic control signal,
flashing signal, stop sign, or yield sign located at the side of a roadway;
   (E)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance or exit to any place where
Police or Fire Department apparatus or other emergency equipment is kept or
housed and on the side of the street opposite said entrance or exit, within 75
feet of said entrance or exit;
   (F)   In front of the emergency entrance to any hospital;
   (G)   At any place designated by the Illinois Department of Transportation
or the Lake County Superintendent of Highways or the Township Highway
Commissioner after appropriate signs restricting or prohibiting stopping or
parking at that place are erected;
   (H)   In a subdivision where the Township Highway Commissioner has posted
signs at the entrances to said subdivision; and/or
   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing.
   (J)   Parking in a parking space reserved for persons with a disability
(handicap parking) without displaying a properly issued handicap placard.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985; Ord. 15-0380, passed 4-14-2015)
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 STOPPING REGULATIONS.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or directions of a police officer or official traffic control device,
no person shall stop a vehicle to pick up or discharge passengers at any place
designated by the Illinois Department of Transportation, the Lake County
Superintendent of Highways, or the Township Highway Commissioner after
appropriate signs restricting or prohibiting stopping at that place are
erected.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 PARKING REGULATIONS DURING SNOW REMOVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any state
highway, county highway, or on township highways in a subdivision where
appropriate signs have been posted at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall
of two inches or more has occurred, or until the snow is removed.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 PARKING REGULATIONS DURING STREET CLEANING AND OILING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any state
highway, county highway, or township highway, at any time when such street is
being cleaned or oiled. Signs indicating that a street or portion thereof is
being cleaned or oiled shall be posted immediately before the cleaning or
oiling of the street, and shall be removed after the cleaning or oiling of the
street is finished or the oil has penetrated.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 PARKING REGULATIONS NEAR SCHOOLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same
to stand for more than a period of 30 minutes upon any state or county or
township highway at a distance nearer than 100 feet from any part of any school
grounds or school premises which are being used for school purposes at any time
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. upon any day on which a school
session is being held in, about or upon such grounds or premises.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 MISCELLANEOUS PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park
or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway
when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off the roadway,
but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view
of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in such position.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985; Ord. 15-0380, passed 4-14-2015)
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 MANNER OF PARKING.
   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or
edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its
right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, except on those
highways that have been marked for angle parking vehicles shall be parked at
the angle to the curb indicated by such markings.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Removing vehicles.
      (1)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a state,
county, township, or other public highway in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, such officer is authorized to move such vehicle, or require
the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a
position off the paved or improved or main-traveled part of such highway.
      (2)   Whenever a member of the Lake County or Township Highway Department
finds an abandoned or disabled vehicle standing upon the paved or main-traveled
part of a highway, in violation of §§
71.04 and
71.05 of this chapter, which vehicle is or may be expected to interrupt the
free flow of traffic on the highway or interfere with the maintenance of the
highway, said member has the authority, but not the duty, to move the vehicle
to a position off the paved or improved or main-traveled part of the highway.
   (B)   Parking tickets. 
      (1)   The Lake County Sheriff or his or her designee(s) shall issue an
arrest ticket in the case of each motor vehicle stopping, standing or parking
in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Such arrest ticket shall be
placed upon the motor vehicle and shall constitute service of a notice to
appear on the owner and operator thereof.
      (2)   Violations of §
71.02 shall be enforced and proceed either through a notice to appear before
the 19th Judicial Circuit Court or pursuant to the Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 –
94.66).
   (C)   Impoundment.
      (1)   Any police officer is hereby authorized to immediately remove or
cause to be removed and impounded at the expense of the owner any vehicle found
upon any state, county, township, or other public highway or bridge when:
         (a)   Report has been made that such vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of the owner;
         (b)   When the person driving or in control of such vehicle is
arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to
take the person arrested before the proper judicial official without
unnecessary delay;
         (c)   Said vehicle is creating an unsafe condition on the state,
county, township, or other public highway or bridge; and
         (d)   Said vehicle significantly hinders the efficient movement of
traffic.
      (2)   Any police officer may order the removal and impoundment, at the
expense of the owner, of any other vehicle found upon any state, county,
township or other public highway and bridge:
         (a)   When the vehicle lacks license registration and the police
officer places upon the vehicle a notice informing the owner of the vehicle
that the vehicle will be towed and impounded by a certain date; and
         (b)   When the vehicle possesses current license registration, notice
shall be given by registered or certified mail to the owner of said vehicle as
reflected in the license. Such notice shall inform the owner of the vehicle
that the vehicle will be towed and impounded upon a certain date should the
owner not remove the vehicle prior to that time.
      (3)   Whenever any vehicle shall be ordered removed and impounded, it
shall become the duty of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office to take possession of
and safely keep the same until any such vehicle shall have been repossessed by
the owner or other person legally entitled to possession thereof or otherwise
disposed of as hereinafter provided.
      (4)   The Lake County Sheriff’s Office shall keep an accurate record of
the description of any such vehicle, including the name of the officer ordering
the removal and impoundage, the person, firm, or corporation, if any, employed
to tow or deliver the same, and the charges, if any, therefore, the date, time
and place of the removal and impoundage, the make and color of car, style of
body, vehicle identification number, year built, state license number, city
vehicle license number, equipment, and general description of condition. Such
record shall be a public record and shall be available for public inspection.
   (D)   Redemption.
      (1)   Whenever a motor vehicle is removed and impounded, the Lake County
Sheriff’s Office shall promptly notify the owner or other person legally
entitled to possession of such vehicle of the fact. Said notice shall be made
by certified or registered mail.
      (2)   When a vehicle is removed from either public at private property as
authorized by the Lake County Sheriff’s Office, the owner of the vehicle will
be responsible for all towing and storage costs.
      (3)   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any towed
vehicle shall be permitted to redeem the same from the Lake County Sheriff's
Office or its towing designee, he or she shallfurnish sufficient evidence of
his or her identity and ownership of the vehicle; present a receipt for towing
and storage charges and expenses; and shall sign a receipt for the vehicle.
         (b)   Alternatively, request that an immediate hearing be set for
determination of whether or not his or her vehicle was properly towed and
impounded. Said hearing shall be set before the Circuit Court within 24 hours
of request, not including weekends or court holidays. If the Court shall
determine that the vehicle was towed without cause the vehicle shall be
returned immediately to the owner without cost or charge. Should the Court
determine that the vehicle was towed and impounded correctly under this
chapter, the vehicle shall not be released without payment of towing and
storage charges.
      (4)   Notification shall be made to the proper state authorities of the
impoundment and intent of sale at public auction should legal owners fail to
make claim for the impounded vehicle. All notifications and any sale at public
auction of impounded vehicles shall coincide and conform with §§ 5/4-201
through 5/4-215 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/4-201 through 5/4-215)
and as amended from time to time. No person may make claim or reimbursement for
an auctioned vehicle against the County of Lake if said owner or other person
legally entitled to possession of said vehicle fails to respond to proper
notification.
      (5)   Said vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions
of the Illinois Vehicle Code as amended from time to time.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985; Ord. 15-0380, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 71.10 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter took effect the first of the month immediately after adoption
by the County Board.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and
shall be fined as set forth below. Each 24 hour period in which, or during
which, a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   Lake County Sheriff's Office Parking Citation (Notice to Appear) -
$35 provided, however, that in the event that the owner or operator makes
payment to the County of Lake within seven calendar days after the date of the
arrest ticket, the penalty shall be $15 for any such violation. All such
payments shall be made payable to the County of Lake at the Office of the Lake
County Sheriff, 25 South Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue, Waukegan, Illinois
60085.
      (2)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation.  Any
violation of §
71.02 (except §
71.02(J) Handicapped Parking) shall be fined a minimum of $40 for each offense.
A violation of §
71.02 (handicapped parking) shall be fined a minimum $250 for each offense.
   (C)   As it pertains to any fines authorized by this chapter, by any other
Lake County ordinance, or by State of Illinois Statute, whoever suffers or
permits any violation specified in this chapter to exist or continue in
violation of this chapter shall be subject to a separate fine for each offense.
Each day that a violation of this chapter exists or continues shall be
considered a separate offense and shall be assessed fines in accordance with
applicable State of Illinois Statutes and this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1985; Ord. 15-0380, passed 4-14-2015)
CHAPTER 72: SNOWMOBILE SIGNING ACCOMMODATION PROGRAM
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Title and purpose
   
72.02   Definitions
Administrative Provisions
   
72.15   Authority
   
72.16   Jurisdiction
   
72.17   Enactment
   
72.18   Interpretation
   
72.19   Separability
   
72.20   Amendments
   
72.21   Powers and duties, generally
   
72.22   Public Works and Transportation Committee, powers and duties
   
72.23   Lake County Engineer and Lake County Division of Transportation, powers
and duties
   
72.24   Sunset provision
   
72.25   Opportunity for immediate program termination
Participation in Program
   
72.40   Generally
   
72.41   Applications
   
72.42   Association field review
   
72.43   Application form for participation
   
72.44   Division of Transportation review for completeness
   
72.45   General provisions
   
72.46   Division of Transportation field review
   
72.47   Division of Transportation report
   
72.48   Consideration by the Public Works and Transportation Committee
   
72.49   Accepted applications
   
72.50   Agreement provisions
   
72.51   Signing
   
72.52   Termination and suspension of agreements
   
72.53   Fees
   
72.54   Grants
   
72.55   Limitation on work
Fees and Charges
   
72.70   Fee schedule
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as the “Lake County Snowmobile
Signing Accommodation Ordinance” or “this chapter”, and the program it
establishes may be referred to as the “County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation
Program”.
   (B)   Purpose. This chapter establishes a program that allows associations
to place uniform snowmobile signs along portions of county highways to mark and
connect their snowmobile trails. The following sections and subchapters set
forth the uniform guidelines and requirements for the administration of the
County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   APPLICATION FORM FOR PARTICIPATION. The form on which associations may apply
for participation in the Lake County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program.
   ASSOCIATION. A formal organization comprised of 20 or more members having a
charter or other instrument of governance that provides, among other things,
for the election of officers, a regular meeting or assembly schedule, and the
payment of dues to be used for the promotion of snowmobiling.
   ASSOCIATION COORDINATOR. An individual authorized by an association to serve
as its liaison with the Lake County Division of Transportation and to conduct
field reviews for the association.
   ASSOCIATION PRESIDENT. An individual authorized by the association to
execute a Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program Agreement.
   CONNECTING SECTION. A length of county highway right-of-way not exceeding
three miles in length, and crossings thereto, approved for the placement of
uniform snowmobile signs by an association that serves to connect other
snowmobile trails established by the association.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. A connecting section that consists of a perpendicular
crossing of a county highway right-of-way.
   COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Lake County, Illinois.
   COUNTY ENGINEER. The County Engineer of Lake County, Illinois.
   COUNTY HIGHWAY. A highway that is part of the county highway system.
   DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION. The County Engineer of Lake County, Illinois.
   FRONTAGE. The front property boundary line of a lot or parcel of land at the
right-of-way line of a county highway.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
   ILLINOIS HIGHWAY CODE. The laws of this state relating to roads, streets,
and highways.
   ILLINOIS SNOWMOBILE ACT. The Illinois Snowmobile Registration and Safety
Act, Illinois Compiled Statutes (625 ILCS 40/1), as amended.
   IMUTCD. The Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways, latest edition and any successor documents.
   LAKE COUNTY DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION. The department of the county charged
with the management of the county highway system by and through the Lake County
Engineer.
   PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE. The Public Works and
Transportation Committee of the Lake County Board, or its successor committee.
   RENEWAL. The replacement of a Lake County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation
Program Agreement upon its termination with a new Snowmobile Signing
Accommodation Program Agreement with the same association for the same
connecting section or cross-connection.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied for public
roadway purposes.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
   SECTION. A length of highway.
   SNOWMOBILE SIGNING ACCOMMODATION. The placement of uniform snowmobile signs
by an association along a connecting section or a cross-connection.
   SNOWMOBILE SIGNING ACCOMMODATION PROGRAM AGREEMENT. A legal and binding
contract between the county and an association.
   SNOWMOBILE SIGNING. Signs for highway vehicular traffic as determined to be
placed by the Division of Transportation on county highways, in accordance with
the IMUTCD, as part of its regular highway signing program for an approved
connecting section or a cross-connection.
   STATE’S ATTORNEY. The State’s Attorney of Lake County, Illinois.
   UNIFORM SNOWMOBILE SIGNING HANDBOOK. A list of uniform snowmobile signs and
their allowed placement on county highways on connecting sections and cross-
connections.
   UNIFORM SNOWMOBILE SIGNS. Signs allowed by the county to be used by an
association on a connecting section and a cross-connection.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 72.15 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth the administrative provisions for this
chapter.
   (B)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to state law authorizing the county
and the County Engineer to exercise jurisdiction over county highways and
pursuant to the provisions for local regulation set forth in the Illinois
Snowmobile Act.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.16 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply upon its enactment by the County Board to all
county highways.
   (B)   This chapter shall not be construed to limit or impair the authority
of the county or the County Engineer to maintain, operate, manage, improve,
supervise, construct, reconstruct, widen, or perform any other work on any
county highway as provided for by this chapter or any other county ordinance or
state law.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.17 ENACTMENT.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of
passage by the County Board.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.18 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   This chapter is intended to promote safety for persons and property in
and connected with the use and operation of snowmobiles upon county highways
subject to the Illinois Snowmobile Act, particularly the control provisions set
forth in Article V thereof. If any part of this chapter is determined to be
inconsistent with the Illinois Snowmobile Act, it is the intent of the county
that the Illinois Snowmobile Act shall govern the operation of snowmobiles and
all other matters relating thereto whenever any snowmobile is operated upon
county highways.
   (B)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall render any
interpretations of this chapter which are necessary to promote efficient
administration of its powers and duties under this chapter. The County Engineer
may also render any interpretations of this chapter which are necessary to
promote efficient administration of the County Engineer’s powers and duties
under this chapter.
   (C)   Whenever any provision of this chapter overlaps, contradicts, or
covers the same subject matter as any other provision of this chapter or any
other county ordinance regulation or rule, the more restrictive or higher
standard shall control.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.19 SEPARABILITY.
   Each subchapter, section, paragraph, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase,
word, provision, term and condition, standard, requirement, or restriction
established by this chapter or any amendments hereto are hereby declared to be
separable and independent, in accordance with the following:
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any part of this
chapter to be invalid, the judgment shall not affect any remaining part of this
chapter not specifically included in the judgment; and
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any part of this chapter to a particular association, the
judgment shall not affect the application of the part to associations not
specifically included in the judgment.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.20 AMENDMENTS.
   This chapter may be amended from time to time by the County Board upon
recommendation by the Public Works and Transportation Committee.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.21 POWERS AND DUTIES, GENERALLY.
   By authority of the County Board and adoption of this chapter, through
powers vested through the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, and other
applicable laws, statutes, orders, and regulations of this state and this
county, the County Board hereby grants to the Public Works and Transportation
Committee, the County Engineer and the Lake County Division of Transportation
the powers and responsibilities set forth.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.22 PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE, POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall have the powers and
duties as assigned to it throughout this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.23 LAKE COUNTY ENGINEER AND LAKE COUNTY DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION, POWERS
AND DUTIES.
   The County Engineer and the Lake County Division of Transportation shall
have the powers and duties as assigned to it throughout this chapter, and in
addition shall have the following powers and duties.
   (A)   The County Engineer shall administer the Lake County Snowmobile
Signing Accommodation Program. The County Engineer may appoint designees of the
Lake County Division of Transportation to assist in its administration.
   (B)   The County Engineer is authorized to develop and distribute an
informational brochure about the County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation
Program.
   (C)   The County Engineer is authorized to develop and revise the Uniform
Snowmobile Sign Handbook.
   (D)   The County Engineer is authorized to publish the Lake County
Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Ordinance, as amended, codified as this
chapter.
   (E)   The County Engineer is authorized to develop the application form for
participation and have the application form amended from time to time.
   (F)   The County Engineer may coordinate the County Snowmobile Signing
Accommodation Program with other jurisdictions and agencies.
   (G)   The County Engineer may develop and distribute appropriate
certificates of appreciation to be presented to the various associations having
participated in the County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program.
   (H)   The County Engineer, or a designee, shall determine what snowmobile
signing the Division of Transportation will place, if any.
   (I)   The Division of Transportation shall have the authority, but not the
duty, to remove any sign in the right-of-way of any county highway that is not
provided for by an approved Lake County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation
Agreement.
   (J)   The County Engineer may recommend to the Public Works and
Transportation Committee, from time to time, appropriate fees to cover
administrative costs of the County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program.
   (K)   The County Engineer may recommend to the Public Works and
Transportation Committee, from time to time, amendments to the County
Snowmobile Signing Accommodation ordinance, codified herein.
   (L)   The County Engineer may order the removal or placement of additional
uniform snowmobile signs by an association.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.24 SUNSET PROVISION.
   (A)   In the event the County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program’s
actual operation ceases to meet the purposes for which it was established, the
Public Works and Transportation Committee shall present a resolution to the
Lake County Board terminating the Lake County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation
Program.
   (B)   Any resolution for termination shall include provisions regarding the
termination of all county Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program Agreements
then still in effect, in accordance with §
72.52.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.25 OPPORTUNITY FOR IMMEDIATE PROGRAM TERMINATION.
   Upon notification to the County Engineer by the State’s Attorney of any
pending or actual change in state statutes, or any pending or actual change in
state case law, that materially affects the basis upon which the Snowmobile
Signing Accommodation Program was established, including county risk management
concerns, the Public Works and Transportation Committee shall review the
information and shall have the authority to immediately present to the County
Board a resolution for termination of the program. The termination of the
program shall also terminate all Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program
Agreements then in effect in accordance with §
72.52.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
PARTICIPATION IN PROGRAM
§ 72.40 GENERALLY.
   The following terms, requirements, and procedures shall govern the
participation of associations in the Lake County Snowmobile Signing
Accommodation Program.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.41 APPLICATIONS.
   Any association may apply for consideration for participation in the Lake
County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program by completely filling out an
application form for participation and submitting it to the Lake County
Division of Transportation. The appropriate fee shall be included with the
application. The application shall be based upon the association’s field review
required by §
72.42.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.42 ASSOCIATION FIELD REVIEW.
   (A)   The Illinois Snowmobile Act allows the use of public road rights-of-
way by snowmobiles, without signing, in accordance with the standards and
requirements of the Act. The association shall undertake a field review prior
to making an application.
   (B)   The association’s field review is intended to meet the following
purposes:
      (1)   The field review is to enable an association, acting by and through
its coordinator, to determine if the association will choose to place, and
where to place, uniform snowmobile signs in accordance with the Uniform
Snowmobile Signing Handbook on the particular connecting sections and cross-
connections. The association, acting by and through its coordinator, shall
determine if the safety of snowmobilers that may use the right-of-way will be
enhanced by the Snowmobile Signing Accommodation; and
      (2)   The association, acting by and through its coordinator, is required
to include any warning of any condition, use, structure, or activity on the
right- of-way as it may determine that may be needed to be signed with uniform
snowmobile signs. Included shall be all locations that require operation of
snowmobiles within ten feet of the roadway to avoid obstructions or hazardous
terrain.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.43 APPLICATION FORM FOR PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   The application form for participation shall be the form developed by
the County Engineer for the efficient administration and review of the
applications of associations applying for consideration for participation in
the County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program.
   (B)   The form shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   Information to be supplied by the association:
         (a)   Name of the association;
         (b)   Address of the association;
         (c)   Name of the association president;
         (d)   Name, address, and phone number of the association coordinator;
         (e)   Signature and date of signature of the association coordinator;
         (f)   Indication if the application is for renewal of a county
Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program Agreement;
         (g)   A description of its desired choices of connecting sections and/
or cross-connections. Each connecting section and cross-connection shall be on
a separate page to enable the application to be considered separately in parts.
Each description shall indicate the proposed direction of travel in relation to
the vehicular traffic flow upon the adjacent roadway. Each description shall
explicitly locate all crossings of the county highway;
         (h)   A listing of all locations that require operation of snowmobiles
within ten feet of the roadway to avoid obstructions or hazardous terrain;
         (i)   The snowmobile trails that the association is involved in at
each end of the connecting section or cross-connection which includes their
approximate length and destination; and
         (j)   The written endorsement of all municipal corporate bodies, or
their designees, for municipalities through which the desired connecting
sections and/or cross-connections traverse.
      (2)   Information to be assembled by the Lake County Division of
Transportation for the submitted applications:
         (a)   Date received;
         (b)   An indication if the proposed connecting sections and cross-
connections are county highways or not;
         (c)   An indication if the proper municipal endorsements have been
obtained;
         (d)   An indication if the application has been judged by the Lake
County Division of Transportation to be complete;
         (e)   An indication if the particular proposed connecting sections and
cross-connections are unavailable due to being proposed for use by another
association;
         (f)   An indication if the proposed connecting sections and cross-
connections are unavailable due to conflicting ongoing or pending highway
maintenance or construction, or to conflicting ongoing or pending utility
maintenance or construction; and
         (g)   An indication of where snowmobile signing, if any, is to be
considered to be placed by the Division of Transportation on those connecting
sections and cross-connections.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.44 DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION REVIEW FOR COMPLETENESS.
   The County Engineer, or designees, shall have the sole authority to
determine if applications received for participation in the Lake County
Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program are complete. Only completed
applications shall be further processed. Incomplete applications shall be
returned but may be resubmitted if completed. Failure to submit the appropriate
fee is to be considered an incomplete application.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.45 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Applications that are judged complete shall be further reviewed by the
Division of Transportation as follows.
   (A)   Renewal terms. Renewals shall be recommended for additional terms,
unless an association has not met the terms, requirements and procedures of
this chapter in the prior year as determined by the County Engineer.
   (B)   Duplicate applications. Whenever two or more associations have
submitted applications for the same connecting section, or cross section, or
both, the Division of Transportation shall attempt to reach an agreement with
the respective association coordinators as to priority, it being the intent of
this provision to avoid overlapping Snowmobile Signing Accommodations. If no
agreement is reached, then the Division of Transportation shall decide which
Snowmobile Signing Accommodation shall have priority. This section does not
apply to renewal applications.
   (C)   Restrictions. The sections of county highways available for use for
connecting sections and cross-connections shall not include the following:
      (1)   Those sections of county highways not to be made available due to
conflicting ongoing or pending road maintenance or construction, or to
conflicting ongoing or pending utility maintenance or construction as
determined by the County Engineer;
      (2)   Those sections of county highways where no separation currently
exists between the right-of-way line and the adjacent roadway of more than ten
feet;
      (3)   Applications not involving connecting snowmobile trails; and
      (4)   Travel of snowmobiles proposed to not be in the same direction of
travel of adjacent traffic flow of the adjacent roadway as described on the
application.
   (D)   Endorsements. The applications for particular connecting sections and/
or cross- connections must include the written endorsement of the municipality
or municipalities through which the connecting section and/or cross-connection
traverses.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.46 DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION FIELD REVIEW.
   (A)   The Illinois Snowmobile Act allows use of public road rights-of-way by
snowmobiles, without signing, in accordance with the standards and requirements
of the Act. The field review by the Division of Transportation is to result in
identification of snowmobile signing, if any, to be placed by the Division of
Transportation to accommodate the request of an association for Snowmobile
Signing Accommodation on a connecting section and cross-connection, if they are
ultimately approved.
   (B)   The Division of Transportation shall base the signing on any policy
considerations as it may determine in accordance with the IMUTCD.
   (C)   The county, acting by and through its Division of Transportation,
makes no representation by the review that the right-of-way is safe for entry
or use by snowmobiles.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.47 DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION REPORT.
   After the field review of §
72.46, all applications, or parts thereof, shall be compiled and a staff report
prepared for the Public Works and Transportation Committee and presented by the
County Engineer including the following information:
   (A)   The names of the associations and the particular connecting sections
and cross-connections recommended to be allowed for Snowmobile Signing
Accommodation; and
   (B)   The names of the associations and the particular connecting sections
and cross-connections recommended not to be allowed for Snowmobile Signing
Accommodation.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.48 CONSIDERATION BY THE PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall consider the
report of the County Engineer prepared in accordance with §
72.47. The Public Works and Transportation Committee may also request, for its
consideration, a relevant review by the State’s Attorney.
      (2)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall have the sole
responsibility, and complete discretion in determining whether an application,
or any part thereof, is rejected or accepted and shall act to reject or accept
all applications, or any part thereof, as contained in the report of the County
Engineer within 15 days. The Public Works and Transportation Committee may take
into account in its decisions any written comments submitted to the County
Engineer from persons having a financial interest in property fronting on
proposed connecting sections that may be the subject of an application or any
part thereof.
   (B)   Variations.
      (1)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall have the
authority to grant any variations to this chapter that it deems necessary and
appropriate to further the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited
to the following general provisions of §
72.45:
         (a)   The renewal terms (see §
72.45(A)).
      (2)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee shall not have the
authority to grant any variances to this chapter and thereby approve any
application, or part thereof, that would violate any of the following
provisions of this chapter:
         (a)   Sections unavailable due to maintenance or construction
conflicts (see §
72.45(C)(1); or
         (b)   Snowmobile signing accommodation program agreements not in
accordance with §
72.50 and the form adopted by the Lake County Board.
   (C)   Notification of final action.
      (1)   The County Engineer shall have prepared a listing showing the final
action of the Public Works and Transportation Committee regarding the staff
report.
      (2)   The action of the Public Works and Transportation Committee shall
be final.
      (3)   The Lake County Division of Transportation shall request those
associations that were approved for particular connecting sections and/or
cross-connections to sign and return to the Division of Transportation the
prepared Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program Agreement with the
appropriate fee and required insurance certificates. The Snowmobile Signing
Accommodation Program Agreement shall be as approved by the County Board and
available from the Lake County Division of Transportation.
   (D)   Required documents/fees. The Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program
Agreement shall not be considered signed if the returned agreement does not
contain the required insurance certificates or the required fees.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.49 ACCEPTED APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   For those applications, or parts thereof, approved by the Public Works
and Transportation Committee in accordance with §
72.48, the County Engineer is authorized, and hereby directed, to execute on
behalf of the county, the Lake County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program
Agreement with that association, provided the signed agreement is accompanied
by the appropriate fee and required insurance certificates.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the associations to submit the signed
Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program Agreements to the County Engineer.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.50 AGREEMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program Agreement adopted by the
County Board shall be the agreement used for all approved applications, or
parts thereof.
   (B)   The terms of the Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program Agreement
shall not be valid beyond April 15 of the winter season under consideration.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.51 SIGNING.
   (A)   Association: Snowmobile Signing Accommodation.
      (1)   The association, for its approved connecting sections and cross-
connections, shall place, inspect, maintain, and replace any uniform snowmobile
signs that it determined were necessary in its field review undertaken in
accordance with §
72.42. No other signs shall be placed by the association on any county highway
right-of-way. The Division of Transportation has no duty to place, inspect,
maintain, or replace the association’s uniform snowmobile signs.
      (2)   The uniform snowmobile signs shall be in place by November 19 and
shall be removed by the association no later than March 31 of the next calendar
year.
   (B)   Lake County Division of Transportation: snowmobile signing. The Lake
County Division of Transportation will place and maintain the snowmobile
signing determined in its field review for approved connecting sections and
cross-connections provided by §
72.46 as part of its normal highway signing program for the duration of the
agreement period.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.52 TERMINATION AND SUSPENSION OF AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The Public Works and Transportation Committee, upon the recommendation
of the County Engineer, may terminate particular Lake County Snowmobile Signing
Accommodation Program Agreements then in effect if an association does not meet
the terms and conditions of its agreement, or if the association’s involvement
in the County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program is inconsistent with any
other restrictions or limitations established by this chapter. The termination
order issued by the County Engineer shall be in writing to the association’s
coordinator mailed to the address as shown on the application form for
participation and shall specify the effective date of termination.
   (B)   The County Engineer may terminate, or suspend, a particular Snowmobile
Signing Accommodation Program Agreement then in effect when the use provided
for therein would conflict with highway construction, highway maintenance, or
utility construction or utility maintenance on a section. The termination or
suspension order shall be in writing to the association coordinator mailed to
the address, as shown on the application form for participation. In the event
of a suspension, the County Engineer may specify the length of the duration of
the suspension.
   (C)   The association shall remove its uniform snowmobile signs on the
involved connecting sections or cross-connections for the duration of any
termination or suspension.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.53 FEES.
   The County Board, by separate resolution, upon the recommendation of the
Public Works and Transportation Committee, may assess from time to time
appropriate fees to offset the administrative costs of the County Snowmobile
Signing Accommodation Program. The fees may be structured and separately
payable for initial applications and final agreements. All fees shall be non-
refundable.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
72.70
§ 72.54 GRANTS.
   It is the policy of the county not to participate in the application of any
grant requests that associations may choose to make of any agency or person for
financial assistance in the signing of connecting sections and cross-
connections. The Lake County Division of Transportation shall not directly
accept any funding from these grants. Fees to offset the administration of this
chapter as herein provided are not to be construed to be applicable to this
section.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
§ 72.55 LIMITATION ON WORK.
   No construction of any snowmobile trail, snowmobile bridge or culvert, or
any work whatsoever on a county highway other than the Snowmobile Signing
Accommodation as approved herein, shall be undertaken by, or authorized by, an
association or by any person.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res./Ord. passed 12-9-1997)
FEES AND CHARGES
§ 72.70 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Fees for the Lake County Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program
shall be as adopted by the County Board.
   (B)   Any and all fees received in the administration of the Lake County
Snowmobile Signing Accommodation Program shall be deposited in the County
Highway Tax Fund.
   (C)   The fee schedule may be amended from time to time by action of the
County Board.
(1977 Code, § 4:1-9) (Res. passed 12-9-1997)
CHAPTER 73: MOTORBOATS
Section
General Provisions
   
73.001   Title and declaration of intent
   
73.002   Definitions
Enforcement
   
73.015   Enforcement
   
73.016   Inspection
   
73.017   Resistance to officers
   
73.018   False representation
Registration of Motorboats and Sailboats Over 12 Feet in Length
   
73.030   Operation unlawful
   
73.031   Identification number application
   
73.032   Identification number display
   
73.033   Destruction, sale, transfer, or abandonment
   
73.034   Transfer of identification number
   
73.035   Conformity with U.S. Government
   
73.036   Loss of certificate
   
73.037   Alteration or counterfeit
   
73.038   Exception from numbering provisions
Equipment
   
73.050   Life preservers; personal flotation devices
   
73.051   Lights
   
73.052   Mufflers
   
73.053   Whistles
   
73.054   Fire extinguisher
   
73.055   Carburetor arresters
   
73.056   Ventilators
   
73.057   Sirens and flashing lights
   
73.058   Disposal of wastes from watercraft
   
73.059   Battery covers
   
73.060   Lanyard cutoff switch
   
73.061   Hull identification numbers
   
73.062   Visual distress signals
Operation of Motorboats
   
73.075   Careless operation
   
73.076   Reckless operation
   
73.077   Age of operators limited
   
73.078   Interference with navigation
   
73.079   Overloading
   
73.080   Incapacity of operator
   
73.081   Overpowering
   
73.082   Restricted areas
   
73.083   Designation of restricted areas; public hearing notice
   
73.084   Designation of restricted areas; publication of notice
   
73.085   Designation of restricted area; review
   
73.086   Traffic rules
   
73.087   Sailboats and rowboats
   
73.088   Water skiing
   
73.089   Regattas and races
   
73.090   (Reserved)
   
73.091   Collisions, accidents, and casualties
   
73.092   Boat liveries
   
73.093   Littering and polluting
   
73.094   Searchlights or other blinding lights
   
73.095   Unauthorized lights
   
73.096   Unnecessary sounding of a whistle
Disposition of Revenue
   
73.110   Disbursement
   
73.111   Circuit Court Clerk
 
   
73.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.001 TITLE AND DECLARATION OF INTENT.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Motorboat Equipment and Operation of
Motorboats Ordinance” or “this chapter”. It is the policy of this county to
promote the safety and public health for persons and property in and connected
with the use, operation, and equipment of motorboats. This chapter shall apply
to all waters within the jurisdiction of this county.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   AIRBOAT. Any boat (but not including airplanes or hydroplanes) propelled by
machinery applying force against the air rather than the water as a means of
propulsion.
   COMPETENT. Capable of assisting a skier in case of injury or accident.
   COUNTY. Lake County, State of Illinois.
   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
   HOLDING TANK. A permanently installed container which receives the discharge
from one toilet or more and retains the sewage for on-shore disposal.
   LIFEBOAT. A small boat kept on board a larger boat for use in emergency.
   LOCAL AUTHORITY. Every county, municipal, and other local board or body
having the authority to adopt local police regulations under the Constitution
and laws of this state.
   MARINE TOILET. Any toilet on or within any watercraft.
   MOTORBOAT. Any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not the machinery
is the principal source of propulsion, but does not include a vessel which has
a valid marine document issued by the Bureau of Customs of the United States
government, or any federal agency or successor thereto.
   OPERATE. To navigate or otherwise use a motorboat or vessel.
   OTHER WASTES. Garbage, wood, petrochemical and chemical products, and animal
or vegetable material.
   OWNER.
      (1)   A person, other than lien holder, having title to a motorboat.
      (2)   The term includes a person entitled to use or possession of a
motorboat subject to an interest in another person, reserved or created by
agreement, and securing payment of performance of an obligation, but the term
excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, or other
entity.
   PERSONAL FLOATATION DEVICE or PFD. A device that is approved by the
Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard, under C.F.R. part 160.
   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel that uses an inboard motor powering a water
jet pump as its primary source of motor power and that is designed to be
operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel, rather than
the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel, and includes
vessels that are similar in appearance and operation but are powered by an
outboard or propeller drive motor.
   PORTABLE TOILET. A self-contained unit with a provision for retaining sewage
in a holding tank for disposal to a sewage system acceptable to the county.
   RECIRCULATING TOILET. A holding tank with all necessary devices to provide
for the recirculation of flushing liquid and for the receiving, venting, and
shore removal of sewage.
   SAILBOAT. Any watercraft propelled by sail or canvas. For the purposes of
this chapter, any watercraft propelled by both sail or canvas and machinery of
any sort shall be deemed a motorboat when being so propelled.
   SEWAGE. Water-carried human and related wastes.
   SPECIALTY PROP-CRAFT. A vessel that is similar in appearance and operation
to a personal watercraft but that is powered by an outboard or propeller driven
motor.
   UNDER WAY. Applies to a vessel or watercraft at all times except when it is
moored at a dock or anchorage area.
   USE. Applies to all vessels on the waters of this county, whether moored or
underway.
   VESSEL or WATERCRAFT. Every description of watercraft other than a seaplane
on the water used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on
water.
   WAKE. A movement of the water created by a boat under way enough to disturb
a boat at rest, but under no circumstances shall a boat exceed five miles per
hour while in a posted “No Wake” area. “No Wake” areas shall be clearly posted
with buoys or appropriate signs. All buoys or signs posting the “No Wake” areas
shall meet the specifications as prescribed by the U.S. Coast Guard or the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
   WASTEWATER. Sewage, industrial waste, or other waste, or any combination.
   WATERCRAFT. Any vessel manufactured or used primarily for non-commercial use
or leased, rented, or chartered to another for non-commercial use, or any
vessel used for livery or other commercial use, unless otherwise stipulated in
a particular subchapter of this chapter.
   WATERS OF THE COUNTY. Any water within the jurisdiction of Lake County,
State of Illinois.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 73.015 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This chapter shall be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff or his or
her designee(s) who, in his or her discretion, may either issue a ticket to
proceed through:
      (1)   The Circuit Court of the 19th Judicial Circuit; or
      (2)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication, set forth in the Lake
County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66).
   (B)   It is further the duty of all these officers to make prompt
investigation of any violation of the provisions of this chapter reported by
any other person, and to cause a complaint to be filed before the Circuit Court
if there seems just grounds for a complaint and evidence procurable to support
the same.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992; Ord. 15-0379, passed 4-14-2015)
Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.016 INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   All duly authorized Deputy Sheriffs may board and inspect any
boat at any time for the purpose of determining if this chapter is being
complied with, provided that the officer has an articulable reason to believe
that any provision of this chapter is being violated.
      (2)   If the boarding officer discovers any violation of this chapter, he
or she may issue a summons to the operator of the watercraft requiring that the
operator appear before the Circuit Court of Lake County.
   (B)   Every vessel subject to this chapter if under way, and upon being
hailed by a designated law enforcement officer, must stop immediately and lay
to.
   (C)   All duly authorized deputies may enforce all federal laws and
regulations which have been mutually agreed upon by the federal, state, and
county governments and are applicable to the operation of watercraft on
navigable waters and federal impoundments where concurrent jurisdiction exists
between federal, state, and county governments.
   (D)   Agents of the Department and other duly authorized police officers may
seize and impound, at the owner’s or operator’s expense, any watercraft
involved in a boating accident or a violation of §§ 3A-21, 5-1, 5-2, or 5-11 of
the Boat Registration and Safety Act.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.017 RESISTANCE TO OFFICERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to resist or obstruct any authorized officer
in the discharge of his or her duties under the provisions of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.018 FALSE REPRESENTATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to represent himself or herself falsely to be
a Deputy Sheriff or to assume to act as such without having been duly appointed
and employed as such.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
REGISTRATION OF MOTORBOATS AND SAILBOATS OVER 12 FEET IN LENGTH
§ 73.030 OPERATION UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   Every motorboat and sailboat over 12 feet in length on waters within
the jurisdiction of this county shall be numbered.
   (B)   No person may operate or give permission for the operation of any such
motorboat or sailboat on these waters unless the motorboat or sailboat is
numbered in accordance with this chapter with applicable federal law, or in
accordance with a federally approved numbering system of another state, and
unless:
      (1)   The certificate of number awarded to the motorboat or sailboat is
in full force and effect; and
      (2)   The identifying number is displayed on each side of the bow of the
motorboat or sailboat.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.031 IDENTIFICATION NUMBER APPLICATION.
   The owner of each motorboat or sailboat over 12 feet in length requiring
numbering by this county shall file an application for numbers with the
Illinois Department of Conservation on forms approved by it. The application
shall be signed by the owner of the motorboat or sailboat, and shall be
accompanied by the appropriate fee as provided for in 625 ILCS 45/3-2.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.032 IDENTIFICATION NUMBER DISPLAY.
   (A)   The owner shall paint or attach to both sides of the bow (front) of a
motorboat or sailboat over 12 feet in length, the identification number, which
shall be of block characters at least three inches in height. The figures shall
read from left to right, be of contrasting color to their background, and be in
a legible condition. No other number shall be displayed on the bow of the
watercraft. In affixing the number to the boat, the space or a hyphen shall be
provided between the “IL” and the number, and another space or hyphen between
the number and the letters which follow.
   (B)   The certificate of numbers shall be pocket size, and shall be
available at all times for inspection on the motorboat or sailboat for which
issued whenever the motorboat or sailboat is in operation. On vessels of
unconventional design or so constructed that it is impractical or impossible to
display identification numbers in a prominent position on the forward half of
their hulls or permanent substructures, numbers may be displayed in brackets or
fixtures firmly attached to the vessel. Exact positioning of the numbers in
brackets or protruding fixtures shall be discretionary with vessel owners,
provided the numbers are placed on the forward half of the vessel and meet the
standard requirements for legibility, size, style, and contrast with the
background.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.033 DESTRUCTION, SALE, TRANSFER, OR ABANDONMENT.
   The owner of any motorboat or sailboat over 12 feet in length shall within
15 days notify the Department if the motorboat or sailboat is destroyed or
abandoned or is sold or transferred either wholly or in part to another person
or persons. In all these cases, the notice shall be accompanied by a surrender
of the certificate of number. When the surrender of the certificate is by
reason of the motorboat or sailboat being destroyed or abandoned, the
Department shall cancel the certificate of numbers and enter that fact in its
records. The Department shall be notified in writing of any change of address.
Should the owner desire a new certificate of numbers showing the new address,
he or she shall surrender the old certificate and notify the Department of the
new address, remitting $1 to cover the issuance of new certificate of numbers.
If the surrender is by sale or transfer either wholly or in part to another
person or persons, the owner surrendering the certificate shall state to the
Department, under oath, the name of the purchaser or transferee.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.034 TRANSFER OF IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.
   The purchaser of a motorboat or sailboat over 12 feet in length shall,
within 15 days after acquiring same, make application to the Department for
transfer to him or her of the certificate of numbers issued to the motorboat or
sailboat giving his or her name, address and the number of the boat. The
purchaser shall apply for a transfer-renewal for a fee as prescribed by 625
ILCS 45/3-2. All transfers will bear June 30 expiration dates in the calendar
year of expiration. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Department
shall transfer the certificate of number together with proof that any tax
imposed under the Lake County Use Tax has been paid or is not owed issued to
the motorboat or sailboat to the new owner. Unless application is made and fee
is paid within 30 days, the motorboat or sailboat shall be deemed to be without
certificate of numbers and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate the
motorboat or sailboat until the certificate is issued.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.035 CONFORMITY WITH U.S. GOVERNMENT.
   In the event that an agency of the United States Government has in force an
overall system of identification numbering for motorboats within the United
States, the numbering system employed pursuant to this chapter and the
Department shall be in conformity therewith.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.036 LOSS OF CERTIFICATE.
   Should a certificate of number or registration expiration decal become lost,
destroyed, or mutilated beyond legibility, the owner of the motorboat or
sailboat shall make application to the Department for the replacement of the
certificate or decal, giving his or her name, address, and the number of his or
her boat and shall pay to the Department a fee of $5.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.037 ALTERATION OR COUNTERFEIT.
   No person shall at any time falsely alter or change in any manner the
certificate of number issued under the provisions hereof, or falsify any record
required by this chapter, or counterfeit in any form the certificate of number.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.038 EXCEPTION FROM NUMBERING PROVISIONS.
   A motorboat or sailboat over 12 feet in length shall not be required to be
numbered under this chapter if it is:
   (A)   Already covered by a number in full force and effect which has been
awarded to it pursuant to federal law or a federally approved numbering system
of another state if the boat will not be within this county for a period in
excess of 60 consecutive days;
   (B)   A motorboat or sailboat from a country other than the United States
temporarily using the waters of this county;
   (C)   A motorboat or sailboat whose owner is the United States, a state, or
a subdivision thereof, and used solely for official purposes and clearly
identifiable;
   (D)   A ship’s lifeboat;
   (E)   A motorboat or sailboat belonging to a class of boats which has been
exempted from numbering by the Department after that agency has found that an
agency of the federal government has a numbering system applicable to the class
of motorboats or sailboats to which the motorboat or sailboat in question
belongs and would be exempt from numbering if it were subject to the federal
law; or
   (F)   Motorboats while competing in any race previously arranged and
announced, or if the boats be designed and intended solely for racing while
engaged in navigation incidental to the tuning up of the boats and engines for
the race. Testing of motorboats incidental to tuning up of the boats and
engines for the race may be accomplished only after obtaining the permission of
the local authority.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
EQUIPMENT
§ 73.050 LIFE PRESERVERS; PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES (PFDs).
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate any watercraft less than 16 feet in length
or a canoe or kayak unless at least one Coast Guard approved PFD of the
following types or their equivalent is on board for each person.
      (1)   Type I. A Type I personal flotation device is a U.S. Coast Guard
approved device designed to turn an unconscious person in the water from a face
downward position to a vertical or slightly backward position and to have more
than 20 pounds buoyancy.
      (2)   Type II. A Type II personal flotation device is a U.S. Coast Guard
approved device designed to turn a person in the water from a face downward
position to a vertical or slightly backward position and to have at least 15
pounds of buoyancy.
      (3)   Type III. A Type III personal flotation device is a U.S. Coast
Guard approved device designed to keep a conscious person in a vertical or
slightly backward position and to have at least 15 pounds of buoyancy.
      (4)   Type IV. A Type IV personal flotation device is a U.S. Coast Guard
approved device designed to be thrown to a person in the water, and not worn.
It is designed to have at least 16 pounds of buoyancy.
      (5)   Type V. A Type V personal flotation device is an approved device
for restricted use and is acceptable only when used in the activity for which
it is approved.
   (B)   No person may use a watercraft 16 feet or more in length unless at
least one Coast Guard approved PFD of the following types or their equivalent
is on board for each person: Type I, Type II, or Type III.
   (C)   No person may operate a personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft
unless each person aboard is wearing a Type I, Type II, Type III, or Type V PFD
approved by the United States Coast Guard.
   (D)   No person may use a watercraft 16 feet or more in length, except a
canoe or kayak, unless at least one Type IV Coast Guard approved PFD or its
equivalent is on board in addition to the PFDs required in subsection (B) of
this section.
   (E)   When assisting a person on water skis, aquaplane, or similar device,
there must be one U.S. Coast Guard approved lifesaving device on board for each
person being assisted or towed.
   (F)   No person may use a watercraft unless each device required by this
section is:
      (1)   Readily accessible;
      (2)   In serviceable condition;
      (3)   Of the appropriate size for the person for whom it is intended; and
      (4)   Legibly marked with the U.S. Coast Guard approved number.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.051 LIGHTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate any vessel less than 26 feet in length
unless the following lights are carried and displayed when underway from sunset
to sunrise.
      (1)   A bright, white light aft to show all around the horizon, visible
for a distance of two miles. The word visible, as used herein, means visible on
a dark night with clear atmosphere.
      (2)   A combination light in the forepart of the boat lower than the
white light aft, showing green to starboard and red to port, so fixed as to
throw a light from dead ahead to two points abaft the beam on the respective
sides and visible for a distance of not less than one mile.
      (3)   Lights under international rules may be shown as an alternative to
the above requirements.
   (B)   Watercraft propelled by muscular power when underway shall carry on
board from sunset to sunrise, but not fixed to any part of the boat, lantern or
flashlight capable of showing a white light visible all around the horizon at a
distance of two miles or more, and shall display the lantern in sufficient time
to avoid collision with another watercraft.
   (C)   Every vessel 26 feet or more in length shall carry and display when
underway any additional or alternate lights as shall be required by the U.S.
Coast Guard for watercraft of equivalent length and type.
   (D)   Sailboats equipped with motors and being propelled partly or solely by
the motors shall carry and display the same lights required for motorboats of
the same class. Sailboats of less than 26 feet in length, equipped with motors,
but being propelled entirely by sail between sunset and sunrise, shall have
lighted the combination running light, but not the white light aft. Sailboats
26 feet or more in length, equipped with the motors but being propelled
entirely by sail between sunset and sunrise, shall have lighted the colored
side lights suitably screened, but not the white lights prescribed for
motorboats.
   (E)   Dinghies, tenders, and other watercraft whose principal function is as
an auxiliary to other larger watercraft, when so operating need carry only a
flashlight visible to other craft in the area, anything in this section to the
contrary notwithstanding.
   (F)   Vessels at anchor between the hours of sunset and sunrise, except
those in a “special anchorage area”, shall display anchor lights as shall be
required by the U.S. Coast Guard for watercraft of equivalent length and type.
   (G)   Watercraft operated manually or by motor which are located on bodies
of water where motors of over seven and one-half horsepower are prohibited must
be equipped during the hours between sunset and sunrise with a lantern or
flashlight, which is capable of showing a beam for two miles, anything in this
section to the contrary notwithstanding.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.052 MUFFLERS.
   (A)   All motorboats shall be equipped and maintained with an effective
muffler or underwater exhaust system. For the purpose of this section, an
effective muffler or underwater exhaust system is one which does not produce
sound levels that are in excess of 90 decibels when subjected to a stationary
sound level test as prescribed by the Society of Automotive Engineers in its
procedure J2005.
   (B)   No person may operate a motorboat on the waters of this state so as to
exceed a noise level of 75 decibels measured as specified by the Society of
Automotive Engineers in its procedure J1970 from any point on the shoreline, or
from any point on the water within 20 feet of the shoreline, of the body of
water on which the motorboat is operated.
   (C)   No person may manufacture or offer for sale any motorboat for use on
the waters of this state if that motorboat cannot be operated in compliance
with the sound levels in subsections (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all public waters over
which the state has jurisdiction.
   (E)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   A motorboat tuning up for or participating in official trials for a
sanctioned race or regatta conducted under a permit issued by the appropriate
unit of government; or
      (2)   A motorboat being operated by a boat or marine engine manufacturer
for the purpose of testing or development, as authorized by the appropriate
unit of government.
   (F)   Any person violating subsections (A) or (B) of this section:
      (1)   Shall be required to install an effective muffler system on the
motorboat in violation;
      (2)   Shall be required to pass the sound level test prescribed by the
Society of Automotive Engineers in its procedure J2005 before putting the
motorboat back into use; and
      (3)   Is subject to the misdemeanors set forth in §
73.999.
   (G)   Any person violating subsection (C) of this section:
      (1)   Shall be required to install an effective muffler system on the
motorboat in violation;
      (2)   Shall be required to pass the sound level test prescribed by the
Society of Automotive Engineers in its procedure J2005 before putting the
motorboat back into use; and
      (3)   Is subject to the offense set forth in §
73.999.
   (H)   Any person who operates any motorboat upon the waters of this state
shall be deemed to have given consent to the test or tests prescribed in this
section or by the Department to determine if the motorboat is in compliance
with the provisions of this section.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.053 WHISTLES.
   It is unlawful to operate a motorboat without a mouth, hand, or power
operated whistle, horn, or other appliance capable of producing a blast of two
seconds or more duration and audible for at least one-half mile.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.054 FIRE EXTINGUISHER.
   It is unlawful to operate a motorboat anywhere in this county without at
least one U.S. Coast Guard approved fire extinguisher so placed as to be
readily accessible and in a condition as to be ready for immediate and
effective use.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.055 CARBURETOR ARRESTERS.
   Carburetors on all engines of motorboats other than those propelled by a
detachable outboard motor shall be fitted or protected by a U.S. Coast Guard
approved device for arresting backfire.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.056 VENTILATORS.
   (A)   Except for open boats, all motorboats which use fuel having a
flashpoint of 110°F or less shall have at least two ventilator ducts fitted
with cowls or their equivalent for the efficient removal of flammable gasses
from the bilges of every engine and fuel tank compartment.
   (B)   There shall be at least one exhaust duct installed so as to extend
from the open atmosphere to the lower portion of the bilge and at least one
intake duct installed so as to extend to a point at least midway to the bilge
or at least below the level of the carburetor air intake.
   (C)   The cowls shall be located and trimmed for maximum effectiveness and
in such a manner as to prevent displaced fumes from being recirculated.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.057 SIRENS AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a motorboat equipped with a siren
or to use any red or blue flashing light except upon duly designated patrol
boats, and the siren or flashing lights used in violation of this section shall
be considered a public nuisance, subject to confiscation and disposal as
determined by a competent court of jurisdiction.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.058 DISPOSAL OF WASTES FROM WATERCRAFT.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any boat containing toilet facilities
to be on the waters of any stream, river, or lake in this county, unless the
toilet facilities shall be closed and sealed to prevent the use thereof or the
discharge therefrom, so that no sewage shall enter into the waters.
      (2)   The method of sealing the toilet facilities shall be subject to the
approval of the county.
   (B)   No person shall dispose of any sewage or waste water accumulated in a
holding tank or any other container on a watercraft in such a manner that the
sewage or wastewater reaches or may reach the waters of the county, except by
pumpout to an operating sewage works which has been approved and permitted by
the state and/or county.
   (C)   Acceptable marine toilet facilities are:
      (1)   Holding tanks which retain wastes from marine toilets for proper
disposal pursuant to subsection (B) of this section;
      (2)   Recirculating toilets equipped with all necessary devices to
provide for the receiving, venting, and shore removal of sewage;
      (3)   Chemical type toilets, provided the design is such that the
container is not portable and the use of on-shore pumping facilities is
provided for in the design of the unit. The design of the toilet and on-shore
disposal adaptation shall be subject to approval;
      (4)   Incinerator type toilets may be used, provided the capacity is
adequate to handle the passenger load. The ash from these toilets is not to be
disposed of in the waters of this county; and
      (5)   Portable toilets may be used, provided they are:
         (a)   Of an approved type;
         (b)   Of adequate capacity to handle passenger load;
         (c)   Fastened down to the boat with a permanent mounted fixture; or
         (d)   Of such a design that the sewage in the holding tank shall be
properly disposed of on shore through use of an on-shore facility.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.059 BATTERY COVERS.
   Every motorboat equipped with storage batteries shall be provided with
suitable supports and secured against shifting with the motion of the boat.
These storage batteries shall be equipped with non- conductive shielding means
to prevent accidental shorting of battery terminals.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.060 LANYARD CUTOFF SWITCH.
   No person may operate any motor boat, including personal watercraft or
specialty prop-craft, which is equipped with a lanyard type engine cutoff
switch, unless the lanyard is properly attached to his or her person, clothing,
or worn PFD, as appropriate for the specific vessel.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.061 HULL IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS.
   Any watercraft manufactured after October 1, 1975 shall have a hull
identification number carved, burned, stamped, embossed, or otherwise
permanently affixed to the outboard side of the transom, or if there is no
transom, to the outermost starboard side at the end of the hull that bears the
rudder or other steering mechanism above the water line in such a way that
alteration, removal, or replacement would be obvious and evident. Any
individual who manufactures any watercraft either for private or public use
shall apply to the Department and shall affix the number to the watercraft as
required by the rules and regulations of the Department.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.062 VISUAL DISTRESS SIGNALS.
   (A)   Every watercraft operated on Lake Michigan within the jurisdictional
waters of Lake County must carry Coast Guard approved visual distress signaling
devices. Recreational boats less than 16 feet in length; boats participating in
organized events such as races, regattas or marine parades; open sailboats not
equipped with propulsion machinery and less than 26 feet in length; and
manually propelled boats shall not be required to carry the daytime visual
distress signals, but must carry Coast Guard approved visual distress signals
between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
   (B)   No person in a watercraft shall display a visual distress signal under
any circumstances except a situation where assistance is needed because of
immediate or potential danger to the persons aboard.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
OPERATION OF MOTORBOATS
§ 73.075 CARELESS OPERATION.
   No person shall operate any motorboat in a careless or heedless manner so as
to be indifferent to the person or property of other persons, or at a rate of
speed greater than will permit him or her in the exercise of reasonable care to
bring the motorboat to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.076 RECKLESS OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate any watercraft, specialty prop-craft, personal
watercraft or manipulate any waterskis, aquaplane, or similar device in such a
manner as to willfully or wantonly endanger the life, limb, or property of any
person, to weave through congested traffic, to jump the wake of another vessel
unreasonably or unnecessarily close to the other vessel or when visibility
around the other vessel is obstructed, to wait until the last possible moment
to swerve to avoid collision or operate any watercraft so as to approach or
pass another boat in such a manner or at such a rate of speed as to create a
hazardous wake or wash.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motorboat at a speed in excess of 25 miles
per hour between the period one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before
sunrise.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.077 AGE OF OPERATORS LIMITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person under ten years of age may operate a motorboat.
Persons at least ten years of age and less than 12 years of age may operate a
motorboat only if they are accompanied on the motorboat and under the direct
control of a parent or guardian, or a person at least 18 years of age
designated by a parent or guardian.
      (2)   Persons at least 12 years of age and less than 18 years of age may
operate a motorboat only if they are accompanied by a parent or guardian or a
person of at least 18 years of age designated by a parent or guardian or the
motorboat operator is in possession of a boating safety certificate issued by
the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Division of Law Enforcement,
authorizing the holder to operate a motorboat.
   (B)   Violations of this section done with the knowledge of a parent or
guardian shall be deemed a violation by the parent or guardian.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.078 INTERFERENCE WITH NAVIGATION.
   No person shall operate any watercraft in a manner which unreasonably or
unnecessarily interferes with other watercraft or with the free and proper
navigation of the waterways of the county. Anchoring under bridges or in
heavily traveled channels constitutes interference if unreasonable under
prevailing circumstances.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.079 OVERLOADING.
   (A)   No motorboat may be loaded with passengers or cargo beyond its safe
carrying capacity, taking into consideration weather and other existing
operating conditions.
   (B)   Every vessel less than 26 feet in length designed to carry two or more
persons and to be propelled by machinery as its principal source of power or
designed to be propelled by oars shall have affixed permanently thereto a
capacity plate as required and specified in 625 ILCS 45/5-4.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.080 INCAPACITY OF OPERATOR.
   The owner of any motorboat or any person in charge or in control shall not
authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any person who by
reason of physical or mental disability is incapable of operating the motorboat
under the prevailing circumstances.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.081 OVERPOWERING.
   (A)   No motorboat shall be equipped with any motor or other propulsion
machinery beyond its safe power capacity, taking into consideration the type
and construction of the motorboat and other existing operating conditions.
   (B)   No motorboat shall exceed the maximum horsepower of the motor the
vessel is designed or intended to accommodate as specified by the vessel’s
capacity plate.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.082 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorboat within a water area which has been
clearly marked by buoys or some other distinguishing devices as a bathing,
fishing, swimming, no wake, or otherwise restricted area by the county, state,
or federal authorities, or by an owner or lessee of property except in the
manner prescribed by the buoys or other distinguishing devices; provided that
this section shall not apply in the case of an emergency or to patrol or rescue
craft.
   (B)   The county shall have the authority within its discretion and after
notice and hearing as provided by §§
73.083 and
73.084 to designate certain areas by proper signs to be boating, fishing,
swimming, no wake, or otherwise restricted areas. The county shall further have
the authority in order to fully carry out the provisions of this chapter to
place signs, beacons, and buoys in designated areas controlling the flow of
traffic.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, obliterate, tear down,
or destroy in whole or in part or attempt to deface, obliterate, tear down, or
destroy any buoys or signs posted pursuant of this chapter and to state and
federal regulations.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.083 DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED AREAS; PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE.
   Prior to designating any area as being restricted, the county shall hold a
public hearing concerning this designation at which all interested parties
shall be given an opportunity to appear and give testimony. Not more than 30
days nor less than 15 days prior to the hearing, notice thereof shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county stating the date,
time, and place of the hearing, the location of the proposed restricted area,
and the nature of the restriction.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.084 DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED AREAS; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   A designation of any area as being restricted shall not be effective unless
not more than ten days nor less than five days prior to the effective date
established in the order of designation, a notice of the order is published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the county, stating the location of the
restricted area and the nature of the restriction.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.085 DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED AREA; REVIEW.
   (A)   All final administrative decisions of the county under §
73.082 shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the
Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., and all amendments and
modifications thereof, and rules adopted pursuant thereto. The term
“administrative decision” is defined as in § 1 of the Administrative Review
Law.
   (B)   (1)   The county shall not be required to certify and record or file
any answer or otherwise appear unless the party filing the complaint deposits
with the Clerk of the Court the sum of $0.05 per 100 words representing costs
of the certification.
      (2)   Failure to make the deposit shall be grounds for dismissal of the
action.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.086 TRAFFIC RULES.
   (A)   Passing. When two boats are approaching each other “head on” or nearly
so (so as to involve risk of collision), each boat must bear to the right and
pass the other boat on its left side.
   (B)   Crossing. When boats approach each other obliquely or at right angles,
the boat approaching on the right side has the right-of-way.
   (C)   Overtaking. One boat may overtake another on either side, but must
grant the right-of-way to the overtaken boat.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.087 SAILBOATS AND ROWBOATS.
   When a motorboat is approaching a boat propelled solely by sails or oars,
the motorboat must yield the right-of-way to the sailboat or rowboat, except
when a large craft is navigating in a confined channel the large craft has the
right-of-way over a boat propelled solely by oars or sails.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.088 WATER SKIING.
   (A)   No motorboat which has in tow or is assisting a person on water skis,
aquaplane, or similar contrivance may be operated or propelled in or upon any
waterway unless the motorboat is occupied by at least two competent persons.
   (B)   No motorboat may have in tow or otherwise by assisting a person on
water skis, aquaplane, or similar contrivance from the period of one-half hour
after sunset to one-half hour prior to sunrise. This subsection does not apply
to motorboats used in duly authorized water ski tournaments, competitions,
exhibitions, or trials therefor when adequate lighting is provided.
   (C)   All motorboats having in tow or otherwise assisting a person on water
skis, aquaplane, or similar contrivance must be operated in a careful and
prudent manner and at a reasonable distance from person and property so as not
to endanger the life or property of any person.
   (D)   No person may operate or manipulate any vessel, tow rope, or other
device by which the direction or location of water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device may be affected or controlled in such a way as to cause the water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device or any person thereon to collide with or strike
against any person or object except ski jumps, buoys, and like objects normally
used in competitive or recreation skiing.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.089 REGATTAS AND RACES.
   (A)   The county may authorize the holding of regattas, motorboat, or other
boat races on any waters of the county. It shall adopt and may from time to
time amend regulations concerning the safety of motorboats and other vessels
and persons thereon, either observers or participants. Whenever a regatta,
motorboat, or other boat race is proposed to be held, the person in charge
thereof shall at least 30 days prior thereto file an application with the
County Planning, Building and Development Department for permission to hold the
regatta, motorboat, or other boat race. The application shall set forth the
date, time, and location where it is proposed to hold the regatta, motorboat,
or other boat race, and it shall not be conducted without authorization of the
county in writing.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not exempt any person from
compliance with applicable federal law or state law or regulation.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.090 (RESERVED)
§ 73.091 COLLISIONS, ACCIDENTS, AND CASUALTIES.
   (A)   The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or other
casualty so far as he or she can do so without serious danger to this own
vessel, crew, passengers, and guests (if any) shall render to the other persons
affected by the collision, accident, or other casualty any assistance as may be
practicable and as may be necessary in order to save them from or minimize any
danger caused by the collision, accident, or other casualty, and also shall
give his or her name, address, and identification of the vessel to any person
injured and to the owner of any property damaged in the collision, accident, or
other casualty.
   (B)   Any person who gratuitously and in good faith renders assistance at
the scene of a vessel collision, accident, or other casualty without objection
of any person assisted, shall not be held liable for any act or omission in
providing or arranging salvage, towing, medical treatment, or other assistance
where the assisting person acts as an ordinary reasonable prudent person would
have acted under the same or similar circumstances.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.092 BOAT LIVERIES.
   (A)   Neither the owner of a boat livery or rental service, nor his or her
agent or employees, shall permit any motorboat or any vessel designed or
permitted by him or her to be operated as a motorboat or powered by muscular
power or sail, to depart from his or her premises unless it has been provided
either by owner or renter with equipment required pursuant to §§ 73.050 through
73.062 and any rules and regulations made pursuant thereto.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a boat livery or his or
her agent or employees to determine that all boats permitted to be operated as
motorboats or powered by muscular power or sail are properly registered as
required pursuant to §§
73.030 through
73.038.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a boat livery or his or
her agent or his or her employees to supply the renter with a rental agreement.
This agreement shall include but is not limited to the renter’s name, address,
the number of persons that will be using the vessel, type and number of
personal flotation devices, fire extinguisher or any other item of equipment
required pursuant to §§ 73.050 through
73.062.
   (D)   Unlawful rental of personal watercraft or specialty prop-craft.
      (1)   A livery shall not lease, hire, or rent a personal watercraft or a
specialty prop-craft to, or for operation by, any person who is under 16 years
of age.
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating this section is subject to the
provisions of §
73.999.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.093 LITTERING AND POLLUTING.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, deposit, or otherwise place any wire, can,
bottle, glass, paper, trash, rubbish, cardboard, wood cartons, boxes, trees,
parts of trees, brush, sewage, petrochemical or chemical products, or other
insoluble material— including animal or vegetable material—into the water or
upon the ice of any waters of this county, or in any place on the banks of
waters or bridges of this county where it shall be liable to be washed into the
waters either by storms, floods or other causes; he or she shall be in
violation of the offense of littering and polluting.
   (B)   Upon conviction by a court, the judge shall order that the person so
found guilty shall employ every practical means of removing the debris from the
place within a time specified by the court.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.094 SEARCHLIGHTS OR OTHER BLINDING LIGHTS.
   The flashing of the rays of a searchlight or other blinding light onto the
bridge or into the pilothouse or operator’s area of any vessel underway is
prohibited.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.095 UNAUTHORIZED LIGHTS.
   No person shall, while underway, display any light—electric or otherwise—not
required under §§ 73.050 through
73.062, that in any way will interfere with distinguishing the proper signal
lights of the vessel.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.096 UNNECESSARY SOUNDING OF A WHISTLE.
   No person shall sound a whistle except as is provided in 375 U.S.C. Chapter
46, which contains the approved horn or whistle signals to be used by
watercraft.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992) Penalty, see §
73.999
DISPOSITION OF REVENUE
§ 73.110 DISBURSEMENT.
   All revenue received for violations of this chapter shall be disbursed to
Lake County and shall be deposited in Lake County General Fund Lake County.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992; Ord. 15-0379, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 73.111 CIRCUIT COURT CLERK.
   Disbursements made pursuant to §
73.110 shall be made monthly by the County Circuit Court Clerk.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992)
§ 73.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Lake County Sheriff’s Office Citation filed in Circuit Court. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the 19th Judicial Circuit
the penalties shall be as follows:
      (1)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
      (2)   Violation of §§
73.030 through
73.038 and
73.050 through
73.062. Any person who shall be found guilty of violating any of the provisions
of §§
73.030 through
73.038 and
73.050 through
73.062 (except as to §
73.058) shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100.
      (3)   Violation of §
73.058. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of §
73.058 shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500.
      (4)   Violation of §§
73.077 through
73.089. Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of §§
73.077 through
73.089 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100.
      (5)   Violation of §§
73.091 through
73.096. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of §§
73.091 through
73.096 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100.
      (6)   Violations citing state statutory provisions. Any violation of this
chapter, for which a fine or penalty is not herein provided, shall be written
citing the appropriate state statutory provision as found in the Boat
Registration and Safety Act.
         (a)   Any person violating subsections (A) or (B) of §
73.052, in addition to the requirements of §
73.052(F), is subject to a Class B misdemeanor for the first offense and a
Class A misdemeanor for any subsequent offense occurring within three years of
the date of the most recent offense.
         (b)   Any person violating subsection (C) of §
73.052, in addition to the requirements of §
73.052(G), is subject to a Class A misdemeanor for the first offense and a
Class 4 felony for any subsequent offense.
         (c)   Any person convicted of violating §
73.092 is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   (B)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through Lake County Administrative
Adjudication (§§
94.50 -
94.66), the minimum fine amount shall be as follows:
      (1)   The minimum fine amount for violations of §§
73.017 through
73.018 and
73.075 through
73.096 shall be $115.
      (2)   The minimum fine amount for violations of §§
73.030 through
73.062 shall be $75.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-2) (Ord. passed 8-11-1992; Ord. 15-0379, passed 4-14-2015)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HIGHWAY ACCESS AND USE
      
91.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
92.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND EXPLOSIVES; FIREWORKS
      
93.   EMERGENCY ALARMS
      
94.   NUISANCES AND ENVIRONMENT; SANITATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
      
95.   SMOKE-FREE ENVIRONMENT
      
96.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON LAND
CHAPTER 90: HIGHWAY ACCESS AND USE
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Title
   
90.002   Introduction
   
90.003   Purpose
   
90.004   Commentary
   
90.005   General word usage, abbreviations
   
90.006   Definitions
Administrative Provisions
   
90.020   General purpose
   
90.021   Authority
   
90.022   Coordination Council established
   
90.023   Jurisdiction
   
90.024   Plat approval
   
90.025   Enactment
   
90.026   Repealer and savings clause
   
90.027   Interpretation and separability; law governing
   
90.028   Enforcement; compliance; Division of Transportation powers and
responsibilities
   
90.029   Amendments
   
90.030   Variations
   
90.031   Appeals procedure
   
90.032   Fees
   
90.033   Violations and penalties
   
90.034   Inactivity
   
90.035   Responsibility for damage claims
Permit Types and Highway Classification
   
90.045   Highway access classification
   
90.046   Access permit types
   
90.047   Minimum access
   
90.048   Minor access
   
90.049   Major access
   
90.050   Designated freeway access
   
90.051   Temporary access
   
90.052   Use of right-of-way permit types
   
90.053   Special event
   
90.054   Utility
   
90.055   Facility
   
90.056   Single service connection
Access Requirements and Policies
   
90.064   Introduction
   
90.065   Access permits
   
90.066   Change in land use or change in land-use density
   
90.067   General requirements
   
90.068   Joint highway improvements
   
90.069   Coordination of development
   
90.070   Costs of access improvements to county highways
   
90.071   Coordination with other LCDOT permits
   
90.072   Access policy
   
90.073   Access criteria
   
90.074   Restricted turning movements
   
90.075   Indirect access
   
90.076   Turnarounds
   
90.077   Parking
   
90.078   Access to corner lots
   
90.079   Access to subdivided or previously platted parcels
   
90.080   Shared access
   
90.081   Required highway improvements
   
90.082   Access permit process
   
90.083   Resident engineer letter
Utility and Facility Permit Policies
   
90.100   Permit required
   
90.101   Utility or facility permit
   
90.102   General requirements
   
90.103   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities
Special Event Policies
   
90.120   Permit required
   
90.121   General requirements
   
90.122   Traffic control requirements
   
90.123   Access for emergency service providers
   
90.124   Other requirements
   
90.125   Revocation of permit
Construction Requirements
   
90.140   Notification of utility companies
   
90.141   Commencement of work
   
90.142   Normal and routine maintenance of county highways
   
90.143   Modification to plans
   
90.144   Access to highways with curb and gutter
   
90.145   Work zone protection
   
90.146   Traffic control
   
90.147   Responsibility for improvements
   
90.148   Construction of improvements
   
90.149   Restoration of right-of-way
   
90.150   As-built engineering plans
   
90.151   Final inspection and acceptance
Performance and Maintenance Guarantees, and Insurance Requirements
   
90.170   Required prior to permit
   
90.171   Performance guarantees
   
90.172   Irrevocable letter of credit
   
90.173   Cash bond
   
90.174   Surety bond
   
90.175   Performance guarantee amounts and length of term
   
90.176   Default
   
90.177   Maintenance guarantee
   
90.178   Escrow accounts
   
90.179   Insurance requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the "Lake County
Highway Access and Use Ordinance," hereinafter referred to as "this chapter".
This chapter provides the policy by which the County Engineer can grant
permits.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.002 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   A Technical Reference Manual serves as a companion to this chapter,
providing additional detail on technical and procedural requirements required
by the chapter. It is the intent of this manual to provide the necessary
guidance, reference materials and forms for developers, municipalities,
townships, and engineering consultants to understand the permitting process and
requirements, and to develop complete permit and engineering plan submittals.
   (B)   The Technical Reference Manual will be reviewed annually and updated
as necessary by the Lake County Division of Transportation (LCDOT).
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.003 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The proper management and operation of the county highway's
infrastructure is critical to the safety of the motoring public and directly
related to the overall economic health and quality of life in Lake County. The
economic vitality of the county is related to the availability of access to the
arterial highway system. This requires the implementation of access management
regulations that provide for a balance between the need to move traffic safely
and efficiently while still providing access to adjacent properties. The county
strives to provide transportation systems that provide for safe, efficient and
flexible movement through an integrated network of road, rail, public transit,
and non-motorized (bicycle and pedestrian) modes of travel.
   (B)   The construction, maintenance and improvement of the county highway
system represents a substantial investment of public funds. Impacts from
development on the county highway system shall be mitigated by development and
should not result in the need for the investment of additional public funds.
The use of the county highway system's rights-of-way by non-highway uses must
be properly managed to ensure that these non-highway uses do not constrain the
ability of the county to improve the county highway system in the future.
   (C)   Conflicts between vehicles using a county highway and vehicles
entering and exiting via access locations should be minimized through the
application of appropriate design standards. Therefore, the application of the
regulations and standards contained in this chapter will promote consistent
driver expectations, resulting in maximum operational efficiencies and safety,
and protect the public investment in county highways.
   (D)   The county also strives to allow for installation of utilities in a
safe and efficient manner. Prudent placement, removal, relocation,
modification, or abandonment of utilities and facilities will promote the most
effective and efficient use of the limited space available within the rights-
of-way of county highways.
   (E)   Therefore, this chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
      (1)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the county and the public using the rights-of-way.
      (2)   To promote the effective and efficient use of the rights-of-way of
county highways.
      (3)   To preserve an acceptable level of service on county highways.
      (4)   To preserve the rights-of-way of county highways for highways and
associated appurtenances.
      (5)   To minimize conflicts between vehicles using county highways and
vehicles entering and leaving via access locations on county highways.
      (6)   To establish reasonable rules, regulations, and specifications to
ensure the proper construction, installation, maintenance, removal, relocation,
and placement of utilities and facilities within the rights-of-way of county
highways in accordance with accepted engineering and design standards and
specifications, as well as the restoration of the disturbed portions of any and
all sections of the rights-of-way of county highways that are the result of the
placement, removal, relocation, modification, or abandonment of utilities and
facilities within the rights-of-way.
      (7)   To establish reasonable regulations and procedures to ensure that
any public or private utilities and facilities are either placed in easements
outside of the right-of-way or are placed within existing rights-of-way such
that future expansion of the county highway can be accomplished at no
additional cost to the county to relocate or remove such utilities or
facilities.
      (8)   To provide for the proper location and limit the number of access
locations to regulate safe and reasonable access from county highways to
abutting property and to provide sufficient spacing between access points to
minimize interference with traffic using adjacent access locations.
      (9)   To prohibit inappropriate use of a county highway as a portion of
the internal circulation system of abutting property or as parking for abutting
property.
      (10)   To provide for the establishment of sufficient pavement, right-of-
way, and easement widths.
      (11)   To establish reasonable requirements for performance and
maintenance guarantees, to ensure the proper construction of required
improvements, and to ensure that required improvements are completed in an
expeditious manner in accordance with accepted engineering and geometric
standards and specifications.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.004 COMMENTARY.
   Whenever a section of this chapter requires additional explanation to
clarify the intent, divisions prefaced "Commentary" are included. They are
intended solely as a guide for both officials and the general public to aid in
the administration and interpretation of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.005 GENERAL WORD USAGE, ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to define words, terms, and
phrases contained in this chapter.
   (B)   General word usage. In the interpretation of this chapter, the
following provisions shall be observed and applied except when the context
clearly requires otherwise:
      (1)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other
tenses and derivative forms.
      (2)   Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular.
      (3)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine
gender shall include the masculine.
      (4)   The word "shall" is mandatory.
      (5)   The word "must" is mandatory.
      (6)   The word "should" is advisory.
      (7)   The word "may" is permissive.
      (8)   In the event of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, or table, the text
shall control.
   (C)   Abbreviations. Abbreviations are used in this chapter and shall have
the meanings as set forth in §
90.006.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.006 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined and shall be
interpreted as such throughout this chapter.
   ABANDONED UTILITY OR FACILITY. Any utility or facility not in use or
operation and with no immediate plans for repair or replacement to serve the
same function.
   ABUTTING. Having a common border with, or being separated from such common
border by an alley, easement, or right-of-way.
   ACCESS. A private or public way for providing means of vehicular entry to or
exit from property abutting a street or highway.
   ACCESS CONTROL OFFICER. A member of the Lake County Division of
Transportation staff designated by the County Engineer to oversee and
administer the process and technical requirements of access-related permits.
   ACCESS PERMIT. A permit issued by the LCDOT granting access to a county
highway from abutting property and allowing construction or reconstruction of
an access point in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   ACCESS POINT. The location of access, typically defined by a driveway or
street.
   ADJACENT ACCESS POINT. An adjoining access point which may be on either side
of the highway and either upstream or downstream of a proposed access point.
   APPLICANT. A local agency, person, or utility company that makes application
for a permit. For access permit projects, the APPLICANT is the property owner
and becomes the permittee.
   APPURTENANCES, HIGHWAY. In highway terms, all of the constituent components
subordinate to but nonetheless necessary for the operation, function and/or
maintenance of a roadway such as storm sewers, lighting, signage, and traffic
control devices, etc. Also called HIGHWAY ASSETS.
   APPURTENANCES, NON-HIGHWAY. All of the constituent components subordinate to
but nonetheless necessary for the operation, function and/or maintenance of a
utility or facility such as utility poles, pedestals, transformers, valves,
vaults, and manholes, etc.
   ARTERIAL. A highway generally characterized by its ability to quickly move
relatively large volumes of traffic but often with restricted capacity to serve
abutting properties. The arterial system typically provides for high travel
speeds and long trip movements. The rural and urban arterial systems are
connected to provide continuous through movements at approximately the same
level of service.
   BERM. A manmade, small hill or embankment-like facility made by the
placement of earth, sand, gravel, rock, organic material, or other similar
material usually linear in nature and used for screening or landscaping
purposes and/or in conjunction with drainage facilities.
   BERM, TOE OF. The point at which the bottom edge or slope of a berm meets
the existing grade of the ground.
   CASH BOND. A certified check or bank cashier's check payable to the Lake
County Treasurer held by or deposited by the Lake County Division of
Transportation to ensure that all permitted work will be completed in
compliance with this chapter and the conditions of the permit.
   CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE. An executed, completed, original document
providing evidence that the owners and contractors have insurance in the
amounts required inclusive of any additional required criteria.
   CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION. The act or process of attesting that the specific
inspections, calculations, or tests, where required, have been performed and
that they comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   CLEAR ZONE. An unobstructed, relatively flat area provided beyond the edge
of the traveled way for the recovery of errant vehicles. The CLEAR ZONE
includes any shoulders or auxiliary lanes.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or firm engaged in construction, landscaping, or
maintenance on a contract basis.
   CORNER OR RETURN RADIUS. The pavement radius of the arc between the edge of
pavement of the access location and the edge of pavement of the abutting road
used to facilitate vehicular turning movements.
   COORDINATION COUNCIL. The ad hoc group established by the County pursuant to
605 ILCS 5/9-113 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, for the purpose
of facilitating the placement, removal, relocation, modification, or
abandonment of utilities or facilities as deemed necessary by the county for
highway or highway safety purposes. The Coordination Council membership shall
consist of the County Engineer, the County Board Chair, or his or her designee,
and a representative designated, in writing to the County Engineer, by each
entity, either public or private, that owns, operates and/or maintains a
utility or facility, or any appurtenance thereto, as defined in this chapter,
that is located within a county highway right-of-way.
   COUNTY. County of Lake, Illinois, also Lake County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Lake County, Illinois.
   COUNTY CLERK: The County Clerk of Lake County, Illinois.
   COUNTY ENGINEER. The Lake County County Engineer, also the Lake County
Director of Transportation.
   COUNTY HIGHWAY. A public road as defined by the Illinois Highway Code as
part of the county highway system, including municipal extensions of county
highways and any proposed roads as yet un-built but designated as a part of the
county highway system.
   COUNTY RECORDER. The Recorder of Deeds of Lake County, Illinois.
   COUNTY TREASURER. The Treasurer of Lake County, Illinois.
   CROSS EASEMENT. Shared access between adjacent parcels to allow the
interaction of traffic without impacting public roadways.
   DEDICATION. The transfer of property interests from private to public
ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee-simple interest or
of a less than fee interest, including an easement.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A manmade facility for the temporary storage of
stormwater runoff with controlled release during or immediately following a
storm.
   DESIGNATED FREEWAY ACCESS. An access which serves a property abutting a
county highway designated as a freeway.
   DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner of a lot or parcel of any land
proposed for inclusion in a development, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase.
   DEVELOPMENT. The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or
enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or
land; any extension of any use of land or any clearing, grading, excavation, or
other movement of land.
   DRAINAGE. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading, or other means. DRAINAGE includes the control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during or after development and includes the means
necessary for prevention or alleviation of flooding.
   DRIVEWAY. A private or public way for the use of vehicles providing service
between a highway and abutting property.
   EASEMENT. A right to use or control the property of another for designated
purposes, such as for drainage or placement of utilities. This may be temporary
or permanent.
   EMERGENCY ACCESS. An access which is designated and utilized solely by
emergency vehicles.
   EMERGENCY REPAIR. An immediate repair or reconstruction to the utility or
facility required to protect health, safety and welfare of the general public.
The emergency work can be required as a result of a natural disaster or other
state emergency. The duration of the work period for an emergency repair is
generally considered 72 hours or less.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any unauthorized object located partially or wholly within the
county highway right-of-way.
   ENCUMBRANCE. Prior easement, rights, or other legal constraint that would
limit or prohibit use of dedicated right-of-way by the Lake County Division of
Transportation or others.
   ENGINEER. See PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.
   ENGINEERING PLANS. A set of design plans, specifications, and estimates of
cost containing all engineering elements necessary to construct an access
point, construct or perform work for a utility or facility, or construct a
highway improvement.
   ENTITY. See PERSON.
   EXCAVATION. An act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   FACILITY. A municipally owned non-roadway object, structure or device,
manmade or natural, which is designed and constructed, located, or placed to
serve a specific function or purpose or perform a particular service.
FACILITIES include, but are not limited to sidewalks, bike paths, sewer lines,
water lines, street lighting, signage, trees, public transportation shelters,
or any other non-highway appurtenance.
   FENCE. An artificial barrier constructed of any material or combination of
materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
   FREEWAY. A highway designated by the County Board as a freeway in accordance
with Article 8 of the Illinois Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/8). A FREEWAY can be
either a full or partial access controlled facility.
   FRONTAGE. The distance, as measured along the highway right-of-way line,
between the property lines of the abutting property.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A road which is adjacent to or included in the right-of-way
of a highway or railroad, and which provides access to abutting properties and
separation from through traffic.
   GEOMETRIC PLAN. A preliminary plan identifying proposed roadway improvements
as warranted by the traffic study.
   HIGHWAY. See COUNTY HIGHWAY.
   HIGHWAY CLOSURE. A segment of the county highway that is partially or fully
closed to vehicular traffic for a period of time.
   IDOT. The Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   ILLINOIS HIGHWAY CODE. The laws of the State of Illinois relating to roads.
   IMUTCD. The current Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways as adopted by IDOT in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-301.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Any manmade changes to any land, structure, utility, facility
or highway.
   INTERSECTION. The general area where an access point and a road or two or
more roads or two access points join or cross.
   INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE. The distance, either right or left, at which a
driver stopped at an intersection can see an approaching vehicle and can enter
the road and reach the posted speed limit without an approaching vehicle
changing or altering from the posted speed limit.
   ITS. Intelligent transportation system. The use of computer and
communication technology to monitor traffic flow, control the operation of
traffic control devices and provide information to travelers about roadway
conditions. (See PASSAGE.)
   LAKE COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT COMMISSION (SMC). The Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission established and pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-1062
et seq. for the purposes of developing, revising, and implementing a countywide
stormwater management plan.
   LAKE COUNTY WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. A part of the adopted Lake
County Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan. Its purpose is to allow
management and mitigation of the effects of urbanization on stormwater
drainage.
   LAND-USE. See USE.
   LAND-USE DENSITY. An intensity measurement usually expressed in terms of the
number of units or square feet of a particular land-use permitted to be built,
constructed, or placed on a defined parcel of land.
   LCDOT. The Lake County Division of Transportation.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE. Qualitative measure describing operation conditions within
a traffic stream as defined in the Highway Capacity Manual.
   LOCAL AGENCY. A local unit of government organized and existing under the
laws of the State of Illinois. LOCAL AGENCIES include, but are not limited to,
fire protection districts, forest preserve districts, municipalities, park
districts, school districts, townships and township road districts.
   LOT. A single, legally divided parcel of land. A lot of record which is part
of a subdivision, the plat of which has been duly authorized and recorded in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County, Illinois.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two roads at their juncture.
   MAINTENANCE EASEMENT. A permitted, platted easement outside of the right-of-
way for the maintenance of roadway related improvements.
   MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee in the form of an irrevocable
letter of credit or cash bond, used to replace the performance guarantee upon
acceptance of the permitted and constructed work by the Lake County Division of
Transportation (LCDOT).
   MAJOR ACCESS. An access which serves property abutting a county highway and
has an anticipated daily two-way traffic volume (total number of entrance and
exit trips by vehicles using the access) of more than 50 trips or has regular
use by vehicles or vehicle combinations of three axles or more (personal
recreational vehicles excluded).
   MAJOR MAINTENANCE. A repair or inspection of an existing utility or facility
that requires substantial disturbance of the county highway and/or right-of-way
as determined by the County Engineer.
   MEDIAN. A portion of a divided highway or divided driveway separating the
traveled ways for traffic flowing in opposite directions. A MEDIAN can either
be raised or flush.
   MEDIAN OPENING. A gap in a median provided for crossing and turning
vehicles.
   MINIMUM ACCESS. An access which serves a single family residence or
agricultural field abutting a county highway, has an anticipated daily two-way
traffic volume (total number of entrance and exit trips by vehicles using the
access) of no more than 20 trips and has no regular use by vehicles or vehicle
combinations of three axles or more (personal recreational vehicles excluded).
   MINOR ACCESS. An access which serves property abutting a county highway, has
an anticipated daily two-way traffic volume (total number of entrance and exit
trips by vehicles using the access) of no more than 50 trips and has no regular
use by vehicles or vehicle combinations of three axles or more (personal
recreational vehicles excluded).
   MINOR MAINTENANCE. A repair or inspection of an existing utility or facility
that requires minimal disturbance of the county highway right-of-way as
determined by the County Engineer.
   MODIFICATION. Any alteration to an existing access location.
   MONTH. A total of 30 consecutive days.
   OTHER STREET. A road under the jurisdiction of another public agency and not
under the jurisdiction of the county.
   OWNER. The person or local agency having the right of legal title or
beneficial or controlling interest in or a contractual right to purchase a lot
or parcel of land, utility or facility.
   PARCEL. Any legally described piece of land.
   PASSAGE. Lake County PASSAGE. Name for Lake County's ITS project – a Program
for Arterial Signal Synchronization and Travel GuidancE.
   PAVEMENT. The bituminous or concrete hard surface of a highway used for
vehicular traffic. The PAVEMENT includes the through traffic lanes, turning
lanes, by-pass lanes and paved shoulders.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee to ensure that all permitted
work required by this chapter will be completed in compliance with this
chapter.
   PERMIT. A formal, written document authorizing certain work to be performed
within the right-of-way of a county highway which sets forth the terms and
conditions applicable to said work in conformance of this chapter.
   PERMITTEE. Any applicant to whom a permit is issued.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, public or private
corporation, organization or business or charitable trust.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. A person as designated by the owner to be the responsible
party to insure the construction of the improvement per the approved
engineering plans.
   PLAT. A survey which defines the boundaries of a parcel of land.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A plan, preliminary in nature, showing engineering and
physical planning elements.
   PRIVATE ROAD. A road in which there is no public interest and for which no
public agency has jurisdictional or maintenance responsibilities.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the State of Illinois under
the Illinois Professional Engineering Act.
   PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR. A surveyor registered in the State of Illinois
under the Illinois Land Surveyor Act.
   PROOF OF INSURANCE. A certificate of insurance including any required
endorsement to the policy.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Any improvement necessary to provide for public needs.
   PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY. Utility company subject to the regulation of the
Illinois Commerce Commission.
   PUBLIC WORKS, PLANNING AND TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE. The Public Works,
Planning and Transportation Committee of the Lake County Board or its successor
committee.
   RESIDENT ENGINEER. An engineer as designated by the owner to be the
responsible party to insure the construction of the developer's improvement per
the approved engineering plans.
   RESTRICTED ACCESS. An access that has geometric restrictions that limit
specific traffic movements to and from the roadway.
   RETENTION FACILITY. A manmade facility designed to completely retain a
specified amount of stormwater runoff without release except by means of
evaporation, infiltration, or pumping.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied for public
road purposes.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE. The boundary between the land acquired for or dedicated
to highway use and abutting property.
   ROAD. An approved place or way, private or public, however designated, for
vehicular travel which affords a principal means of access to abutting property
or other street, including rights-of-way, bridges, drainage structures, signs,
guardrails, protective structures and all other structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicular traffic.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. That portion of a utility or facility that runs from the
main line of the utility or facility along the county highway and connects to a
customer's property providing the service of the utility or facility.
   SHARED ACCESS. An access location used jointly by two or more properties.
   SHARED ACCESS EASEMENT. An easement appurtenance permitting common access
from and through adjacent properties pursuant to specified terms and
conditions.
   SHOULDER. The portion of the highway contiguous with the traveled way for
the accommodation of stopped vehicles and for emergency use.
   SITE PLAN. A plan of the proposed development as required by the
governmental agency having land use regulatory authority. If the property is
scheduled for phased development, the SITE PLAN would include the proposed
layout of the total projected development.
   SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment that will be permitted within the
county highway right-of-way under the "Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
Ordinance."
   SPECIAL EVENT. An event of public interest such as a parade, festival, race
or other public gathering which will impact normal operation of a county
highway.
   SPECIAL PROVISION. A specification or document which supplements information
contained in the engineering plans and provides details and requirements of
items that are unique to a project.
   STATE'S ATTORNEY. The State's Attorney of Lake County, Illinois.
   STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying stormwater.
   STREET. See OTHER STREET.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. An engineer whose principal professional practice is in
the field of structural engineering.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, erected, or placed which has location in or
on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground such
as buildings, cellular towers, and parking lots, etc.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person subdividing land.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division or redivision of a parcel of land into two or more
parts by means of mapping, platting, conveyance, change, or rearrangement of
boundaries.
   SURVEYOR. See PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR.
   "T" INTERSECTION. An intersection consisting of three approaches.
   TEMPORARY ACCESS. An access location permitted for a specific time period
and with restrictions on usage.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices, which
conform to the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY. A comprehensive collection and analysis of all
information necessary to accurately evaluate the effect and impact of traffic
generated by a development on the current and future road network surrounding
the development.
   TRAFFIC SIGNAL WARRANT STUDY. A study conducted to determine if a proposed
traffic signal meets the warrants based on the most recent edition of the
IMUTCD and if the installation of such a signal will improve the overall safety
and/or operation of the intersection.
   TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH BOARD. A unit of the National Research Council,
which serves the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering.
   TRAVELED WAY. The portion of the roadway, for the movement of vehicles,
exclusive of shoulders.
   TURNAROUND. An area utilized by vehicular traffic to change direction
outside of the right-of-way.
   TURNING LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for the
deceleration and queuing of vehicles leaving the through lanes.
   TURNING MOVEMENT. Vehicles making a designated turn.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which land, or any structure thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   UTILITY. A unit, either publicly or privately owned, composed of one or more
pieces of aerial or underground related equipment or constructed materials
connected or a part of a structure or system designed to provide a service
including, but not limited to, fiber optic cable, coaxial cable, electric
cable, telecommunication cable, or gas lines.
   UTILITY EASEMENT. A platted easement, inside or outside of the county
highway right-of-way that is for the use or benefit of a public or private
utility to accommodate their utilities as defined by this chapter.
   WORKING DAYS. Any calendar day except Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays
as observed by the county.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 90.020 GENERAL PURPOSE.
   This chapter sets forth the administrative provisions for this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.021 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, provide for the County
Board and the County Engineer to have authority over supervision of county
highways. This chapter is hereby adopted to preserve and protect the public
safety, health, and general welfare as they relate to the operation and use of
county highways, and their associated right-of-way.
   (B)   605 ILCS 5/5-413 et seq. of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended
provides for access roads and driveways for public and private use to be
allowed onto a county highway only upon the issuance of a permit by the County
Engineer in accordance with regulations adopted by the County Board. This
chapter implements that law but does not limit nor restrict the county insofar
as other sections of the Illinois Highway Code pertaining to access to and use
of county highways.
   (C)   765 ILCS 205/2 et seq. of the Illinois Compiled Statues, as amended,
requires that written approval be obtained from the appropriate local highway
authority regarding highway access prior to final approval and recording of a
plat by a municipality or county. For county highways, the authority shall be
the County Engineer.
   (D)   605 ILCS 5/8-101 et seq. of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as
amended, grants county boards the authority to designate highways under their
jurisdiction as freeways. 605 ILCS 5/8-102 et seq. gives the County Board the
sole authority to grant or deny any new points of access, or allow the
modification, change, or enlargement of any existing points of access.
   (E)   605 ILCS 5/9-115.1 of the Illinois Compiled Statues, as amended,
requires that drainage facilities for the purposes of detention or retention of
water may not be constructed within a distance of ten feet plus one and one-
half times the depth of the drainage facility adjacent to the right-of-way of
any public highway without the written permission of the highway authority
having jurisdiction over the public highway. The toe of any earthen berm may
not be constructed nearer than ten feet to the right-of-way of any public
highway without the written permission of the highway authority having
jurisdiction over the public highway.
   (F)   The Illinois Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/5-414) of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, as amended, grants county boards the authority to adopt regulations
providing for the issuance of permits by the County Engineer for the temporary
closure to traffic of any portion of a highway under their jurisdiction for any
public purpose.
   (G)   The Illinois Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/9-113) of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, as amended, sets forth the powers and authority of the appropriate
highway authority as they relate to the placement, removal, relocation,
modification, or abandonment of utilities and facilities within public highways
including their placement within the rights-of-way of county highways. For
county highways, the appropriate highway authority shall be the County
Engineer.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.022 COORDINATION COUNCIL ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in Illinois Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/9-
113) of the Illinois Compiled Statues, as amended, the county, acting by and
through the County Engineer, as the appropriate highway authority, hereby
establishes a Coordination Council for the purposes of implementing the
provisions of said statute and facilitating the communication and coordination
relating to the placement, removal, relocation, modification, or abandonment of
public utilities owned and maintained by a public utility company within county
highway rights-of-way.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.023 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply to all access to and use of county highway right-
of-way, whether permanent or temporary, for purposes of providing service from
and/or to a county highway to any property after the enactment of this chapter
by the County Board. This includes any land in any township or municipality
located partially or entirely within the county.
   This chapter shall not be construed in any manner or form to limit or
restrict the power or authority of the county or the County Engineer to
maintain, operate, improve, construct, reconstruct, manage, widen, expand or
perform any other work on any county highway as may be best determined, as
provided by law, including the modification, restriction, or elimination of any
access location permitted under this chapter or any access location permitted
prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.024 PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority contained in 765 ILCS 205/2, as referenced
in §
90.021 of this chapter, the County Engineer shall have the authority to approve
or disapprove, in writing, plats with respect to highway access to county
highways.
 
COMMENTARY:
The LCDOT's responsibility is access to and use of a county highway with
respect to the future planning, maintenance and management of the county
highway right-of-way. The responsibility for determining land-use requirements
rests solely with the governmental authority having the land-use regulatory
authority.
 
   (B)   The signature certificate which shall be included on the final plat of
subdivision to obtain written approval for access to a county highway is
provided in the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.025 ENACTMENT.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and effective date according to law except for all permit or use requests
submitted prior to the adoption of this chapter and which have received written
approval. All requests submitted prior to adoption of this chapter which have
not been given written preliminary approval and all requests submitted
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter shall be governed by the provisions
of this chapter as finally enacted or amended.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.026 REPEALER AND SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   The prior policies establishing rules, regulations, and specifications
governing access to or use of county highway rights-of-ways are hereby
repealed, provided such repeal shall not affect the right of the county to
institute any action at law or in equity to require compliance or prosecute
violations there under, it being the county's intention to preserve all such
causes of action and not to excuse any violation under the prior rules,
regulations, and specifications.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.027 INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY; LAW GOVERNING.
   (A)   Interpretation. The County Engineer shall render any interpretations
of this chapter, which are necessary to promote efficient administration and
review of permit requests. This chapter shall be interpreted strictly and in
accordance with the standards set forth herein. Whenever any provision of this
chapter overlaps, contradicts, or covers the same subject matter as any other
provision of this Ordinance or any other county ordinance regulation, or rule,
the more restrictive or higher standard shall control.
   (B)   Separability. Each chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word, provision, rule and regulation,
or restriction established by this chapter or any amendments thereto is hereby
declared to be separable and independent, in accordance with the following.
      (1)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision
of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any provision of
this chapter not specifically included in the judgment.
      (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter, such judgment shall not affect
the application of the provisions not specifically included in the judgment.
   (C)   Law governing. In any controversy or dispute under this chapter or in
any claims arising hereunder or related hereto, whether in contract or tort,
they shall be governed by the laws of Illinois. Any suit regarding
requirements, rules, regulations and specifications of this chapter must be
brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in Lake County, Illinois.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.028 ENFORCEMENT; COMPLIANCE; DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION POWERS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Enforcement. Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
in accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes as referenced in §
90.021.
   (B)   Compliance. No access or use related work shall be performed in the
highway right-of-way which does not comply with the provisions set forth in
this chapter. Should an access, utility or facility be illegally placed within
the county right-of-way it shall be removed by the owner. If the owner refuses
or fails to remove an illegal access, utility or facility upon written notice,
LCDOT shall have the right, but not the duty, to remove the illegal access,
utility or facility and invoice the owner for the cost of the removal. Notice
from LCDOT will be given in writing, via certified mail, and shall allow the
owner a minimum of ten working days from receipt of the notice to remove the
illegal access, utility or facility. Removal shall include restoration of the
county right-of-way to an equal or better condition than existed before
construction.
      (1)   Whenever any provision of this chapter sets forth any time for any
act to be performed by permittee, such time shall be deemed to be of the
essence. The permittee's failure to perform within the time allowed shall, in
all cases, be sufficient grounds for the county to invoke an appropriate remedy
or penalty.
      (2)   The permittee shall not be excused from complying with any of the
requirements, rules, regulations, and specifications of this chapter as a
result of any failure of the county, on any one or more occasions, to insist on
the permittee's performance or to seek the permittee's compliance with said
requirements, rules, regulations, and specifications.
   (C)   Division of Transportation: powers and responsibilities. By authority
of the County Board and adoption of this chapter, through powers vested through
the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, and all other applicable laws,
statutes, orders, and regulations of the State of Illinois and the County of
Lake, the County Board of Lake County hereby grants and assigns to the County
Engineer and the Lake County Division of Transportation the following powers,
responsibilities, strategies and practices regarding enforcement of this
chapter:
      (1)   To review plans, specifications, studies, and estimates and issue
or deny permits for work within the county highway rights-of-way.
      (2)   To develop and set in place application procedures, issue permits
and maintain records thereof.
      (3)   To develop and publish a Technical Reference Manual to assist and
guide the public in procedures and requirements for such permits. This manual
shall include application procedures, forms, technical engineering standards
and requirements for type, extent and nature of the studies, drawings,
engineering plans, or any other types of documents that are needed for the
administration and implementation of this chapter, and to change, modify, and/
or update these materials, applications, and permits as needed.
      (4)   To update, modify and/or revise the Technical Reference Manual
including application procedures, forms, studies, drawings, engineering plans
and standards, or any other types of documents as needed.
      (5)   To review, approve, disapprove, or cause changes and modifications
to be made to all studies, drawings, engineering plans, and other documents
that are required by this chapter or the Technical Reference Manual as they
relate to access locations, highway improvements, or placement of utilities or
facilities.
      (6)   To conduct inspections and field investigations as necessary to
ensure compliance with the rules, regulations, and specifications of this
chapter.
      (7)   To institute any appropriate action as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, as amended, or this chapter and to request that the State's
Attorney institute any proceedings to prevent unlawful construction,
reconstruction, alteration, modification, enlargement, conversion, and/or
unlawful use of an access location providing service to a county highway or
unlawful placement of a utility or facility after the adoption of this chapter.
      (8)   To advise the County Board on all proposed amendments to this
chapter.
      (9)    To maintain and update the Access Management Highway
Classification Map
      (10)   To designate an "Access Control Officer" within the LCDOT to
oversee and administer the day-to-day implementation of this chapter.
      (11)   To grant and approve variations from the provisions of this
chapter in accordance with the standards as set forth in §
90.030.
      (12)   To render interpretations of this chapter in accordance with the
provisions set forth in §
90.027.
      (13)   To approve and disapprove plats in accordance with §
90.024.
      (14)   To hear and decide appeals from any decisions of the Access
Control Officer or any other administrative officials made in the performance
of their duties under the provisions of this chapter.
      (15)   To perform other such duties as are required by this chapter.
      (16)   To designate and supervise agents to operate in the County
Engineer's capacity to perform such duties as are assigned by this chapter.
      (17)   To coordinate the requirements and provisions of this chapter with
the governmental authority having land-use regulatory authority over a
development taking access to a county highway.
      (18)   To have established a Coordination Council, to be chaired by the
County Engineer, or his or her designee, to facilitate the timely placement,
removal, relocation, or modification of utilities and facilities deemed
necessary for highway and highway safety purposes pursuant to 605 ILCS 5/9-113,
as amended.
      (19)   To establish rules of order and procedures, set meeting dates,
prepare and distribute agenda for, prepare minutes of, and conduct meetings of
the Coordination Council.
      (20)    To deliver on an annual basis as determined by the County
Engineer to each member of the Coordination Council a copy of the County Five-
Year Highway Improvement Program (605 ILCS 5/5-301, as amended), and the annual
program as developed by the County Engineer.
      (21)   To notify, in accordance with 605 ILCS 5/9-113, as amended, the
owner or owners of the utilities and/or facilities that require placement,
removal, relocation and/or modification as a result of an impending county
highway improvement.
      (22)   To establish strategies and practices as may be necessary to
provide effective communication and coordination relating to proposed county
highway improvements and the placement, removal, relocation, modification, or
abandonment of utilities or facilities within county highway rights-of-way.
      (23)   To cooperate with any contractor responsible for the
implementation of a county highway improvement in seeking the compliance of the
owner, or owners, of any utilities or facilities located or abandoned within
the county highway right-of-way with the provisions of this chapter and 605
ILCS 5/9-113, as amended.
      (24)   To collect, deposit in the County Highway Tax Fund, and expend
such funds as may be derived from any fees collected pursuant to the
administration of this chapter.
      (25)   To administer and carry out the provisions of this chapter in a
reasonable time given staffing levels, workload, and budgeting constraints.
      (26)   To act at the direction of the Public Works, Planning and
Transportation Committee in those matters relating to access improvements and
programmed or ongoing highway improvements, including the preparation of joint
agreements; recommending donation amounts; establishing escrow accounts for
future highway improvements; and collecting, depositing, and expending
donations and other such funds for county highway purposes.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.029 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   County Board action.
      (1)   In order to promote the public health, safety, comfort, and general
welfare, the County Board may from time to time amend the regulations imposed
by this chapter.
      (2)   These amendments shall not be adopted without the advice of the
County Engineer.
   (B)   Standards for amendments. Amendments to this chapter shall demonstrate
compliance with the following standards:
      (1)   The proposed amendment to this chapter shall state in particular
the chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, and word sought to be
amended.
      (2)   The proposed amendment shall contain the specific language of the
proposed amendment and shall recite the specific reasons for such a change.
      (3)   The proposed amendment shall be consistent with the intent and
purpose of this chapter and with its various rules, regulations, and
specifications.
      (4)   The proposed amendment shall not be detrimental to the safety,
operation, or capacity of a county highway.
      (5)   The proposed amendment shall in no manner limit, restrict, alter,
diminish, or unduly impede the county in its, or the County Engineer in his or
her, statutory authority as it relates to county highways.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.030 VARIATIONS.
   Minimizing congestion and delay, ensuring the safety of the traveling
public, and protecting the county's ability to maintain and improve the county
highway system are among the objectives of this chapter. Under conditions of
practical difficulty and extraordinary hardships, it may be difficult to
strictly comply with the requirements of this chapter. The purpose of a
variation is to provide relief from strict compliance with the regulations and
requirements of this chapter so long as the objectives of this chapter are not
compromised.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Where the County Engineer finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this chapter, the
County Engineer may approve variations to the requirements of this chapter so
that substantial justice may be done and the public interest subserved thereby,
provided that such variations shall not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   The County Engineer may require that a traffic impact study or
other information, studies, or data be submitted when reviewing a request for a
variation from the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Variation requests. A petition for any variation shall be submitted in
writing to the County Engineer by the permittee. The permittee must prove that
the variation will not be contrary to the public interest and that a practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship will result if it is not granted. In
particular, the permittee shall establish and substantiate that the variation
conforms to the requirements and standards as set forth in §
90.030.
   (C)   Standards for variations. No variation in the strict application of
the provisions of this chapter shall be granted unless it is found that the
following relevant requirements and conditions are satisfied. The County
Engineer may grant variations whenever it is determined that all of the
following have been met.
      (1)   The granting of the variation shall be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the regulations imposed by this chapter and shall not be
detrimental to the safety of the traveling public using the county highway.
      (2)   There must be proof of unique or existing special circumstances or
conditions where the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the permittee of reasonable access. Circumstances that would allow
reasonable access by a road or street other than a county highway,
circumstances where indirect or restricted access can be obtained, or
circumstances where engineering or construction solutions can be applied to
mitigate the condition shall not be considered unique or special.
      (3)   There must be proof of practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship. It is not sufficient to show that greater profit or economic gain
would result if the variation would be granted. Furthermore, the hardship or
difficulty cannot be self-created or self-imposed; nor can it be established on
this basis by the owner who purchases with or without knowledge of the
provisions of this chapter. The difficulty or hardship must result from the
strict application of this chapter and it must be suffered directly and solely
by the owner of the property in question.
      (4)   The variation is the least deviation from the provisions of this
chapter which will mitigate the hardship or practical difficulty.
   (D)   Action by the County Engineer. Upon receipt of the required variance
application form, all supporting documentation, data, studies and other
requested information and all related variance fees, the County Engineer shall
review and render a decision in writing to the owner. The County Engineer may,
in the decision for a variation, stipulate conditions or impose requirements in
granting of a variation from the provisions of this chapter. The written
decision of the County Engineer is valid for a period of one year.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.031 APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Access Control Officer. All objections to any action or decision
concerning access shall be filed in writing with the Access Control Officer.
The Access Control Officer shall consider the objections, and after a decision
has been made shall inform the permittee in writing of the action taken on said
objection.
   (B)   County Engineer. If the permittee is dissatisfied with the action or
decision of the Access Control Officer, a written objection may be filed with
the County Engineer. The County Engineer will consider the objection and
formulate a response, which will be communicated in writing. The County
Engineer may modify or overturn any previous action or decisions.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.032 FEES.
   (A)   All fees required for this chapter shall be established by the County
Engineer. Information regarding the required fees for each type of permit
application shall be provided in the Technical Reference Manual.
   (B)   Existing agreements that have alternate permit fee schedules shall
remain in effect until and unless those agreements are expired, are terminated,
or are renegotiated, and are approved by the County Board.
   (C)   The County Engineer shall have the authority to waive any fees or
charges imposed by this chapter if said fees and charges are for a permit to
perform work within a county highway right-of-way that is needed due to a
county improvement or maintenance operation.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.033 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whomever shall construct, or cause to be constructed, any access-
related improvements or any utility or facility within the right-of-way of any
county highway, or whoever shall repair, relocate, revise, modify, enlarge,
remove, reconstruct, or abandon any existing utility or facility within the
right-of-way in violation of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 for each access location
so constructed. Each day that the access location is in place in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the above
penalties. A violation shall also include any access-related improvements or
any utilities or facilities within the county highways built without approval,
and a permit as required by this chapter as well as approved improvements built
with substandard designs and specifications.
   (B)   The Lake County Division of Transportation shall have the authority to
stop any and all work that it determines is proceeding in an unsafe or
substandard manner, or poses any danger to the public or the county highway. In
the event any aspect of the perimeter's construction, placement, maintenance,
repair, use or operation of the county highway at any time violates or is
forbidden by any law, statute, rule, regulation, order, or requirement of any
governmental authority, the permittee shall immediately discontinue such
operations and, at its own expense, take all necessary corrective action.
   (C)   Whenever a violation shall come to the knowledge of the County
Engineer, the County Engineer may take any action as deemed appropriate and as
set forth in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended. The provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed exclusive and shall not be deemed to prevent the
maintenance of any other action or proceeding in law or equity to enforce the
provisions of this chapter or to vacate and remove any improvements constructed
in violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the County Recorder that
any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated, as they relate to
plats, it shall be the County Recorder's duty to notify the County Engineer and
the State's Attorney.
   (E)   The County Engineer shall have the authority to delay the issuance of
permits to an applicant due to the failure of the applicant to comply with the
provisions of other permits issued to the applicant. The County Engineer shall
also have the authority to delay the issuance of permits if the property served
by the permitted work or facility is in violation of or has not complied with
the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, statute, regulation or
administrative order that may apply to such property. The County Engineer shall
also have the authority to revoke any active permit issued to the applicant due
to the failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of other permits
or the failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.034 INACTIVITY.
   (A)   An application for any permit under this chapter will be considered
inactive if no response is provided by the applicant, their agent, or their
engineer within six months from the date of the last written review comments
received from LCDOT.
   (B)   If that time period has lapsed, the application will be considered
invalid and the applicant must reapply and comply with any and all new
conditions, policies, standards or ordinances that may be in effect at the time
of the re-submittal. If more than one year has passed from the date of the last
written review comments, application fees must be paid as if it was a new
submittal. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to contact the Lake
County Division of Transportation to determine the status of any permit
submittals.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.035 RESPONSIBILITY OF DAMAGE CLAIMS.
   (A)   The permittee and contractors shall indemnify and save harmless and
defend the LCDOT and the county, its officers, agents, and employees against
all loss, damage, or expense that it or they may sustain as a result of any
suits, actions, or claims of any character brought on account of property
damage, injury to or death of any person or persons, including all persons
performing any work under the permit, which may arise in connection with the
work to be performed under the permit.
   (B)   The permit is not intended by any of the provisions of any part of the
permit to make the public or any member thereof a third party beneficiary of
the permit, or to authorize anyone not a party to the permit to initiate or
maintain a suit for personal injuries or property damage pursuant to the terms
or provisions of the permit. The duties, obligations, and responsibilities of
the parties to the permit with respect to third parties shall remain as imposed
by law.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
PERMIT TYPES AND HIGHWAY CLASSIFICATION
§ 90.045 HIGHWAY ACCESS CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   The LCDOT uses a highway access classification system to apply
appropriate access management techniques, requirements and standards to
permitting of access facilities. The specific requirements for each
classification are outlined in the Technical Reference Manual, which is
maintained by LCDOT and updated annually in accordance with provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   County highways serve two primary functions: access and mobility. The
county highway system was developed with the primary function of providing
regional mobility. Illinois Compiled Statues 605 ILCS 5/5-102 describes county
highways to be "as nearly as possible highways connecting the principal
municipalities and trading points in each county with each other, and also with
the principal municipalities and trading points in other counties." Through
land use changes since the establishment of the county highway system, some
county highways now provide increased access to support local economic
development. As access to a roadway increases, mobility along that roadway
decreases. Due to this relationship, roadways are assigned a functional
classification that defines the design, administrative and regulatory policies
which govern that roadway. Functional classification ranges from freeways (high
mobility, low accessibility) to local streets (low mobility, high
accessibility.) The appropriate degree of access control varies according to
the function the roadway provides.
 
COMMENTARY:
Access management is the coordinated planning, regulation, and design of access
between roadways and land development. Studies have shown that an effective
access management program can reduce crashes by as much as 50%, increase
roadway capacity by 23% to 45%, and reduce travel time and delay as much as 40%
to 60% (source: Access Management Manual, Transportation Research Board, 2014.)
 
   (C)   Access classification definitions. The county highway system is
comprised of roadways with varying functional classifications. For purposes of
determining the requirements and procedures for permitting of access
facilities, the following access classifications are established:
      DESIGNATED FREEWAY. Those roadways that, in accordance with 605 ILCS 5/8-
101, as amended, have been designated by the County Board as freeways and as
such are intended to provide the highest level of mobility within the county
highway system. They are intended to provide very low accessibility. Currently
two county highways are designated freeways in Lake County:
         (a)   Washington Street (County Highway 45) from US 41 to IL 21.
         (b)   Peterson Road (County Highway 20) from US 45 to IL 60.
      HIGH MOBILITY HIGHWAY. Those county highways of regional importance that,
by their length and connectivity with other county and/or state highways or
large centers of activity, provide for a high degree of mobility and supplement
the mobility of state highways and freeways.
      LOW MOBILITY HIGHWAY. Those County Highways of local importance that
provide connectivity between arterials and local roads, or by their current
physical characteristics provides a low level of mobility.
      MEDIUM MOBILITY HIGHWAY. Those county highways of regional or local
importance that provide connectivity between the municipal street system and
other county or state highways or serve as a connection between county highways
or centers of activity.
   (D)   Access Classification Map.
      (1)   Adoption of map. To implement the intent of this chapter, the
county highway system is hereby divided into highway access classifications as
depicted on the Access Classification Map which is contained within the
Technical Reference Manual and is hereby adopted by reference.
      (2)   Map amendments. As county highways are constructed, improved,
reconstructed, or otherwise altered, there may be a need to change the
classification of a county highway for access management purposes. The Access
Classification Map may be amended from time to time by update to the Technical
Reference Manual. The LCDOT shall be responsible for maintaining and updating
the Access Classification Map.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.046 ACCESS PERMIT TYPES.
   Access to a county highway, whether temporary or permanent, shall be granted
via one of five types of access permit classifications. Access permit
classifications are a function of the traffic volumes that the access will
generate and the usage of the access. The five classifications of permits
followed by their definitions are:
   (A)   Minimum access.
   (B)   Minor access.
   (C)   Major access.
   (D)   Designated freeway access.
   (E)   Temporary access.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.047 MINIMUM ACCESS.
   (A)   A minimum use access is one which serves a single family residence or
agricultural field abutting a county highway, has an anticipated daily two-way
traffic volume (total number of entrance and exit trips by vehicles using the
access) of no more than 20 trips and has no regular use by vehicles or vehicle
combinations of three axles or more (personal recreational vehicles excluded).
   (B)   A gated access for the sole use of emergency response providers may be
considered a Minimum Access if the access will be in place longer than 12
months.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.048 MINOR ACCESS.
   (A)   A minor access is one which serves property abutting a county highway,
has an anticipated normal daily two-way traffic volume (total number of
entrance and exit trips by vehicles using the access) of no more than 50 trips,
as estimated utilizing the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers Trip Generation Manual, and has no regular use by vehicles or vehicle
combinations of three axles or more (personal recreational vehicles excluded).
   (B)   Examples of land-uses served by a minor access can include, but is not
limited to, a small residential community (e.g., two to four houses), an
apartment complex with eight or fewer units, or an office building with less
than 3,000 gross square feet.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.049 MAJOR ACCESS.
   (A)   A major access is one which serves property abutting a county highway
and has an anticipated daily two-way traffic volume (total number of entrance
and exit trips by vehicles using the access) of more than 50 trips, or has
regular use by vehicles or vehicle combinations of three axles or more
(personal recreational vehicles excluded).
   (B)   Examples of land-uses served by a major access can include, but is not
limited to, regional shopping centers, multiple-unit, single-family, multi-
family residential developments, office, industrial complexes, public,
religious, education, or recreation uses.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.050 DESIGNATED FREEWAY ACCESS.
   (A)   605 ILCS 5/8-101 et seq. Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended,
grants the authority to a County Board to designate particular highways on the
county highway system as freeways for the purpose of promoting the safety and
convenience of highway traffic by regulating access to the freeway. This
designation may also apply to approach roads which intersect or approach the
freeway. A permit for an access to such freeways shall be termed a "designated
freeway access permit." The County Board has the sole authority to grant or
deny new points of access or changes, modifications, and/or revisions to
existing points of access in accordance with 605 ILCS 5/8-102 et seq. as
amended.
   (B)   As of January 2018, there are two such designated freeways on the
county highway system. They are: (1) Washington Street (County Highway 45) from
U.S. 41 to IL 21, and (2) Peterson Road (County Highway 20) from U.S. 45 to IL
60.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.051 TEMPORARY ACCESS.
   (A)   A temporary access is one which serves property abutting a county
highway and is used for a specified purpose for less than 12 months and then is
removed in its entirety or is replaced with a permanent access. A temporary
access may be either a minor access or a major access depending on the daily
traffic volumes.
   (B)   Examples of temporary access can include, but are not limited to,
access for special events, construction access to backyards, access for a
construction entrance to begin initial site preparation work or construction of
on-site utilities prior to approval of a permanent access permit.
   (C)   The Access Control Officer may extend a temporary access permit in
special cases where temporary access is required for more than 12 months.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.052 USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT TYPES.
   Use of the county highway right-of-way for a non-highway function such as
special events, utilities or facilities, whether temporary or permanent, shall
be granted via one of four types of use permits. A permit is required for any
work performed in the county highway right-of-way, even if a temporary or full
closure of the roadway is not required. The four types of use permits are:
   (A)   Special event.
   (B)   Utility.
   (C)   Facility.
   (D)   Single service connection.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.053 SPECIAL EVENT.
   Pursuant to 605 ILCS 5/5-414 et seq. as amended, the County Engineer may,
upon application by the proper authorities of any governmental agency or
person, issue a permit to temporarily close any portion of a county highway for
any public purpose. Temporary closure of a highway for purpose of special
events of public interest and filming shall be authorized by issuance of a
special event permit.
 
COMMENTARY:
Examples of events can include, but are not limited to, parades, marathons, and
festivals, as well as special events of public interest and filming for a
movie, television, commercial, or documentary.
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.054 UTILITY.
   A utility permit shall be required for the reconstruction, relocation,
repair, maintenance, modification, removal, upgrade, or any and all forms of
work relating to an existing utility, or any and all forms of work relating to
the construction or placement of a new utility within the right-of-way of any
county highway.
 
COMMENTARY:
Examples of utilities can include, but are not limited to, electric lines,
telephone lines, telecommunication lines, small cell wireless installations,
cable television lines, and natural gas transmission lines.
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.055 FACILITY.
   A facility permit shall be required for the reconstruction, relocation,
repair, maintenance, modification, removal, upgrade, or any and all form of
work relating to an existing facility, or any and all form of work relating to
the construction or placement of a new facility within the right-of-way of any
county highway.
 
COMMENTARY:
Examples of facilities can include, but are not limited to, municipal or
government owned sidewalks, street lights, bike paths, storm sewers,
watermains, sanitary sewer lines and trees.
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.056 SINGLE SERVICE CONNECTION.
   A single service connection permit is limited to installation of a single
service connection to a utility or facility for a single family residence.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
ACCESS REQUIREMENTS AND POLICIES
§ 90.064 INTRODUCTION.
   Any owner of property abutting a county highway has the right of reasonable
access. Access which meets the requirements in this chapter shall be approved
through granting an access permit. To assist a property owner, developer, their
engineer, contractor, public agencies or any other applicant in the
administrative, procedural and engineering requirements of this chapter, refer
to the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.065 ACCESS PERMITS.
   (A)   n access permit shall be required for the construction of any new
access or the modification of any existing access within the right-of-way of a
county highway, when the work is to be done by any person or public agency
other than Lake County. An access permit shall not be required for a public
agency when a joint agreement covers the work involved therein or at such times
as the County Engineer is exercising statutory supervisory authority.
   (B)   Requirements for access to a county highway are based on two factors:
      (1)   The type of access (minimum, minor, major, designated freeway,
temporary).
      (2)   The access classification of the county highway from which the
access is being permitted.
   (C)   The owner must specify the type of access being requested. If the
access type is unknown or ambiguous, the owner shall consult the Access Control
Officer. The County Engineer has the responsibility and final authority for
determining the access type.
   (D)   The access permit is valid for as long as the use is consistent with
the approved access type, unless otherwise specified on the permit. The Access
Control Officer may, upon written request, extend the term of an access permit
for such a period as the Access Control Officer may determine.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.066 CHANGE IN LAND USE OR CHANGE IN LAND-USE DENSITY.
   (A)   A change in use notification shall be required when a change in the
use of the access location or a change in the land-use or land-use density
occurs and the continued use of an existing access location is proposed.
Changes in land-use or land-use density may result in a significant change in
the number of or type of vehicles using an access location. Therefore, a new
access permit as well as modifications, improvements, additional right-of-way
dedications or revisions may be required to the existing access location and/or
the county highway to accommodate the change in traffic.
   (B)   Changes in land-use or land-use density are situations that may result
in a change in the number or type of vehicles using an existing access.
Modifications, improvements, or revisions may be required to the access point
and/or the county highway to accommodate the change.
 
COMMENTARY:
Examples of changes in land-use may be the conversion of an office space to a
medical office space, or an office space to a commercial retail space. Examples
of changes in land-use density may be the redevelopment of an existing gas
station to include a convenience store and car wash, installation of additional
parking spaces, or the expansion of a building on a property with an existing
access.
 
   (C)   If a change in land-use or land-use density occurs and an existing
access point is proposed to be used, the owner shall submit a change in land-
use notification form to the LCDOT prior to construction of proposed changes.
The notification and supporting information shall be reviewed to identify if
the existing access facility is suitable for the proposed land-use or land-use
density, under the provisions of this chapter. If determined suitable, the
owner will be notified to continue use of the existing access point. If the
existing access facility is not suitable for the proposed land-use or land-use
density, as determined by the Access Control Officer and in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the design standards in the Technical Reference
Manual, the owner shall submit a new application for a new access permit and
make all modifications, improvements or revisions to the existing access point
and/or the county highway to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   If a property is being re-subdivided or redeveloped, the existing
access point(s) may require relocation, reconstruction, or the number of access
points reduced to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.067 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all types of access permits.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.068 JOINT HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENTS.
   In certain circumstances, it may be advantageous to the motoring public to
construct access improvements as part of a larger overall improvement or in
conjunction with programmed county highway improvements. In order to minimize
disruptions to the public, the County Engineer may require access related
improvements to proceed in a coordinated and comprehensive manner.
   (A)   Programmed improvements.
      (1)   In certain circumstances, the LCDOT may have a highway improvement
programmed for the section of county highway for which an owner is applying for
access and the owner, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter, is required to construct highway improvements to accommodate the
proposed access. The County Engineer may recommend that both improvements
proceed simultaneously and as a coordinated joint improvement.
      (2)   For joint improvement projects, the County Engineer shall have the
option to require a formal joint agreement to be approved by the County Board.
The joint agreement shall be prepared by the LCDOT and shall specifically
provide for the responsibilities and obligations of the county and the owner as
related to the joint improvement. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
relieve the owner of any financial responsibilities related to an access
improvement.
      (3)   If the owner or the County Engineer determines a joint agreement
for a joint improvement is not appropriate, the County Engineer shall specify
the conditions to be made a part of the access permit so that construction of
the access-related improvement shall not interfere with the proposed county
highway improvement project.
   (B)   Ongoing improvements.
      (1)   In certain circumstances, the LCDOT may have a highway improvement
under construction for the section of county highway for which an owner, in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter, is required to
construct highway improvements to accommodate a proposed access. The County
Engineer may recommend that the highway improvements for the access location be
incorporated into the ongoing county highway improvement project by means of a
formal joint agreement or by a donation of money to be made a part of the
access permit. If a formal joint agreement is recommended, the parties shall
proceed as in subdivision (A) above.
      (2)   If a donation of money is recommended by the County Engineer, the
owner shall have the option to agree in writing to an amount determined by the
LCDOT. This amount shall be sufficient to cover the cost of the required access
improvement, including engineering costs and construction supervision, as part
of the ongoing county highway improvement project. The donation shall be
subject to acceptance by the Public Works, Planning and Transportation
Committee, in accordance with 605 ILCS 5/5-101.7 et seq., as amended.
      (3)   If the Public Works, Planning and Transportation Committee, elects
not to proceed with a donation, the County Engineer shall specify the
conditions to be made a part of the access permit so that construction of the
access improvement by the owner required for the access shall not interfere
with the ongoing county highway improvement project.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the owner of
any financial responsibilities as related to an access or access improvements.
   (C)   Donations. The Public Works, Planning and Transportation Committee, in
accordance with, 605 ILCS 5/5-101.7 et seq., as amended, shall have the
authority to accept money or right-of-way or additional detention or
compensatory floodplain storage donated from any source and to use the same for
county highway purposes to mitigate the impacts to the county highway system
from the proposed development.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.069 COORDINATION OF DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   If property abutting a county highway is being developed and access is
requested to the county highway, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to
effect any coordination necessary to comply with the requirements and
provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the governmental authority
having land-use regulatory authority.
   (B)   If two or more owners of property abutting a county highway are being
developed during the same time period, the Access Control Officer may require
each owner to effect any coordination necessary to comply with the requirements
and provisions of this chapter. This may include constructing their respective
highway access improvements as a joint and coordinated effort as one
construction project.
   (C)   The issuance of an access permit by the LCDOT shall not be construed
to relieve an owner of any responsibility to secure any other permits or comply
with any requirements of any other governmental authority having any
jurisdictional responsibilities as it relates to a development. The owner shall
also be responsible for securing any permits or complying with any other
requirements of any governmental authority as they may relate to the
construction of an access or highway improvement.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.070 COSTS OF ACCESS IMPROVEMENTS TO COUNTY HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   The permittee shall be solely responsible for paying all costs
associated with the design and construction of an access and all costs
associated with the design and construction of any improvements to a county
highway as required by this subchapter to accommodate the access and the
traffic using the access. Costs to the owner shall include but are not limited
to the following:
      (1)   Preparation of any plans, studies, information, or data required by
the LCDOT to review an access request and any revisions thereto.
      (2)   Collection of traffic counts and classification counts.
      (3)   Preparation of a traffic impact study and any revisions thereto.
      (4)   Preparation of preliminary plans and any revisions thereto.
      (5)   Preparation of a geometric plan and/or intersection design study.
      (6)   Preparation of a traffic signal warrant study and any revisions
thereto.
      (7)   Preparation of engineering plans and specifications, including
estimates of costs and any revisions thereto.
      (8)   Traffic control signage.
      (9)   Traffic signalization.
      (10)   Pavement markings and markers and all other traffic control
devices.
      (11)   Relocation of utilities and facilities out from underneath the
existing or proposed pavement.
      (12)   Relocation of above ground utilities and facilities including
utility poles to the proposed right-of-way line and outside of the clear zone.
      (13)   Removal of objects in the right-of-way (see §
90.081).
      (14)   All easements and right-of-way necessary to construct improvements
required by this chapter and the preparation of any plats and other legal
documents.
      (15)   Obtaining and posting performance guarantees, certificates of
insurance, and maintenance guarantees.
      (16)   Fees and other charges as required by this chapter.
      (17)   All other costs associated with access and improvements to a
county highway as required in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.071 COORDINATION WITH OTHER LCDOT PERMITS.
   After the engineering plans, specifications, estimate of cost, payment of
fees, performance guarantee, and certificate of insurance are received and
approved by the LCDOT, the plat of subdivision will be signed by the County
Engineer. Also at this time any utility/facility permits that have been applied
for can be issued with the issuance of the access permit. Construction may then
commence in accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications of this
chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.072 ACCESS POLICY.
   It is Lake County policy that any owner of property abutting a county
highway has the right of reasonable access. Indirect access via other existing
or proposed streets or easements or restricted access is considered reasonable
access to a county highway.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.073 ACCESS CRITERIA.
   (A)   This section describes criteria applicable to all types of access. The
criteria presented include the maximum number of access points and their
permissible location with respect to adjacent access points and intersecting
streets.
 
COMMENTARY:
The number of access points along a county highway should be limited and spaced
far enough apart so that conflicting movements are minimized and safe operation
is promoted.
 
   (B)   Maximum number of access points.
      (1)   Each development or property regardless of the number of parcels
shall be limited to one access point, except as provided for otherwise in this
chapter.
      (2)   One additional access point may be granted if it can be
demonstrated that the level of service at the approved access point would be
substantially improved by the addition of one access point. In this instance,
the level of service at the approved access point must be improved by a minimum
of one level of service. This level of service improvement must provide a
noticeable improvement, i.e., a level of service improvement from B to A would
not warrant an additional access.
      (3)   The Access Control Officer may permit one additional restricted
access, permitting right-turns in and right-turns out only, provided that the
owner clearly demonstrates a substantial need and complies with all the
applicable provisions of this chapter. This option will only be considered
where the enforcement of this restricted movement will be possible.
      (4)   Upon review and approval by the Access Control Officer, a one-way
pair of access points may be permitted in place of a single major access point.
The location, driveway separation, engineering design, and geometrics of the
access-related improvements shall be determined by the LCDOT on a site-specific
basis.
 
COMMENTARY:
Where additional access points are requested, first consideration shall be
given to supplemental access points, which restrict turning movements. Shared
access points or indirect access from adjacent public streets is encouraged.
Access classification of the roadway will be considered by the Access Control
Officer in evaluation of requests for additional access points.
 
   (C)   Alignment with existing access locations or roads. Where an existing
access location or road is on the opposite side of the county highway from an
abutting property for which access is being requested, the proposed access
shall be aligned with the existing access location or road whenever possible.
Given site specific characteristics or operational considerations on the county
highway, the Access Control Officer may waive this requirement under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The abutting property for which access is being requested has
insufficient frontage to allow for the proper alignment with the existing
access location or road.
      (2)   The proposed point of access would not comply with other provisions
and requirements set forth in this chapter.
      (3)   The alignment of the proposed access point with an existing access
location or road would be detrimental to traffic flow, result in undue delay,
impede traffic operations, or impair traffic safety on the county highway.
      (4)   In the event that a proposed access point is not aligned as
provided for in this section, the spacing of access points with existing
adjacent access points and roads shall comply with the provisions in §§
90.073(D) and
90.073(E).
   (D)   Spacing of adjacent access points.
      (1)   To function effectively, adjacent access points shall be spaced to
ensure safe and efficient traffic movements and operations.
      (2)   The minimum distance between adjacent access points shall be
determined by the distance required to provide full left-turn tapers and
storage bays along the county highway for inbound turning movements to each
access location regardless of the present need for said tapers and storage
bays. The geometric standard can be found in the LCDOT Standard Details.
      (3)    If a property has inadequate frontage to meet this spacing
requirement, the Access Control Officer shall determine the location of the
access point using the standards and provisions established by the chapter. The
Access Control Officer may require that the access be shared, that indirect
access be used, or that the access restrict turning movements.
   (E)   Distance from intersecting streets.
      (1)   To enhance traffic safety and operation on county highways, access
points shall be located a sufficient distance from intersecting streets.
      (2)   The minimum distance between an access point and an intersecting
street shall be determined by the distance required to provide full left-turn
tapers and storage bays along the highway for both the access point and the
intersecting street, regardless of the present need for said tapers and storage
bays. The geometric standard can be found in the LCDOT Standard Details.
      (3)   If a property has inadequate frontage to meet this minimum distance
requirement, the Access Control Officer shall determine the location of the
access point using the standards and provisions established by this chapter.
The Access Control Officer may require that the access be shared, that indirect
access be used, or that the access restrict turning movements.
   (F)   Proximity to adjacent intersections and access points.
      (1)   If construction of an access requires the widening of and
improvements to the abutting county highway, and an existing intersection or
access falls within the limits of construction, then such widening or
improvements shall extend through and beyond the intersection or access before
tapering down to the existing pavement width. Exclusive left-turn lanes shall
be provided at the existing intersection or access.
      (2)   The Access Control Officer shall determine the limits of the
construction of widening and improvement to a county highway.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.074 RESTRICTED TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   (A)   Turning movements may be restricted under conditions where capacity,
delay, operational, or safety conditions make specific turns in or turns out
detrimental to the public interest. These conditions will be identified on a
site-specific basis. Refer to the Technical Reference Manual for additional
guidance on site-specific conditions.
   (B)   Turning movement restrictions shall be enforced with barrier median
channelization or driveway channelization. The Access Control Officer shall
determine the type of channelization based on site conditions and the access
classification. Design standards and details are provided in the Technical
Reference Manual.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.075 INDIRECT ACCESS.
   (A)   Access to other streets. Access to a county highway may be prohibited
when a property abutting a county highway has frontage on one or more other
streets and reasonable access can be provided from said streets. The Access
Control Officer shall determine, on a site-specific basis whether access will
be permitted to the county highway.
   (B)   Access to property for residential or non-residential subdivisions.
When property abutting a county highway is to be subdivided or developed,
direct access to a county highway shall not be used in lieu of an adequate
internal traffic circulation system. Indirect access to individual lots shall
be required from an internal traffic circulation system which itself provides
access to the county highway or other street. The Access Control Officer shall
determine, on a site-specific basis, which lots abutting the county highway may
have direct access and which lots shall have indirect access.
 
COMMENTARY:
As an area develops and subdivisions are platted contiguous to one another, the
internal street system should interconnect. Such interconnection permits local
movement between subdivisions without forcing trips between subdivisions to use
major roads such as county highways as part of an internal circulation system.
For non-residential developments, outlots and service to individual businesses
should be provided via cross easements, frontage roads or other internal
circulation system. The purpose of major roads such as county highways is to
carry traffic to and from such sites, not to augment or be a part of an
internal circulation system.
 
   (C)   Wording on the plat of subdivision.
      (1)   When indirect access is required and there is a plat of
subdivision, the following note shall be placed on the plat of subdivision:
      (2)   Direct access to [county highway name] Road, County Highway [county
highway number], from lots [lot numbers] is prohibited.
      (3)   This note shall be placed on all plats that have additional lots or
outlots along the county highway frontage that will not take direct access to
the county highway.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.076 TURNAROUNDS.
   No access shall be permitted if such access would require backing or turning
maneuvers onto a county highway. Provisions for turnarounds shall be made
outside the county highway right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the Access
Control Officer.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.077 PARKING.
   (A)    No access shall be permitted if such access would result in parking
on a county highway or within the right-of-way of a county highway, unless
otherwise approved by the Access Control Officer. Provisions for parking shall
be made outside of the right-of-way of a county highway.
   (B)   The Access Control Officer may approve provisions for parking within
the right-of-way of a county highway if an agreement for such parking and
associated maintenance responsibilities is in place with the local
municipality.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.078 ACCESS TO CORNER LOTS.
   The following standards shall govern access to corner lots:
   (A)   (1)   For access to an abutting property located at the intersection
of two county highways, one access point shall be permitted on the county
highway having the lower volume of traffic. The Access Control Officer shall
determine which highway has the lower volume of traffic. The requirements for
the access point shall comply with the provisions set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   The Access Control Officer, on a case-by-case basis, may allow an
access point on the county highway with the higher volume of traffic provided
the left turns into the site are not counter to and are in the same direction
as the left turn movements at the intersection with the cross street.
   (B)   (1)   For corner lots at an intersection where only one of the
abutting roads is a county highway, access shall be provided from the road
having the lower volume of traffic. The Access Control Officer shall determine
which road has the lower volume of traffic. If the Access Control Officer
determines that the county highway has the lower volume of traffic, one access
shall be permitted, and the requirements for the access point shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   If access has previously been granted by another highway authority
having jurisdiction over the road having a higher volume of traffic than the
county highway, then access to the county highway shall not be permitted.
   (C)   If access is being requested to both roads and one or both roads is a
county highway, the owner may apply for a variation from this section. In
addition to the provisions set forth in §
90.030 of this chapter, a traffic impact study shall be required.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.079 ACCESS TO SUBDIVIDED OR PREVIOUSLY PLATTED PARCELS.
   Access to land subdivided prior to the adopted date of this chapter, April
12, 1988, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the extent
possible. Owners of such property for which access is being requested and for
which compliance with this chapter cannot be attained may request the Access
Control Officer to grant access. Such access granted by the Access Control
Officer shall be the least deviation from the rules, regulations, and
specifications of this chapter.
 
COMMENTARY:
Many older existing subdivisions were platted with small lots fronting on
county highways. In these instances shared access or indirect access can be
used to reduce the number of access points on a county highway.
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.080 SHARED ACCESS.
   Certain geometric, land-use, and site conditions may require shared access
among two or more developments or properties. This would occur when frontages
are limited and each development or property is unable to meet the requirements
of this chapter. In these instances, shared access shall be provided to
adjacent developments or properties. The Access Control Officer shall determine
on a site-specific basis when shared access shall be required.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.081 REQUIRED HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   In order to maintain safe and efficient traffic operations at the
access intersection and to ensure that the impact of a development accessing a
county highway does not result in a degradation of traffic operations,
improvements to the county highway system may be required with a major access
permit. These improvements may include dedication of additional right-of-way to
accommodate the widening required to maintain the existing level of service.
 
COMMENTARY:
Increases in traffic from development result in two types of impacts to the
county highway system:
 
      (1)   Impacts that occur at the access point(s) and adjacent
intersections that result in an increase in delays at those specific locations
and are directly attributable to a specific development.
      (2)   Cumulative impacts to the overall roadway network that result from
the incremental increases in traffic from developments.
   (B)   Limits of required improvements for any major access permit shall be
determined by the Access Control Officer, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and design guidance provided in the Technical Reference Manual,
Chapter 4.
   (C)   Right-of-way requirements.
      (1)   Right-of-way widths.
         (a)   The right-of-way widths for county highways shall be a total of
100 to 140 feet, 50 to 70 feet half right-of-way width, as designated by the
County Engineer. Required right-of-way shall be determined for each permit
request based on the access classification of the county highway to which
access is being requested, existing right-of-way width, surrounding land use,
local development plans and long range transportation plans. In general,
required right-of-way width increases as the level of mobility of the county
highway increases. Required minimum right-of-way width by access classification
is included in the Technical Reference Manual.
         (b)   If the property abutting a county highway is to be subdivided or
a major access is being requested, the owner shall dedicate, at no cost to the
county, sufficient land to satisfy this right-of-way requirement.
         (c)   If additional right-of-way is needed in order to construct the
required highway improvements or is needed to accommodate a future improvement
to a county highway due to the particular circumstances of the nature of the
major access, the additional right-of-way shall be dedicated by the owner at no
cost to the county. This may include additional right-of-way required to obtain
the required sight distance at the proposed access location. If the additional
right-of-way needed is from property not controlled by the owner, the owner
shall obtain the additional right-of-way in the name of the county at no cost
to the county.
      (2)   Right-of-way widths to accommodate future county bike paths. At
certain major intersections and along county highways where future county bike
paths will be constructed as identified by the County Engineer, an additional
ten to 20 feet of right-of-way width may be required. If the abutting property
is being subdivided or a major access is being requested, the owner shall
dedicate, at no cost to the county, sufficient land to satisfy the right-of-way
requirement as designated by the County Engineer to accommodate the future
county bike path.
      (3)   Wording on plat. The following wording shall be used to dedicate
right-of-way, on a plat of subdivision or plat of dedication: HEREBY DEDICATED
FOR PUBLIC ROAD PURPOSES.
      (4)   Restoration of right-of-way. Upon completion of any construction
work within the right-of-way, the right-of-way shall be restored in accordance
with the permitted plans acceptable to the LCDOT.
      (5)   Objects in the right-of-way. In general, no new objects, trees,
plantings, bushes, landscaping, fences, signs, rocks, debris, berms, detention
or retention facilities, or any such materials shall be permitted within the
right-of-way. Trees may be allowed to be planted within the right-of-way, if a
municipality will accept maintenance of these trees via the municipal
acceptance form or via an agreement. In those instances where additional right-
of-way is being dedicated as required by this chapter, brush, fences, signs,
rocks, landscaping, objects, berms, detention facilities, wetlands,
floodplains, and other such obstacles shall be removed or relocated beyond the
new right-of-way line and clear zone. All affected existing utility poles shall
be relocated to the new right-of-way line along the entire frontage of the
development.
      (6)   Right-of-way encumbrances. All right-of-way to be dedicated shall
be free and clear of any existing encumbrances, which would render the right-
of-way in any manner or form unusable for road purposes or would in any manner
or form, result in any extraordinary costs to the county at such time as said
right-of-way is to be used for road purposes. This would include the mitigation
and/or fee for future mitigation of any wetlands within the proposed right-of-
way.
      (7)   Right-of-way monumentation. All new right-of-way boundary corners,
points of curvature and points of tangency shall be monumented with iron pipes
or rods that are a minimum of one-half inch diameter by 24 inches long or with
other acceptable types of monuments that are in compliance with the Illinois
Professional Land Surveyor Act of 1989 Section 1270.56, Minimum Standards of
Practice, paragraph 5. The type of monuments found or set shall be noted on the
plat.
 
COMMENTARY:
The additional right-of-way required in this section is needed to accommodate
future highway improvements that are needed because of the cumulative traffic
generation of developments and to accommodate access related improvements. The
right-of-way widths are also needed to accommodate roadway drainage, snow
storage, utilities and facilities, and to provide for traffic and pedestrian
safety.
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.082 ACCESS PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   Review and issuance of each type of access permit shall be governed by
the individual processes outlined in the Technical Reference Manual.
   (B)   The general administrative process applicable to all permits includes:
      (1)   Permit review is initiated with an initial submittal package which
shall include at a minimum a cover letter, application form and site plan
location. A pre-application meeting shall be required for a major access permit
or designated freeway permit. See the Technical Reference Manual for additional
guidance on initial submittal requirements.
      (2)   The owner shall sign and submit the permit application and
application fee. For all access permits, the owner shall be considered the
permittee for all provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Submittals received by the LCDOT will be reviewed within 15 working
days or as deemed a reasonable time period given manpower, workload, and
budgeting constraints. All submittals that require review by LCDOT departments
outside of the Permitting Department may require more than 15 working days for
the review to be completed by all parties.
      (4)   The Access Control Officer may require engineering studies, plans,
and other information in order to review and evaluate the owner's application.
All engineering documents shall be signed and sealed by a licensed professional
engineer in the State of Illinois. Multiple reviews may be necessary prior to
approval of the engineering plans. The LCDOT shall include guidance on
engineering plan and study requirements in the Technical Reference Manual.
      (5)   Upon approval of the initial submittal and engineering documents,
receipt of required fees, guarantees, and proof of insurance as required, a
permit will be issued.
      (6)   Construction must begin within the time frame specified in the
Technical Reference Manual, unless otherwise specified on the permit.
      (7)   When construction work is complete, per the approved plans, the
LCDOT shall be notified in writing to perform a final inspection.
      (8)   When construction work, inspections and punch list items are
completed, the access permit work will be accepted by the LCDOT.
      (9)   Upon acceptance of the access permit work, the permittee shall
provide as-built plans, maintenance guarantee (if required), and pay
outstanding invoices. The performance guarantee will then be released.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.083 RESIDENT ENGINEER LETTER.
   The permittee shall provide a licensed professional engineer to act as
resident engineer, as required by permit type. He or she shall be responsible
for inspections on behalf of the permittee and will be responsible for ensuring
that the permitted work is constructed in compliance with the approved
engineering plans and specifications. While the LCDOT may conduct periodic
inspections, it is not their responsibility to provide project management or
day-to-day oversight of the construction. The resident engineer information
shall be submitted to the LCDOT on the resident engineer's company letterhead
and include the engineer's name, address, telephone number, and professional
engineer's license number for the licensed professional engineer who will act
as resident engineer. A sample letter for use by resident engineers can be
found in the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
UTILITY AND FACILITY PERMIT POLICIES
§ 90.100 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   In order to provide for the safe placement of utilities and facilities
within the rights-of-ways of county highways, to safeguard the motoring public,
to promote the orderly and efficient use of public rights-of-way, and to ensure
that said placement of utilities and facilities does not inhibit the county's
ability to maintain, operate, and improve the county highway system, it is
hereby declared to be the policy of the county to regulate the placement,
removal, relocation, modification, or abandonment of utilities and facilities
within the rights-of-way of county highways through the rules, requirements,
and regulations established by this chapter and the specifications,
requirements and conditions contained in the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.101 UTILITY OR FACILITY PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit shall be required for the replacement, relocation, repair,
modification or removal of any existing utility or facility and any manner or
form of work relating to the construction or placement of a new utility or
facility within the right-of-way of any county highway. For all provisions of
this chapter, a single service connection permit shall be considered a utility
or facility permit. All work associated with a utility or facility to be placed
or already existing within the right-of-way of a county highway shall be
performed at no cost to the county.
   (B)   Any public utility company, municipal corporation, or other public or
non-public corporation, association or person may request permission to locate,
place or construct upon, under, or along any highway, utilities or facilities
provided that the entity receive written consent from the LCDOT in accordance
with this chapter. The LCDOT has the right to deny, on a non-discrimination
basis, any application for the placement of utilities or facilities for any
reasonable cause or for safety concerns when such placement would, in the
opinion of the LCDOT, be detrimental to current or future needs of the county
highway system.
   (C)   A permit for work relating to a utility or facility shall be valid for
a period not to exceed 18 months from the date of issuance and all rights
arising from or created by such issued permit shall expire and terminate if the
work contemplated under the permit has not been initiated. The County Engineer,
upon written request, may extend the term of a permit for such a period of time
as the County Engineer may determine. If the utility or facility work is to be
completed as part of an access permit, the proposed utility or facility shall
be included on the engineering plans submitted for that review process, but
shall be permitted separately with a utility or facility permit.
 
COMMENTARY:
Examples of types of utilities can include, but are not limited to, electric
lines, telephone lines, telecommunication lines, cable television lines, and
natural gas transmission lines. Examples of types of facilities can include,
but are not limited to, sidewalks, street lights, bike paths, storm sewers,
watermains, sanitary sewer lines, trees, and other municipal or government
owned facilities and general work performed within the right-of-way. Wireless
antenna installation are covered under the "Wireless Telecommunication
Facilities Ordinance".
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.102 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Highway purposes of county highways. The rights-of-way of county
highways are established for the location of highways and the highway
associated appurtenances. Utilities and facilities shall be located within such
rights-of-way in a manner that will not impede or conflict with any existing
highway or associated appurtenance or any future improvement or widening of a
highway and the construction or reconstruction of associated appurtenances. A
utility or facility is not considered a highway appurtenance.
   (B)   Relocation of existing utilities and facilities.
      (1)   Whenever a county highway pavement is widened, reconstructed,
resurfaced, or additional lanes are added and an existing utility or facility
will be under the widened pavement or traffic signal equipment, the owner of
the existing utility or facility or the permittee shall relocate, remove, or
modify the utility or facility from under the widened pavement at no cost to
the county. The County Engineer shall determine the need for said relocation,
removal, or modification on a case by case basis.
      (2)   Any and all additional or extraordinary costs that may be incurred
by the county due to the presence, abandonment, or proposed placement of any
utility or facility within the right-of-way of a county highway shall be borne
solely by the owner of said utility or facility. Payment to the county for said
additional or extraordinary costs shall be made as determined by the County
Engineer.
   (C)   Conflicts with existing utilities and facilities/insufficient space.
      (1)   In the event of the placement, construction, relocation, removal,
modification, abandonment, enlargement, or any manner of work to be performed
on any utility or facility, existing or proposed, within the right-of-way of a
county highway there does not exist sufficient space for said proposed work,
the county is not responsible for providing additional space in any manner or
form. In the event the County Engineer determines that there exists
insufficient space within the right-of-way of a county highway, the proposed
work may not be permitted.
      (2)   In the event a conflict exists between any existing or proposed
utilities or facilities located or proposed to be located within the right-of-
way of a county highway, said conflict shall be resolved by the owners of said
utilities or facilities. The resolution of any conflict shall not result in the
county incurring any costs, either now or in the future, and shall not impede
traffic or hinder the operation of the county highway. The resolution of any
conflict must be approved by the County Engineer if the proposed resolution
involves work to be performed within the right-of-way of a county highway.
   (D)   Other agency requirements and permission. The issuance of a permit
under the provisions of this chapter does not relieve, excuse, diminish, or
negate, in any manner or form, the authority, rules, requirements or permission
that may be required by any governmental authority or person that regulates any
manner of work to be performed on any utility or facility, existing or
proposed, within the right-of-way of a county highway. Prior to or subsequent
to the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the owner of
a utility or facility may be required to submit evidence of compliance with the
rules, regulations, and specifications of any other applicable regulatory
agency or person for the work to be performed within the right-of-way of a
county highway.
   (E)   Property owner's permission. The issuance of a permit under the
provisions of this chapter does not relieve the permittee from obtaining
permission from the legal property owner to locate the utility or facility on
any county highway where the right-of-way is in the form of an easement for
public road purposes and the county does not own the right-of-way. The rules,
regulations, and specifications of such permission shall not be in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter nor supersede, diminish, alter, or in any
manner or form, interfere with use of said easement for roadway purposes, nor
shall said permission result in any costs to the county either now or in the
future. Failure to obtain permission can be just cause not to issue a permit or
to suspend or revoke an issued permit.
   (F)   Locating utilities and facilities.
      (1)   The owner of any utility or facility located within the right-of-
way of a county highway shall upon written request determine the location of
its utility or facility as required by the County Engineer to facilitate design
engineering, construction, or maintenance work to be performed on a county
highway. Such locating may include, but are not limited to, exposing the
utility or facility and/or providing distance and depth measures.
      (2)   The locating of a utility or facility shall be performed within ten
working days of the receipt of the request of the County Engineer when
seasonally possible to do so within such timeframe and shall not result in
costs to the county due to delays in the design engineering, construction or
maintenance work contemplated by the county. This requirement to locate
utilities or facilities shall not be construed to be in conflict with damage
prevention efforts of the Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavation
(J.U.L.I.E) program, but a condition of any permit to construct and/or maintain
a utility or facility within a county highway right-of-way. Failure to respond
to such locating requests shall constitute a violation of this chapter, as
detailed in §
90.033.
   (G)   Participation in the J.U.L.I.E. The owner of any utility or facility
to be located within the right-of-way of a county highway shall be a member of
J.U.L.I.E. The only allowed exceptions to J.U.L.I.E. membership are the owners
of a single service connection for water or sanitary sewer within the county
highway right-of-way.
   (H)   Maintenance of utilities and facilities.
      (1)   The owner of a utility or facility located within the right-of-way
of a county highway shall be solely responsible for the use, operation, and
maintenance of the utility or facility. All work performed on a utility or
facility located within the right-of-way of a county highway shall be performed
at no cost to the county and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   In the event a utility or facility located within a right-of-way of
a county highway becomes a hazard or potential hazard, the owner of the utility
or facility shall immediately take the necessary steps to remedy and alleviate
the hazard or potential hazard, at no cost to the county. Said remedy shall not
alter, diminish, lessen, change, or in any manner or form, limit the use of a
right-of-way for roadway purposes.
      (3)   The owner of the existing utility or facility shall obtain a permit
to perform maintenance on the utility or facility located within the right-of-
way of a county highway. Permit and inspection fees may be waived for minor
maintenance work that does not substantially impact the county highway right-
of-way. The waiver of permit and inspection fees shall be at the discretion of
the County Engineer. All applicable fees under this chapter shall be paid by
the owner for any maintenance work that involves the open cutting of the county
highway pavement.
      (4)   Major maintenance. Major maintenance is the repair or inspection of
an existing utility or facility that requires substantial disturbance of the
county highway and/or right-of-way. Major maintenance or inspection work may
require excavation and roadway lane and shoulder closures. The County Engineer
shall determine whether the work constitutes major maintenance work.
 
COMMENTARY:
Examples of major maintenance can include, but are not limited to, replacing a
valve on an existing water main, replacing an existing utility pole, the
installation or cut off of a single residential service which involves
earthwork, and maintenance work that requires substantial earthwork or
excavation. Any planned maintenance work that requires the open cutting of the
county highway pavement shall be considered major maintenance.
 
      (5)   Minor maintenance. Minor maintenance is the repair or inspection of
an existing utility or facility that requires minimal disturbance of the county
highway right-of-way. The County Engineer shall determine whether the work
constitutes minor maintenance work.
 
COMMENTARY:
Examples of minor maintenance may include, but are not limited to aerial work
on existing utility lines, replacing sections of existing sidewalk in place,
resurfacing a municipal street within the county highway right-of-way,
televising or lining of an existing sewer without disturbing pavement, and
adjusting manholes without affecting county highway pavement.
 
   (H)   Emergency repair work.
      (1)   Emergency repair work may be performed on a utility or facility
located within a right-of-way of a county highway prior to obtaining a permit
to perform the work necessary to remedy the emergency situation. For all
emergencies, the LCDOT shall be notified immediately during business hours and
the Lake County Sheriff's Office shall be notified outside of normal business
hours. The emergency repair notification form, available in the Technical
Reference Manual, shall be submitted to the LCDOT within 24-hours of the
discovery of the emergency. The County Engineer shall determine whether a
permit is required for the work performed. A permit is required for all
pavement open cuts.
      (2)   Emergency repair work traffic control. When emergency work is
needed on the traveled portion of the roadway, immediate steps shall be taken
by the utility or facility company to provide all necessary protection for
traffic on the highway. Applicable traffic control standards in accordance with
the Technical Reference Manual shall be used at all times. The person in charge
shall notify the LCDOT Transportation Management Center (commonly named
PASSAGE) of any lane closure and when the lane re-opens. Any time a portion of
the county highway requires closure outside of normal business hours, the Lake
County Sheriff's Office shall be notified.
      (3)   Emergency work duration. The duration of the work under an
emergency situation by definition is considered 72 hours or less. This time
frame is meant to resolve the immediate emergency and temporary pavement may be
required as part of this job. The county highway shall be open to traffic as
soon as possible. All permanent restoration to pavement, shoulders and right-
of-way that was disturbed as the result of emergency work shall be completed
within one week of the completion of the emergency repair. Should the emergency
occur during the winter months, temporary restoration measures shall be
required until permanent restoration can be completed in the spring.
      (4)   Emergency work permit requirements. Performance of the emergency
repair work does not relieve the owner of the utility or facility of all other
applicable rules, regulations, and specifications, as set forth in this
chapter. A permit application for the emergency work shall be received by the
LCDOT no later than one week after the emergency had been identified.
   (I)   Pavement open cut requirements. Open cutting of pavements degrades the
pavement condition and creates the potential for increased future maintenance
costs. Due to this impact, open cutting of the pavement for any utility or
facility work is discouraged, and all efforts necessary shall be made by the
owner of a utility or facility to avoid open cutting of the pavement. If there
is no reasonable alternative to open-cutting, a request for open cut shall be
made in accordance with the processes and forms contained in the Technical
Reference Manual. No pavement open cuts shall be permitted between November 15
and April 15, except in the case of an emergency repair process.
   (J)   Service connections.
      (1)   The owner of a utility or facility located within the right-of-way
of a county highway shall be responsible for and repair, or cause to be
repaired, damage to any property of the county and shall restore any disturbed
county highway rights-of-way due to any service connections whether installed
by the owner, his or her authorized representative, or by others.
      (2)   Service connections for water service and sanitary sewer service
are allowed to be located within the right-of-way of the county highway
provided that the appropriate permit for said services has been issued and the
appropriate acceptance form has been signed. The LCDOT is not responsible for
re-establishing any service connections damaged by anyone performing work
within the county highway right-of-way.
   (K)   Abandoned utilities and facilities.
      (1)   The owner of any utility or facility shall be responsible for any
utilities and facilities remaining in the right-of-way that have been abandoned
or are no longer in use. This responsibility shall include the location and
removal or the cost of the removal of said utilities and/or facilities that are
in conflict with any highway improvement, construction, and/or maintenance
projects of the county and/or its agents. Should the highway pavement be
widened, the abandoned utility and/or facility shall be removed out from under
the proposed widened pavement or reconstructed at no cost to the county.
      (2)   The County Engineer may determine on a case by case basis that an
abandoned utility or facility may remain in place provided good and sufficient
reasons are presented to the County Engineer in writing by the owner of the
abandoned utility or facility. However, cost of said removal shall not be the
sole reason for a request to leave the abandoned utility or facility in place.
      (3)   Upon a determination by the County Engineer that an abandoned
utility or facility may remain in place, the County Engineer may set forth
conditions and requirements which shall include, but not be limited to, prompt
reimbursement of the county or its agents for costs incurred due to allowing
the abandoned utility or facility to remain in place or filling the abandoned
utility with suitable material to avoid future collapse or failures.
   (L)   Change in permittee status. The permittee shall promptly notify the
county of any actual or proposed change in status (including but not limited to
bankruptcy) or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of
the permittee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major
stockholders but also includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred
shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person, group of
persons, or group of persons jointly acquiring 5% or more of the voting shares
of the permittee. Said notification shall be in writing and sent to the County
Engineer within 30 days of the change in status.
   (M)   In addition to the rules, requirements, and regulations established by
this chapter and the specifications, requirements and conditions contained in
the Technical Reference Manual, utility requests that fall under the Small
Wireless Facilities Deployment Act shall follow the rules, requirements, and
regulations established by the Lake County Small Wireless Telecommunication
Facilities in Public Rights-Of-Ways Ordinance.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.103 BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES.
   (A)   It is the policy of Lake County to encourage travel by pedestrian and
bicycle facilities. Pedestrian and bicycle facilities should be integral to the
transportation facilities of adjacent neighborhoods and development with access
across the county highway rights-of-way at acceptable locations as determined
by the LCDOT.
   (B)   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities to be constructed along a county
highway may be located in easements outside of the right-of-way of the county
highway or may be located within the right-of-way if the local agency accepts
maintenance responsibility for the facility and sufficient area exists to meet
appropriate design standards. The county reserves the right to reject requests
for permitting of bicycle and pedestrian facilities where insufficient area
exists or where installation of such facilities would create a potential for
unsafe conditions.
   (C)   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities permitted under this chapter shall
not be maintained by the county. The permittee for such facilities must be a
municipal or local agency with sufficient financial and operational resources
to properly maintain and operate said facilities in a manner satisfactory to
the county.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
SPECIAL EVENT POLICIES
§ 90.120 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The County Engineer, in accordance with 605 ILCS 5/5-414 et seq. as
amended, may issue a permit to temporarily close any portion of a county
highway for any public purpose. Temporary closure of a highway for purpose of
special events of public interest and filming shall be authorized by issuance
of a special event permit.
   (B)   Temporary closures for emergency repairs, natural disasters, or other
emergency conditions are exempt from these requirements.
 
COMMENTARY:
Examples of special events can include, but are not limited to, parades,
marathons, festivals, other special events of public interest and filming for a
movie, television, commercial, or documentary.
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.121 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A special event permit is required for any activity on county highway
right-of-way which impacts or has the potential to impact the traveling public.
Municipal corporations, governmental agencies, or a person or business may
apply for a special event permit. Contact with the LCDOT shall be made by the
applicant in the early stage of the event's planning process, a minimum of 30
days prior to the planned event.
   (B)   Temporary closure of a county highway classified as a designated
freeway, principal arterial, or arterial, may require additional conditions of
approval including, but not limited to, significant coordination with local and
regional emergency service agencies, preparation of a detour plan, notification
of media outlets, placement of changeable message signs on the route prior to
the closure, etc.
   (C)   Route alternatives may have to be considered by the applicant should a
portion of the county highway intended for an event be under construction at
the time of the event.
   (D)   Procedure and requirements for special event permit application are
outlined in the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.122 TRAFFIC CONTROL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Temporary closure of a county highway for a special event will only be
permitted if a suitable detour or alternate route exists which will not overly
delay the motoring public, as determined by the LCDOT. Traffic control
requirements are outlined in the Lake County Highway Permits Technical
Reference Manual.
   (B)   The permittee, not the LCDOT, shall be responsible for advance
notification of temporary closures, the detour route, traffic control,
including signage and police/sheriff presence or assistance if required. The
LCDOT has the authority to require that the permittee have police or sheriff's
presence during the highway closure.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.123 ACCESS FOR EMERGENCY SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   Provisions must be made to allow for safe passage of emergency vehicles
through the closed portion of highway. Written approvals may be required from
emergency service providers if deemed necessary by the LCDOT.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.124 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of a special event permit, the permittee shall
provide the LCDOT with acceptable proof of insurance. Indemnification
requirements are outlined in the Technical Reference Manual.
   (B)   The permittee shall be responsible for cleaning and maintaining the
right-of-way of the county highway during and following the event. In the event
that the permittee fails to remove any debris, litter, signs, or other
appurtenances that were temporarily in place during the closure, upon cessation
of the temporary closure, the LCDOT reserves the right, but does not have the
duty to, perform those activities necessary to remove any debris, litter,
signs, or other appurtenances that were temporarily in place during the closure
without advance notification and bill the permittee for said costs.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.125 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The LCDOT reserves the right to require the cessation of all activity and
removal of the temporary closure if any of the requirements of this chapter or
additional regulations, requirements and conditions imposed by the permit have
not taken place or if the traffic control requirements are not in accordance
with the requirements of the permit.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 90.140 NOTIFICATION OF UTILITY COMPANIES.
   The County, all utility companies, and J.U.L.I.E. must be notified before
construction work commences within the required J.U.L.I.E. notification time
frame. It shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee to have all
underground facilities located prior to the commencement of any construction.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.141 COMMENCEMENT OF WORK.
   No work requested under the provisions of this chapter shall commence until
such time as a permit is issued by LCDOT.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.142 NORMAL AND ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF COUNTY HIGHWAYS.
   All normal and routine maintenance performed by the LCDOT on county highways
shall take precedence over and supersede all construction, maintenance,
placement, removal, relocation, modification, and use of county highway rights-
of-way as governed by this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.143 MODIFICATION TO PLANS.
   Any modifications to engineering plans after LCDOT has approved them but
prior to permit issuance must be submitted and approved by the LCDOT prior to
construction.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.144 ACCESS TO HIGHWAYS WITH CURB AND GUTTER.
   (A)   Before an access-related improvement is constructed on a curbed
highway, the existing curb and gutter shall be completely removed within the
access location area. The curb-cut shall be of sufficient width to accommodate
the required access width and curb returns, as well as the full length of any
turning lane and approach treatments that are being installed.
   (B)   Depressed curb and gutter shall be reinstalled at minor access
driveways and may be required at other access types.
 
COMMENTARY:
Removing only the back of a curb and paving over the broken curb section is not
acceptable, since this practice results in an exposed face that is highly
susceptible to spalling or raveling. On highways with mountable curbs, it is
not acceptable to simply pave to the back of the curbing and require motorists
to drive over the curbing.
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.145 WORK ZONE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Appropriate measures shall be taken by the permittee to prevent and
protect the public from any hazards or potential hazards caused by or the
result of any work permitted under this chapter.
   (B)   Traffic control and protection for the safety of the traveling public
in accordance with the Technical Reference Manual and approved engineering
plans shall be in place through the duration of the work. County highway
pavements shall not be broken, cracked, or damaged in any manner or form as a
result of the permitted work. Any dirt, mud, dust, or any form of debris shall
be removed from the highway pavement in a reasonable time frame, or upon
notification by LCDOT.
   (C)   Equipment with grouser pads, cleats, or studs shall not be operated or
allowed on any highway pavement.
   (D)   In the event the permittee violates the rules, regulations, or
specifications of this chapter, the Technical Reference Manual, or the approved
permit documents and refuses to remedy the violation, the County Engineer may,
but has no duty to, order the work to be done to correct the violation. The
permittee shall reimburse the county at a rate not to exceed 130% of the costs
incurred by the county and shall cease all work being performed until such time
as reimbursement has been made and alternate construction methods acceptable to
the County Engineer are approved.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.146 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Traffic control and protection measures are required during
construction. A traffic control plan shall be included within the engineering
plans and specifications submitted to the LCDOT. Should adequate traffic
control measures not be in place, a representative of the LCDOT has the
authority, but not the duty, to halt the construction until such time as the
traffic control measures are corrected.
   (B)   The first infraction will result in the halting of construction until
such time as traffic control measures are corrected. The second infraction will
result in the halting of construction for the remainder of that day. Traffic
control measures must be established prior to the start of the next workday.
Should there be a third infraction, the permit shall be revoked and there shall
be a meeting with the permittee, resident engineer/person in charge, and LCDOT
to discuss what measures will be taken to reinstate the permit.
   (C)   The LCDOT shall have the ability to assess a fine in accordance with §
90.033 of this chapter for any infraction of traffic control requirements.
   (D)   The resident engineer/person in charge shall notify the LCDOT
Transportation Management Center (commonly named PASSAGE), of any upcoming lane
closures (24 hours prior) and immediately when the lane is re-opened to
traffic. Closures of a travel lane for permitted work will only be allowed
between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on weekdays. Exceptions to this policy may be
granted by the LCDOT Engineer of Traffic on a case by case basis through the
permit review process. Temporary closures for emergency repairs, natural
disasters, or other emergency conditions are exempt from these requirements.
   (E)   Parking or storage of vehicles, materials, or equipment within the
county right-of-way will not be allowed unless otherwise specified in the
permit documents.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.147 RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Permittee. Regardless of contracts, agreements, or inspections
performed, the responsibility for the installed improvements required by this
chapter shall rest solely with the permittee.
   (B)   Permittee's person in charge/resident engineer.
      (1)   The permittee shall provide a person in charge of construction and
inspection of the permit work. For some access permits, the person in charge
shall be a full-time resident engineer, licensed in the State of Illinois. Said
person in charge shall have the appropriate training and experience to ensure
the quality of construction of all aspects of the project. The person in charge
shall be present at all times during critical phases of the construction and
shall transmit weekly progress reports to the LCDOT Permit Department. He or
she shall prepare all construction reports on said construction in accordance
with the Motor Fuel Tax (MFT) guidelines for such reports as required by the
Illinois Department of Transportation.
      (2)   The person in charge or their designated surveyor shall be
responsible for establishing the proper lines and grades for all earthwork,
paving, drainage facilities, and locations of all pavement markings. The person
in charge shall be responsible for all other engineering work and inspection.
At the completion of the improvements, as required by this chapter, the person
in charge shall certify in writing to the LCDOT that all work and improvements
have been completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the
Technical Reference Manual and the approved engineering plans and
specifications. The person in charge shall provide a 24-hour contact number.
      (3)   The LCDOT may at any time require a written report on inspections
made by the person in charge. Construction work shall be subject to inspection
and testing at all times by the LCDOT.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.148 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Construction of permitted work required by this chapter shall be in
accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications as set forth in this
chapter and the Technical Reference Manual.
      (2)   The construction of any improvements, utility or facility work
within the right-of-way shall not commence until a permit is issued.
      (3)   The construction of improvements or utility/facility work must
begin and end within time frames identified in the Technical Reference Manual,
or as identified on the issued permit. These time periods may be extended by
the County Engineer upon receipt of a written request detailing sufficient
cause.
   (B)   Field modifications. During the construction phase, the person in
charge shall note any conditions or unforeseen circumstances that may involve
departures from the approved engineering plans and specifications. The person
in charge must request in writing to the LCDOT the approval to depart from the
approved engineering plans and specifications. Revised plan sheets shall
accompany the written request.
   (C)   Maintenance during construction.
      (1)   Emergency action by LCDOT. If any emergency repairs or actions are
required of the LCDOT on a county highway due to construction of permitted work
as approved by this chapter, the LCDOT may perform but does not have the duty
to perform such emergency repairs or actions and charge the permittee for all
the costs associated with such work. The person in charge shall be present for
such emergency repairs and shall be responsible for any changes or
modifications necessary in the traffic control.
      (2)   Debris removal.
         (a)   The permittee shall be responsible for cleaning and maintaining
the right-of-way of the county highway. Storm sewers and drains shall be kept
free of debris, trash, and other extraneous material at all times. The pavement
surface shall be kept clean and free of mud, gravel, debris, trash, and other
extraneous material at all times. Should the permittee fail to keep the
pavement clean or the drainage functioning properly, the county shall have the
right, but not the duty, to clean the pavement and restore drainage to maintain
a safe and passable highway. The permittee shall be responsible for all costs
incurred by the county for said cleaning.
         (b)   Persistent failure by the permittee to comply with this section
will result in LCDOT revoking the permit and taking any action necessary to
keep the pavement clean and drainage functioning properly. Should the permit be
revoked, there shall be a meeting with the permittee, person in charge, and
LCDOT to discuss what measures will be taken to reinstate the permit.
      (3)   Damage to utilities and facilities. Any damage caused to any
utilities or facilities during construction shall be repaired at the
permittee's expense to the satisfaction of the authority owning such utility or
facility. The LCDOT shall be notified immediately after notification of the
owner of the utility or facility, that damage has occurred. The permittee shall
present to the LCDOT an outline of the steps to be taken to repair the utility
or facility.
      (4)   Winter maintenance.
         (a)   No construction authorized by permit issued by the county
involving the widening of a county highway will be allowed to commence after
October 1. Construction may resume when the asphalt plants open the following
spring. No construction activities will be allowed within the county highway
right-of-way during active snow or ice removal.
         (b)   Prior to the suspension of construction for the winter months,
the permittee shall contact the LCDOT. The LCDOT shall perform a field
inspection to identify any potential winter maintenance problems. The permittee
shall correct any problems identified by the LCDOT to the satisfaction of the
LCDOT. The permittee shall be solely responsible for all costs to correct any
problems identified by the LCDOT.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.149 RESTORATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Upon completion of the work permitted under this chapter, all disturbed
areas of the right-of-way shall be restored to the original condition or
better. Said restoration shall include any special landscaping or enhanced
areas that existed in the right-of-way prior to the commencement of the
permitted work. For larger projects, restoration work shall be completed as
areas are backfilled and rough graded.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.150 AS-BUILT ENGINEERING PLANS.
   As-built drawings depicting actual construction shall be required for some
permit types, as identified in the Technical Reference Manual. These drawings
shall show any deviations from the approved engineering plans referenced in the
permit. The as-built drawings shall be submitted in digital format. As-built
drawings shall be the sole and exclusive property of the LCDOT. In the absence
of as-built engineering plans of acceptable survey level detail, the county may
request locating, in accordance with §
90.102(F) of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.151 FINAL INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   Upon written notification by the permittee, the resident engineer or
the person in charge that the construction has been completed, including the
submission of all required reports, the LCDOT shall perform a final inspection.
Prior to final approval and acceptance by the LCDOT, the permittee shall
correct any deficiencies noted by the LCDOT and provide one set of electronic
as-builts for the LCDOT records, if required by permit type.
   (B)   At such time as all work has been done to the complete satisfaction of
the LCDOT and the maintenance guarantee provided, the performance guarantee
shall be released.
   (C)   Unless otherwise approved by the LCDOT, final inspections for release
of the performance or maintenance guarantee shall not be performed prior to May
1 nor later than November 1 in any year.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES, AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
§ 90.170 REQUIRED PRIOR TO PERMIT.
   Prior to the issuance of any permit for work to occur within a county
highway right-of-way, the permittee shall provide sufficient financial
guarantees and evidence of insurance to safeguard claims against the county for
such work. Depending on the type and magnitude of the work, the financial
guarantees shall consist of both performance and maintenance guarantees.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.171 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
   (A)   An acceptable performance guarantee to protect the county highway
system and ensure compliance with this chapter shall be provided prior to the
issuance of a permit as provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   The performance guarantee shall be an irrevocable letter of credit for
the following permit types:
      (1)   Major access (or major temporary access).
      (2)   Designated freeway access.
      (3)   Utility or facility permit which includes crossing underneath
pavement of any county highway.
      (4)   Utility or facility permit which requires any open cut of county
highway pavement.
   (C)   The performance guarantee shall be in the form of a cash bond,
irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond for all other types of permits.
   (D)   The County Engineer shall be and is hereby authorized to act for the
county in all matters relating to performance guarantees. The County Engineer
may, upon receipt of written application from a property owner substantiating
good and reasonable cause, waive this requirement for certain minor, minimum
access, special event or facility permits. The performance guarantee must
contain the permit application number or the project name and county highway
name on the guarantee.
   (E)   The amount and length of term of the performance guarantee shall be as
identified in the Technical Reference Manual, based on the permit type.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.172 IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT.
   Every irrevocable letter of credit provided pursuant to this section shall
be from a bank acceptable to the County Engineer having capital resources of at
least $50,000,000 and being insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. Each irrevocable letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide
that (i) it shall expire no earlier than 18 months after the date of issuance
and, in no event, until 60 days after written notification of such expiration
has been given by the issuing bank to the LCDOT; and (ii) it shall not require
the consent of the permittee prior to any draw on it by the LCDOT. The format
and language of the irrevocable letter of credit shall be determined by the
County Engineer as advised by the State's Attorney.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.173 CASH BOND.
   All cash bonds posted shall be made payable to the Lake County Treasurer and
shall be submitted to the County Engineer. The type of cash bond provided may
be a cashier's check, bank draft, certified check, or bank money order. A
certificate of deposit is not acceptable. The County Engineer may deposit a
cash bond with the Lake County Treasurer. No interest shall be paid on any such
cash bond so deposited.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.174 SURETY BOND.
   All surety bonds shall be issued by a surety or insurance company authorized
by the Illinois Department of Insurance to sell and issue sureties in the State
of Illinois. The discharge of the surety under all surety bonds shall be
conditioned upon the completion of the permitted work and restoration of the
county right-of-way to its original condition or better within the specified
time period of the permit, in strict conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and any permit issued hereunder. Said surety bonds shall be payable to
the Lake County Treasurer and shall be submitted to the County Engineer and
shall be of a term of a minimum of 18 months. The format and language of the
surety bond shall be determined by the County Engineer as advised by the
State's Attorney.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.175 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE AMOUNTS AND LENGTH OF TERM.
   (A)   The County Engineer shall establish performance guarantee policies
showing the items and costs used to determine performance guarantee amounts and
the length of the term of the performance guarantee. Such items shall reflect
the costs needed to restore the right-of-way of the county highway to its
original conditions or better. Additional costs may be added to insure
completion of the work permitted under this chapter.
   (B)   The length of the term for performance guarantees shall be the amount
of time required to complete the permitted work and restoration work plus any
additional time to ascertain any problems with the permitted work and
restoration work. In no case shall the length of the term for the performance
guarantee be less than 18 months.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.176 DEFAULT.
   If the permittee fails to perform the work with sufficient work force and
equipment or with sufficient materials to insure the completion of said work
within the specified time, or performs the work unsuitably as determined by the
County Engineer, or neglects or refuses materials or performs any such work as
shall be rejected as defective and unsuitable, or discontinues the execution of
the work, or for any other cause whatsoever does not carry on the work in an
approved manner, the County Engineer shall give notice to the permittee and the
permittee's bank or surety, if any, of such delinquency. Said notice shall
specify the corrective measures required. After said notice, the County
Engineer shall draw on the performance guarantee to have the work completed in
accordance with the terms of this chapter, the permit, and the performance
guarantee. The County Engineer shall deliver any funds drawn upon to the Lake
County Treasurer and request deposit in the appropriate fund. The LCDOT may
then take over the work, including use of any or all materials or equipment on
the ground as may be suitable and acceptable and may complete the work with any
such other methods as, shall be required for the completion of the work in an
acceptable manner.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.177 MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Improvements.
      (1)   A maintenance guarantee, if required by the LCDOT, shall be
submitted by the permittee to the County Engineer upon satisfactory completion
of all improvements and release of the performance guarantee. The term of the
maintenance guarantee shall be for two years following completion, approval,
and acceptance of the improvements. All failures that occur during the two-year
period shall be corrected by the permittee and restored to a satisfactory
condition, subject to the approval of the County Engineer. The amount of the
maintenance guarantee shall, at a minimum, equal 15% of the original amount of
the performance guarantee. This requirement may be waived upon review by the
County Engineer if deemed unnecessary. The County Engineer shall be, and is
hereby authorized to act for the county in all matters relating to maintenance
guarantees.
      (2)   A maintenance guarantee shall be in the form of an irrevocable
letter of credit for all major access, including any major temporary access, or
designated freeway access. All maintenance guarantees shall be payable to the
Lake County Treasurer, delivered to LCDOT and originate from a bank or surety/
insurance company that satisfies the requirements of §
90.172.
   (B)   Default. If the permittee fails to restore to satisfactory condition
the pavement or other improvements, within the specified time, or shall perform
the work unsuitably as determined by the County Engineer, or for any other
cause whatsoever shall not carry on the restoration in a suitable manner, the
County Engineer shall give notice to the permittee and the permittee's bank or
surety, if any. Said notice shall specify the corrective measures involved. If
the permittee, within a period of ten days after said notice, does not proceed
in accordance therewith, the County Engineer shall draw on the maintenance
guarantee to have the work completed in accordance with this chapter, the
permit, and the terms of the maintenance guarantee. The County Engineer shall
deliver any funds drawn upon to the Lake County Treasurer and request deposit
in the appropriate fund.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.178 ESCROW ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   In case future improvements to the county highway may be necessary as
the result of construction of an access-related improvement, the County
Engineer may require that funds for said future improvements be deposited with
the Lake County Treasurer in escrow to pay such costs. The permittee shall be
responsible for all costs of a future improvement to a county highway as a
result of an issued access permit. The parties shall proceed as described in §
90.068(C) of this chapter.
   (B)   The amount to be in the escrow shall be equal to the current estimated
cost of the improvement plus 30% of the cost for the county to administer the
improvement. A cashier's check, bank draft, certified check, or bank money
order in the amount equal to 130% of the current estimate of costs of the
improvement shall be made payable to the Lake County Treasurer and shall be
submitted to the County Engineer for deposit in an escrow account to be used
only for the improvement specified. A certificate of deposit shall not be
acceptable.
   (C)   If, within a period of six years from the date of the issuance of an
access permit, the funds deposited in the escrow account, as well as any
interest income earned during that time, have not been used to pay for the
specified improvement, the funds in the escrow account, plus any interest
income earned, shall be returned to the permittee and any further obligation of
the permittee for the specified improvement shall be terminated.
   (D)   The period of time, as specified herein, may be extended upon the
written approval of the County Engineer and the owner.
 
COMMENTARY:
An example of a future improvement requiring escrow funding could be a staged
or phased development over a period of several years. The traffic impact study
may show that a traffic signal is not currently warranted but would be
warranted as subsequent development stages or phases are completed.
 
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
§ 90.179 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Proof of insurance for all forms of insurance required by this chapter
shall be provided to the LCDOT prior to the issuance of a permit. This
insurance is to provide protection against all claims for damage to public or
private property, and injuries to persons, arising out of and during the
progress of the permitted work to its completion. The certificate of insurance
must include the permit number or the project name and county highway location
on the certificate. All parties working within the ROW shall be required to
provide proof of insurance.
   (B)   The County Engineer shall determine the minimum acceptable amounts for
the following types of insurance: (1) bodily injury liability and (2) property
damage liability. There shall be no restrictions on occurrence limits. The
County Engineer may, at his or her sole and exclusive discretion, upon receipt
of written application from the permittee substantiating good and reasonable
cause, allow the indemnification to be provided by someone other than the
permittee for a single family homeowner, not for profit organization, or local
agency. The Technical Reference Manual provides detailed information on these
limits and all other insurance requirements not specified in this chapter.
   (C)   The certificate(s) shall contain a provision that coverages afforded
under the policies will not be canceled or non-renewed, and that restrictive
modification cannot be added until at least 30 days after written notice has
been given to the LCDOT. A mere intent to notify the LCDOT of cancellation is
not acceptable. The permittee shall cease, or cause to be ceased, operations,
work, and construction of an improvement if the insurance is canceled or
reduced below the required minimum amount of coverage as determined by the
County Engineer.
   (D)   Insurance coverages which are to remain in force and effect after
completion of the construction will require an additional certificate(s)
evidencing continuation of such coverages.
   (E)   Such additional certificate(s) shall be submitted upon completion and
acceptance of the construction improvements and upon one year thereafter. If
any information concerning reduction of coverage is not furnished by the
insurer, it shall be furnished by the permittee with reasonable promptness in
accordance with the permittee's information and belief. Any acceptance of proof
of insurance by the LCDOT shall in no way limit or relieve the permittee of the
duties and responsibilities assumed by the owner. Acceptance of insurance
certificates not in compliance with the provisions of these requirements by
LCDOT shall not affect or constitute a waiver of these requirements.
(Ord. 19-1061, passed 7-9-2019)
CHAPTER 91: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
   
91.001 through 91.199 Reserved
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
   
91.200   Title
   
91.201   Enabling statute
   
91.202   Definitions
   
91.203   Regulations and standards
   
91.204   Permitting requirements
   
91.205   Permit fees
   
91.206   Adjustments or relocations of wireless telecommunication facilities
   
91.207   Damage to wireless telecommunications facility
   
91.208   Damage to county infrastructure or property
   
91.209   Variance requirements
   
91.210   Abandonment and removal
   
91.211   County wireless telecommunication facilities
   
91.212   No implied warranties
   
91.213   Hold harmless agreement
 
   
91.999   Penalty
§§ 91.001 through 91.199 RESERVED.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
§ 91.200 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be referred to as the “Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities Ordinance.”
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.201 ENABLING STATUTE.
   The legislature passed Public Act 100-0585, the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act (hereinafter “the Act”), enabling Lake County to pass an
ordinance to adopt rates, fees and terms which comply with the Act for the
collocation of small wireless facilities within the county’s rights-of-way. All
definitions, terms and conditions of the Act are incorporated herein and made a
part hereof without the necessity of repeating all definitions, terms and
conditions. To implement a clear, simplified permitting process, the county is
reiterating some, but not all, of the provisions from the Act. The fact that a
provision from the Act is not specifically listed in this subchapter does not
impact its legal effect. If applicable federal or state laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this subchapter, the wireless provider shall
comply with the requirements of this subchapter to the maximum extent possible
without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   Since the Lake County Highway Temporary Closure and Utility and Facility
Placement Ordinance does not sufficiently address the collocation of small
wireless facilities, and the legislature has enacted specific terms which apply
only to small wireless companies who request to locate small wireless
facilities within the county rights-of-way, the county is enacting this new
subchapter, the Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Ordinance.
   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this subchapter regarding
the siting and installation of wireless telecommunication facilities are more
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other local
law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the regulations of this
subchapter shall govern.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.202 DEFINITIONS.
   All terms from the Lake County Highway Temporary Closure and Utility and
Facility Placement Ordinance shall be applicable to this subchapter unless
otherwise stated. In the event there is a conflict between the Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities Ordinance and the Lake County Highway Temporary
Closure and Utility and Facility Placement Ordinance, the Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities Ordinance shall govern. As used in this
subchapter, the subsequent terms shall have the following meanings:
   ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE. An existing pole or other structure within
the public right-of-way that can be used to support an antenna and is not a
county-owned infrastructure.
   COUNTY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE. Streetlights and traffic signals owned,
operated and maintained by Lake County and within the public right-of-way.
   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS). A type of wireless telecommunication
facility consisting of a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected
to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within
a geographic area.
   LANDSCAPE SCREENING. The installation at grade of plantings, shrubbery,
bushes or other foliage intended to screen ground mounted wireless
telecommunication equipment from public view.
   PROVIDER. Excludes any person who is providing service to or for a private
niche market.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed in the State of Illinois as a
professional structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the
Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989.
   STRUCTURE. Includes alternative antenna structure and county-owned
infrastructure as herein defined, collectively.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy
towers, or monopole towers.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by the County Engineer or designee from specific
limitations of this subchapter.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a non-discriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA. An antenna that is part of a wireless
telecommunications facility.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT. Equipment, exclusive of an antenna,
that is part of a wireless telecommunications facility.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. An antenna, equipment, and related
improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide publicly accessible
wireless transmission of voice, data, images, or other information including,
but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication service,
paging, and Wi-Fi antenna service.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.203 REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be permitted to be placed in
public rights-of-way as attachments to existing alternative antenna structures
or county-owned infrastructure or as an attachment to a new alternative antenna
structure subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   Siting of wireless telecommunication facilities. When deciding where
to install wireless telecommunication facilities, wireless services providers
shall take into consideration the surrounding and adjacent land uses and make
every effort to avoid siting wireless telecommunication facilities at or near
properties with high frequency outdoor usage such as parks, schools,
recreational facilities, etc.
   (B)   New alternative antenna structures. With respect to the application
for the installation of a wireless telecommunication facility on a new
alternative antenna structure, the county may propose that the wireless
telecommunication facility be collocated on an existing alternative antenna
structure within 100 feet of the proposed installation, which the applicant
will accept if it has the right to use the alternate antenna structure on
reasonable terms and conditions and the alternate location and structure does
not impose technical limits or unreasonable additional material costs as
determined by the applicant. The applicant shall provide a written
certification describing any property rights, technical limits or material
costs as reasons that the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in
this paragraph.
   (C)   Signage. Identification signage shall be affixed onto each wireless
telecommunication facility identifying the wireless services provider, contact
phone number and unique identifier. Installation of other signs on a wireless
telecommunication facility shall be prohibited, unless they are for warning
labels or otherwise are required by law or regulations.
   (D)   Frequency interference. The wireless services provider’s operation of
the wireless telecommunication facilities in the rights-of-way shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by the county’s public safety or roadway
facility communications, including, but not limited to, streetlight and traffic
signal transmissions. In the event that an interference with the frequencies
used by the county’s public safety or roadway facility communications is
detected, at any time, the wireless services provider is required to, at its
own expense, either: (i) reconfigure or filter its antenna system’s
transmissions or frequency; or (ii) cease transmitting/receiving from said
unit; or (iii) remove the entirety of the installation immediately upon
notification of said interference. In the event a relocation is required, the
wireless services provider will be required to apply for a new wireless
telecommunication facility permit under the terms of this subchapter.
   (E)   Attachment limitations. No wireless telecommunication antenna or
facility shall be attached to an alternative antenna structure or county-owned
infrastructure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   Height requirements. The maximum height of a wireless
telecommunication antenna attached to a structure is limited to ten feet above
the structure on which the wireless telecommunication antenna is collocated.
The height of a new or replacement structure on which wireless
telecommunication facilities are collocated shall be limited to the higher of:
         (a)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing structure, other
than a tower supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date
the application is submitted to the county, that is located within 300 feet of
the new or replacement structure and that is in the same rights-of-way within
the jurisdictional boundary of the county according to a survey completed by
the applicant of all existing structure heights and locations; or
         (b)   Forty-five feet above ground level.
      (2)   Antenna size. The wireless telecommunication antenna, including
antenna panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped antennas, shall be located inside
an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an
antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet.
Applicant shall provide written proof by way of design drawings and details at
time of application submittal that show the volume limitation has been met.
      (3)   Equipment volume of above-ground wireless telecommunication
facility. The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and
appurtenances comprising a wireless telecommunication facility, exclusive of
the antenna itself, shall not cumulatively exceed 25 cubic feet in volume. The
following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunication demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services. Applicant shall provide written
proof by way of design drawings and details at time of application submittal
that show the volume limitation has been met.
      (4)   Mounting requirements. The base of the equipment, antenna or
appurtenances of a wireless telecommunication facility collocated on a
structure shall be located no lower than ten feet above grade and at a location
and height that meets the requirements of the American Disabilities Act (ADA)
and the clearances set forth in the Public Rights-of-Way Accessibility
Guidelines (PROWAG) or the subsequent regulations on accessibility in public
rights-of-way. Collocation on county-owned infrastructure shall also not
interfere with or obscure existing traffic control devices including signal
heads and signage. For traffic signals or street lights, no elements of a
wireless telecommunication facility shall be mounted onto the signal mast arm
or lighting luminaire arm.
      (5)   Landscape screening. In the event that a wireless telecommunication
facility is proposed to be installed at grade, landscape screening shall be
installed to minimize the visibility of the wireless telecommunication
facility, at the discretion of the county.
      (6)   Wiring and cabling. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the
remainder of the facility shall be installed in accordance with the version of
the National Electric Code and National Electrical Safety Code in effect at the
time of application. In no event shall wiring and cabling serving the facility
interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television or video
service operator, electric utility or telephone utility. The applicant shall be
required to provide written sign-off by each owner/operator that a proposed
collocation will not adversely impact their existing facilities. Said sign-offs
must be provided at the time of application submittal. The applicant shall
obtain necessary inspections of power service cabling required by local
agencies.
      (7)   Grounding. The wireless telecommunication facility shall be
grounded in accordance with the requirements of the most current edition of the
National Electrical Code currently in effect. The applicant shall obtain
necessary inspections of grounding installations required by local agencies.
      (8)   Guy wires. No guy or other support wires shall be used in
connection with a wireless telecommunication facility unless the facility is
proposed to be attached to an existing structure that incorporated guy wires
prior to the date that an applicant has applied for a permit.
      (9)   Pole extensions. Extensions to structures utilized for the purpose
of collocating a wireless telecommunication antenna and its related wireless
telecommunication equipment shall be fabricated from material similar to the
structure and shall have a degree of strength capable of supporting the antenna
and any related appurtenances and cabling and capable of withstanding wind
forces and ice loads in accordance with the structural loading standards set
forth as noted below. An extension shall be securely bound to the structure in
accordance with applicable engineering standards for the design and attachment
of such extensions.
      (10)   Structural loading. The wireless telecommunication facility,
including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment shall be
designed to withstand wind forces and ice loads in accordance with applicable
standards established in Chapter 25 of the National Electric Safety Code for
structures, Rule 250-B and 250-C standards governing wind, ice, and loading
forces on structures, in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in
TIA/EIA Section 222-G established by the Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel
structures and the applicable industry standard for other existing structures.
The applicant shall provide the county with a structural evaluation of each
specific location affirming that the proposed installation passes the standards
described above. The evaluation shall be prepared by a professional structural
engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.
      (11)   Electrical disconnect. The wireless telecommunication facility
shall include an electrical service disconnect switch to allow county personnel
and agents to shut off power in the event of an incident or other abnormal
condition. The switch shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the wireless
telecommunication facility and accessible to county and emergency response
personnel without restriction.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.204 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Applications for the collocation or installation of wireless
telecommunication facilities shall be required to include the following.
   (A)   General permitting requirements.
      (1)   A site specific structural integrity analysis prepared by a
professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.
      (2)   An exhibit showing the location where each proposed wireless
telecommunication facility would be installed.
      (3)   A line-of-sight analysis to ensure that wireless telecommunications
equipment, either pole or ground mounted, does not obscure the safe visibility
of/by motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.
      (4)   Photographs taken within six months of application submittal of the
location and its immediate surroundings depicting the land uses and structure
(s) on which each proposed wireless telecommunication facility would be
mounted.
      (5)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, for
each proposed wireless telecommunication facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed, with height and offset dimensions shown as well
as volumetrics (cubic feet) of each of the wireless telecommunication facility
components.
      (6)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
wireless telecommunication facility covered by the application, if approved.
      (7)   Certification that the collocation complies to the best of the
applicant’s knowledge, with the frequency interference requirements in §
91.203(D).
      (8)   Restoration. Upon completion of the work authorized by permit under
this subchapter, all disturbed or damaged areas of the right-of-way shall be
restored to their original condition or better. Said restoration shall include,
but is not limited to, repairs to shoulders, ditches, parkways, curbs, and
pavements and/or any special landscaping, hardscaping, or enhanced areas that
existed in the rights-of-way prior to the commencement of the permitted work.
The County shall bear no responsibility for costs associated with such
restoration. A performance guarantee, per the Lake County Highway Temporary
Closure and Utility and Facility Placement Ordinance, shall be required for
applications requiring ground disturbance. A performance guarantee for all
applications shall be in the form of a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit,
or surety bond. The County Engineer shall be and is hereby authorized to act
for the county in all matters relating to the performance guarantees. The
County Engineer may, upon receipt of written application substantiating good
and reasonable cause, waive this requirement for facilities. This waiver shall
be at the discretion of the County Engineer except that “good and reasonable
cause” shall not include financial or banking difficulties. The term for the
performance guarantee shall not be less than 18 months.
      (9)   Service connections. Other related improvements including, but not
limited to, buried electrical service, and buried fiber optic or cable
connections that are needed to service the wireless telecommunication facility
and are installed within county rights-of-way beyond the physical pole or
structure require additional and separate permits. These types of connections
shall be applied for concurrently by the respective utility provider supplying
that service or connection.
      (10)   Insurance coverage. A Certificate of Insurance meeting the
coverage limits and insurance company ratings, as specified in the Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, shall be submitted, at no
cost to the county, and shall name “Lake County, the Lake County Division of
Transportation, its elected and appointed officials, its employees and agents”
as additional insured parties. The Certificate shall also include proof of
Evidence of Worker’s Compensation Insurance coverage. The insurance shall
include commercial general liability insurance with respect to the wireless
provider’s activities to afford minimum protection limits consistent with the
county’s requirements of other users of county rights-of-ways, including
coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
   (B)   County-owned infrastructure.
      (1)   Pole attachment agreement. In addition to the required permit, a
separate pole attachment agreement between the wireless services provider and
the county is required prior to the county authorizing the placement of
wireless telecommunication facilities on county-owned infrastructure.
      (2)   Replacement of county- owned infrastructure. If the county
determines that applicable codes or public safety requires the county’s
infrastructure to be replaced to support the requested collocation, the county
shall require the wireless services provider to replace the county’s
infrastructure at no cost to the county. If the proposed installation requires
replacement of the county’s infrastructure, no property rights will be
conferred on the applicant by the replacement of such infrastructure.
      (3)   Make ready analysis. When a wireless services provider is seeking a
permit to collocate a wireless telecommunication facility on county-owned
infrastructure, a make ready analysis prepared by a professional structural
engineer licensed in the State of Illinois shall be required.
   (C)   Alternative antenna structure; permission to use alternative antenna
structure. When the applicant of a wireless telecommunication facility submits
an application, the applicant shall submit to the county a copy of the approval
from the owner of an alternative antenna structure, to mount the wireless
telecommunication facility on that specific alternative antenna structure.
Approval by the alternative antenna structure owner to allow the installation
of a wireless telecommunication facility shall also include a guarantee by the
alternative antenna structure owner that it will either remove abandoned
equipment in accordance with §
91.210 below or cause the removal of the equipment. Approval by the alternative
antenna structure owner shall also include a determination by the alternative
antenna structure owner that the alternative antenna structure is structurally
capable of supporting the wireless telecommunication facility.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.205 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Permits for placement of wireless telecommunication facilities are
required. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the procedures for
the application for, approval of and revocation of such a permit shall be those
required in the Lake County Highway Temporary Closure and Utility and Facility
Placement Ordinance and/or Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. All
applications shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter. All applications for permits pursuant to this subchapter shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable application fee according to the following
schedule:
      (1)   Single wireless telecommunication facility on an existing structure
- $650
      (2)   Multiple wireless telecommunication facilities (maximum 25)
included in a single application to collocate on existing structures – $350
each
      (3)   Wireless telecommunication facility that includes the replacement
or installation of a new structure or tower - $1,000 each
   (B)   Annual recurring rate. The wireless services provider shall pay to the
county an annual recurring rate for each permitted location of $200 per year or
an amount equal to the county’s direct costs, whichever is greater, to
collocate telecommunication facilities on county- owned infrastructure. Initial
payment shall be received prior to permit issuance by the county. Thereafter,
payment shall be received annually beginning on the second March 1 following
the initial payment. (Example: If initial payment is on January 1, 2019, the
next payment is March 1, 2020, and the third payment is March 1, 2021).
   (C)   Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or
fails to comply with any requirements thereof, or who constructs, alters,
repairs, disconnects, removes any facility within the county highway rights-of-
way in violation of an approved plan or directive of the County Engineer or his
designee, or fails to apply for or obtain a permit issued under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine equal to
the greater of:
      (1)   Seven hundred and fifty dollars; or
      (2)   Twice the assessed application fees under this subchapter; or
      (3)   An amount sufficient to correct any deficiencies or maintain the
proper movement and safety of the county highway users.
   Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The
imposition of any fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.206 ADJUSTMENTS OR RELOCATIONS OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   The wireless services provider shall be responsible for making adjustments,
relocations and/or removal of its facilities within the county rights-of-way
due to highway construction, reconstruction or maintenance work within 90
calendar days of receipt of written notification as directed by the County
Engineer or the duly authorized designee. If such facility is not removed or
relocated as directed within 90 days of such notice, the county may remove or
cause the removal of such facility through whatever actions are provided by law
for removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.207 DAMAGE TO WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.
   If the structure or attached wireless telecommunications facility is
damaged, the wireless telecommunications facility operator shall make the
equipment safe or clear the equipment from the right-of-way within two hours of
notification to the wireless services provider designee.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.208 DAMAGE TO COUNTY INFRASTRUCTURE OR PROPERTY.
   The wireless services provider shall be financially responsible for any
damage to county infrastructure or property caused by the installation,
maintenance, or operation of wireless telecommunication facilities.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.209 VARIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Each location of a wireless telecommunication facility within county right-
of-way shall meet all of the requirements of the subchapter. The decision of
the Division of Transportation to deny a permit application may be appealed to
the County Engineer or authorized designee. The County Engineer or authorized
designee shall hear the request for a variance within 14 calendar days
following receipt of notice, and the decision shall be the final action of the
county with respect to the request for a variance. Any request for a variance
shall be made in writing to the county c/o the Division of Transportation, 600
West Winchester Road, Libertyville, Illinois 60048 within 14 calendar days of
receipt of a decision by the county.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.210 ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL.
   Any wireless telecommunication facility located within the right-of-way of a
County Highway that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall
be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall remove same within
90 days of receipt of written notice from the county notifying the owner of
such abandonment. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
return-receipt-requested, by the county to such owner at the last known address
of such owner. In the case of wireless telecommunication facilities attached to
county-owned infrastructure, if such facility is not removed within 90 days of
such notice, the county may remove or cause the removal of such facility
through the terms of the applicable pole attachment agreement or through
whatever actions are provided by law for removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.211 COUNTY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   This subchapter shall not apply to wireless telecommunication facilities
owned by the county.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.212 NO IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
   As to county-owned infrastructure onto which wireless telecommunications
facilities are to be considered for installation, no implied or expressed
warranty is given, granted, inferred, etc. as to its capability to accept,
support, etc. and/or provide for the needs of the wireless telecommunication
facility installation. The complete responsibility for assuring the support
element’s ability will rest and lie entirely with the permit applicant. In the
event the permit applicant’s selected county-owned infrastructure is deemed
inadequate by the permit applicant or the applicant’s consultant, the county
will be under no obligation to augment or create a new element for the
installation of the wireless telecommunication facility.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.213 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   It is recognized that the system being created by the wireless
telecommunication facilities network requires an interconnection and complete
coverage for the system to function. It is also recognized that during events,
weather conditions, traffic accidents and maintenance and construction
operations sometimes cause damage to roadway facilities within rights-of-way
including county-owned infrastructure. Although replacement, reconstruction or
re-installation of this infrastructure is typically accomplished in as
efficient, timely and economical a manner as possible, there is no defined
timeframe in which this repair work is completed. In the event such incidents
occur causing damage to county-owned infrastructure which have wireless
telecommunication facilities mounted or otherwise attached to them, and in the
event such accidents or occurrences cause elements of or the complete wireless
telecommunication facility to be incapacitated, rendered inoperable, made
irreparable, or destroyed, the county and its affiliated and associated
departments and divisions, elected and appointed officials, employees, and
agents shall be held harmless and under no obligation to replace, reconstruct
or re-install the roadway facilities within a certain time frame or to the same
configuration or condition, nor shall there be any obligation by the county to
repair, reconfigure or replace any elements of the wireless telecommunication
facility. Such duties and responsibilities for the repair, reconfiguration or
replacement of the wireless telecommunication facility shall rest solely and at
the expense of the wireless services provider.
(Ord. 18-0757, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   An person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
CHAPTER 92: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND EXPLOSIVES; FIREWORKS
Section
Hazardous Materials Cost Recovery
   
92.01   Recitals; purpose
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Release prohibited
   
92.04   Cleanup or abatement of hazardous material release; liability for costs
   
92.05   Billing responsible parties; payment to the county
Fireworks
   
92.15   Permit required to sell, use, or explode
   
92.16   Definitions
   
92.17   Applications
   
92.18   Supervised public display
   
92.19   Enforcement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS COST RECOVERY
§ 92.01 RECITALS; PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is hereby ordained for the following purpose:
   (A)   Whereas the cost of providing emergency services to isolate and
mitigate the effects of the release of hazardous materials within the
boundaries of the county has increased in recent years;
   (B)   The county must respond to mitigate the effects of the release of
hazardous materials on the health, safety, and welfare of county residents and
property and on the ecological balance of the environment;
   (C)   To obtain sufficient funds to provide emergency services to mitigate
the effects of the release of hazardous materials, it is necessary to require
those entities using the emergency services to reimburse the county for the
cost of those services; and
   (D)   The County Board of this county has determined that it is in the best
interest of the county and its residents to provide regulations regarding the
release of hazardous materials and to require reimbursement for emergency
services involving hazardous materials.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1B) (Ord. passed 3-14-2006)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   COSTS INCURRED BY THE COUNTY. All costs and expenses of the county incurred
in connection with the cleanup or abatement of the release of hazardous
materials and shall include but shall not be limited to the following: actual
labor costs of the county personnel involved in the isolation, cleanup, or
abatement of the release (including worker’s compensation benefits, fringe
benefits, and administrative overhead); cost of equipment operation, damage and
loss to materials and equipment as determined by the county; cost of materials
and rental equipment or county equipment used or consumed by the county or any
of its agencies or departments; repairs to equipment or cleanup thereof,
necessitated by equipment use in response to a release; and cost of any labor,
materials, and equipment provided by the Lake County HAZ MAT Team; other
departments providing labor, materials, or services by virtue of any mutual aid
agreement or independent contractors.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any substance or material in a quantity and form
determined by the United States Department of Transportation to be capable of
posing an unreasonable risk to health and safety or property when transported
in commerce or any other substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under
the laws of the United States or of this state.
   RELEASE. To dump, leak, seep, spill, emit or discharge, or the leakage,
seepage, spill, emission, or other discharge, or to create a substantial threat
of RELEASE requiring emergency response.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. A person who:
      (1)   Owns or has custody of hazardous material that is involved in an
incident requiring emergency action by an emergency response agency;
      (2)   Owns or has custody of bulk or non-bulk packaging or a transport
vehicle that contains hazardous material that is involved in an incident
requiring emergency action by an emergency response agency; or
      (3)   Who causes or substantially contributed to the cause of the
incident.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1B) (Ord. passed 3-14-2006)
§ 92.03 RELEASE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership,
unincorporated association, or any unit of federal, state, or local government
or any other entity to release any hazardous material into the environment,
whether intentionally or unintentionally, except by permit.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1B) (Ord. passed 3-14-2006) Penalty, see §
92.99 
§ 92.04 CLEANUP OR ABATEMENT OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL RELEASE; LIABILITY FOR
COSTS.
   (A)   Cleanup.
      (1)   The county or supporting fire departments are authorized to take
such action as determined to be reasonably required to contain, neutralize, and
clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous material released upon or into
any property, facilities, or the atmosphere within the county where the release
creates a hazard or an apparent hazard to any individual, property, or the
environment.
      (2)   The county may be assisted in these activities by the Lake County
HAZ MAT Team, any other municipal or fire protection district fire department,
any party to a mutual aid agreement, or independent contractors, as necessary
to protect against or eliminate the hazard or apparent hazard.
   (B)   Liability. Any responsible party shall be jointly and severably liable
to the county for the payment of all costs incurred by the county as a result
of such cleanup or abatement by the county, Lake County HAZ MAT Team, other
fire departments, or independent contractors.
   (C)   Fire suppression services. The authority to recover costs under this
section shall not include actual fire suppression services that are normally or
customarily provided by the Fire Department, unless the fire involves hazardous
materials, or other services normally or customarily provided by other
municipal fire departments.
   (D)   Remedies. The remedies provided by this subchapter shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1B) (Ord. passed 3-14-2006)
§ 92.05 BILLING RESPONSIBLE PARTIES: PAYMENT TO THE COUNTY.
   (A)   Billing responsible parties. The county shall, within 90 days of
completion of the cleanup or abatement of any hazardous material release, send
an invoice for the costs incurred by the county in connection with the
discharge to the person or persons determined by the county to be responsible
parties pursuant to §
92.04.
   (B)   Payment. The responsible party shall submit payment for the invoice to
the county within 30 days of receipt of the county’s invoice.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-1B) (Ord. passed 3-14-2006)
FIREWORKS
§ 92.15 PERMIT REQUIRED TO SELL, USE, OR EXPLODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, co-partnership, or corporation to
knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or
explode any fireworks or consumer fireworks in the unincorporated area of the
county without first obtaining a permit as required in this subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 3:1-2) (Ord. passed 4-13-1976; Ord. 15-0372, passed 4-14-2015)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks that comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Products
Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. Parts 1500 and 1507, and
classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States Department of
Transportation un 49 C.F.R. 172.101. CONSUMER FIREWORKS shall NOT include snake
or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party
poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and
"auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains
or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that
the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion;
and toy pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths
grains of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at
times.
   FIREWORKS. Includes any explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion,
combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy
cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire
underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman
candles, sparklers, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any
FIREWORKS containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances
producing visual effects: provided, however, that the term FIREWORKS shall not
include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive
compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come
in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper
or plastic caps which contain less than twenty hundredths grains of explosive
mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
(1977 Code, § 3:1-2) (Ord. passed 4-13-1976; Ord. 15-0372, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 92.17 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for permits for the supervised public display of fireworks
shall be made to and permits shall be issued by the Director of the Lake County
Planning, Building and Development Department subject to the standards set
forth herein. Upon receipt, the Director of the Lake County Planning, Building
and Development Department shall forward a copy to the Patrol Division in the
Lake County Sheriff's Office.
(1977 Code, § 3:1-2) (Ord. passed 4-13-1976; Ord. 15-0372, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 92.18 SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   All of the following conditions must be met for the supervised public
display of fireworks.
   (A)   Application for a permit shall be made in writing on application forms
supplied by the Planning, Building and Development Department at least 30 days
in advance of the date of the display, and action shall be taken on the
application within 48 hours after the application is made.
   (B)   The application form must be signed by a group of three or more adult
individuals.
   (C)   A written agreement with the local fire department having jurisdiction
over the site of the proposed display containing provision for appropriate
firefighting apparatus during the fireworks display and provision for the
manner and location in which the displays are going to be discharged shall be
submitted with the application.
   (D)   A document from the Lake County Health Department and Community Health
Center regarding arrangement for temporary sanitary facilities shall accompany
the application.
   (E)   All permanent or temporary lighting shall be inspected and approved by
an inspector from the Lake County Planning, Building and Development
Department.
   (F)   No structures shall be erected without acquiring a building permit and
an inspection made.
   (G)   The duration of the permit and the hours of operation shall be
specified in the permit.
   (H)    The site is to be cleared of all merchandise, all debris is to be
cleaned up, and all temporary structures are to be removed within a reasonable
length of time after the close of display as specified in the permit.
   (I)   Adequate public parking shall be provided on the site including a
stabilized drive. It is the responsibility of the operators to guide traffic to
these areas and to keep patrons from parking along the shoulders of the road in
the vicinity of the activity.
   (J)   Traffic control arrangements in the vicinity at major intersections
shall be arranged by the operators with the Lake County Sheriff’s Office.
   (K)   A bond shall be posted with this county in a sum sufficient to
guarantee the repair of public rights-of-way of any damage resulting from this
activity.
   (L)   If liquor is to be served, the appropriate liquor permit shall be
obtained from the Lake County Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (M)   A non-refundable fee in an amount determined by the County Board shall
accompany each application.
   (N)   After a permit has been issued, sales, possession, use, and
distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose
only.
   (O)   No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
(1977 Code, § 3:1-2) (Ord. passed 4-13-1976)
§ 92.19 ENFORCEMENT.
   Violations of this chapter shall be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff or
his or her designee(s) who, at his or her discretion, may proceed either
through a notice to appear before the 19th Judicial Circuit Court or through
administrative adjudication pursuant to the Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66).
(Ord. 15-0372, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Fireworks. Anyone who violates, or assists in the violation of, any
provision of §§
92.15 through
92.18 shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be fined as set forth
below for each such offense, or imprisoned in the county jail for a period of
not more than six months, or both.
      (1)   Lake County Sheriff's Office Citation filed in Circuit Court. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement before the 19th Judicial
Circuit, the fine amount shall be as follows:
         (a)   The first violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of no less than $250.
         (b)   A second violation of this chapter by the same person, within a
12 month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $500.
         (c)   A third or subsequent violation of this chapter by the same
person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than
$750.
      (2)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66 ), the minimum fine amount shall be $115 for each violation.
(1977 Code, § 3:1-2) (Ord. passed 4-13-1976; Ord. 15-0372, passed 4-14-2015)
CHAPTER 93: EMERGENCY ALARMS
Section
   
93.01   Title
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Alarm holder permits
   
93.04   Direct communications to county facilities
   
93.05   Central answering service
   
93.06   Local alarms
   
93.07   Alarm responses
   
93.08   Testing equipment
   
93.09   Disconnection from county facilities
   
93.10   Reconnection to county facilities
   
93.11   Reservation of rights
   
93.12   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 TITLE.
   This chapter, including all rules and regulations which may be adopted by
this county, by reference or otherwise, is entitled “Emergency Alarm
Ordinance”.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   ALARM HOLDER. The owner, lessor, or person responsible for the existence of
an alarm system within or on premises.
   ALARM RESPONSE. An alarm signal resulting from a malfunction, improper
installation or human error, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, other acts of
God, or an interruption of service supplied by a carrier of the signal that
requires a response from law enforcement.
   ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment, components, or devices arranged to
signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which
personnel of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office are expected to respond. Such
systems shall be construed hereunder to include BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS, MANUAL
HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEMS, and LOCAL ALARM SYSTEMS.
   AUTOMATIC DIALERS. An alarm system that, when activated, automatically
relays over regular telephone lines (as distinguished from dedicated telephone
lines) a pre-recorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of
an emergency situation.
   BURGLAR ALARM. An alarm system activated by signaling an entry or attempted
entry into the area protected by the alarm system.
   CENTRAL ANSWERING POINT. An office or place to which alarm systems are
relayed and where operators monitor and investigate the alarm signals prior to
notifying the appropriate agency of an emergency situation.
   COUNTY. County of Lake, Illinois.
   DEDICATED TELEPHONE LINE. A telephone line which has as its sole use the
transmission of an alarm signal.
   DIRECT CONNECTION. A method of using a telephone line which has as its sole
use the transmission of an alarm signal to a central receiving facility
provided by the county.
   FIRE ALARM. An alarm system designed to detect heat or smoke.
   HOLDUP ALARM. An alarm system which is activated manually to signal a
robbery or an attempted robbery.
   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system which, when activated, causes an audible or
visual signal in or on the premises that the system is designed to protect.
This alarm may or may not be a part of a system to notify an answering point.
   SERVICE CHARGE. An assessment by the county against an alarm holder for
false alarms emanating from the alarm system as provided in this section.
   TROUBLE INDICATION. A transmitted signal different from the alarm signal
which indicates a mechanical-electrical problem in the system.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986; Ord. 17-0903, passed 11-14-2017)
§ 93.03 ALARM HOLDER PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall be authorized to operate an alarm system, other than
local alarms as defined herein, without first obtaining an alarm user’s permit.
Users requiring new installations shall obtain permits within ten days
following passage of this chapter.
   (B)   All applications for a permit shall be made upon forms prescribed by
the Lake County Sheriff, which may be obtained at the office of the Lake County
Sheriff.
   (C)   All applications for new permits must contain the updated names of the
agent or key-holder.
      (1)   All applicants, and all manufacturers and companies under contract
to maintain receiving alarm equipment within facilities of the county, by their
several acts in applying for and in receiving permits to use the facilities,
shall be deemed to have agreed that the county shall not be held liable for any
alarm failure of service, and shall not be held liable for any consequential
damages resulting from that failure. Further, the permit holders, upon
receiving their permits, also agree thereby that the county shall not be held
liable for any damage that may result from the installation, maintenance, or
operation of the alarm system, the installation, maintenance, and operation
being the sole responsibility of the alarm holder. Further, all alarm holders,
by the act of obtaining issuance of a permit to them, shall be deemed to have
agreed to all of the provisions of subsections (C)(2) and (C)(3) hereof.
      (2)   All applicants, by receiving a permit, agree to indemnify, defend,
and save harmless this county, its agents, servants, and employees, and the
manufacturers and companies, if any, under contract or agreement to maintain
the receiving alarm equipment in the county facilities, from all claims,
demands, judgments, liability, costs, and expenses that may arise, in any way,
as a result of utilization of the alarm connection to county facilities.
      (3)   All permit holders agree that the county, the equipment
manufacturers and companies under contract to maintain receiving alarm
equipment within county facilities, shall not be liable for any costs or
expenses of installation, maintenance of leased services, or any other charge
or fees for any alarm equipment leased or owned by the applicant.
   (D)   All applicants at the time of making application for a permit
hereunder must certify that they have a system of alarm maintenance available
to them on a 24-hour basis, and that an alternative power source is available
to prevent false alarms due to any failure of power supplied by a utility
company.
   (E)   The alarm holders permit application form will be reviewed by the Lake
County Sheriff to determine whether the form complies with this chapter. If the
Lake County Sheriff approves the form, the Lake County Sheriff shall issue a
permit.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.04 DIRECT COMMUNICATIONS TO COUNTY FACILITIES.
   (A)   After issuance by the Lake County Sheriff of a permit, the holders of
permits for alarms from business premises, financial institutions, and
residences may have the systems so installed as to terminate within the
county’s alarm facilities.
   (B)   An alarm holder approved for a direct connection to county alarm
facilities, or the company contracting for servicing the subscriber’s alarm
system, shall be responsible for obtaining the data path between the alarm
holder’s premises and the alarm receiving equipment, if required, in order to
provide an input signal which is compatible with the receiving equipment.
   (C)   All signals transmitted over these wires shall be transmitted in a
method compatible with the alarm receiving equipment and the requirements of
the county.
   (D)   These alarms shall be subject to the same provisions concerning false
alarms as other systems addressed herein.
   (E)   Each direct communication alarm system user in the county shall
provide an alternative source of power for the alarm system in order to prevent
false alarms due to failure of power supplied from the utility company. The
alternative source of power shall have the capacity to provide power for at
least 24 hours subsequent to any power failure.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.05 CENTRAL ANSWERING SERVICE.
   Upon approval of an application for permit, an alarm holder may utilize an
alarm system connected to a central answering point other than the Lake County
Sheriff’s facility. The operator of this answering point shall first attempt to
determine the validity of an alarm signal and, if unable to do so, shall notify
the Lake County Sheriff’s Office whether the signal is believed to be a valid
or genuine alarm.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.06 LOCAL ALARMS.
   Local alarms shall have an automatic shutoff which will deactivate the sound
within ten minutes after activation of the alarm. In the event that the alarm
shall not respond to the automatic shutoff, neither the county nor its
employees shall be liable for damages by reason of failure of the shutoff
device.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.07 ALARM RESPONSES.
   (A)   Two alarm responses shall be without charge in any 12-month period. A
service charge of $50 shall be billed to the company reporting the third
through fifth alarm response, and shall be billed $100 for the sixth alarm
response and thereafter in a 12-month period, except as provided in §
93.09(B).
      (1)   Should a false alarm be transmitted by a piece of electronic
equipment under service by an alarm company, there shall be no charge for a
false alarm, provided the alarm holder gives the Lake County Sheriff proof that
the defect is being corrected.
      (2)   In the event false alarms or trouble alarms continue during any 12-
month period, the Lake County Sheriff may direct the company maintaining the
county monitoring equipment to disconnect the premises, from which the false or
trouble alarms originate, from the equipment. Reconnection of the premises to
the monitoring equipment shall not be made until all false alarm fees, and a
reconnection charge of $250, have been paid to the county.
   (B)   Failure, or refusal, of any alarm holder to pay any service charge or
service charges for false alarms may result in discontinuance of the alarm
service.
   (C)   A 30-day grace period for new alarm systems or for major modification
or additions to existing alarm systems shall be granted upon approval by the
Lake County Sheriff.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986; Ord. 17-0903, passed 11-14-2017)
§ 93.08 TESTING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Alarm systems transmitting emergency signals directly to the
communication center of the county shall be tested, or demonstrated only with
prior approval from the Lake County Sheriff.
   (B)   Approval of the Lake County Sheriff is not required to test or
demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages directly to the
communication center unless the messages are to be relayed to county
facilities.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.09 DISCONNECTION FROM COUNTY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Failure of an alarm holder to pay any service charges required to be
paid by this chapter shall be cause for the Lake County Sheriff to disconnect
an alarm system.
   (B)   If any alarm system records 12 false alarms within any 12-month
period, that shall be cause for the Lake County Sheriff to disconnect an alarm
system upon giving 60 days’ written notice to the alarm holder.
   (C)   Twelve or more trouble indicators from any one alarm system within any
12-month period shall be cause for the Lake County Sheriff to disconnect an
alarm system after 60 days’ written notice.
   (D)   Any disconnection hereunder shall not be at the cost of the county.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.10 RECONNECTION TO COUNTY FACILITIES.
   (A)   If an alarm system has been disconnected because of non-payment of any
charges, the alarm system may be reconnected to county facilities only after
payment of all outstanding charges.
   (B)   If an alarm system has been disconnected because of excessive false
alarms or trouble indicators, the alarm holder affected must submit to the Lake
County Sheriff a written statement showing all reasons, if any, for the trouble
indications and false alarms, and setting forth what measures have been taken
to prevent or to minimize future similar problems. The Lake County Sheriff
shall review the statement and, if the Lake County Sheriff recommends
reconnection of the alarm system in question, the alarm holder shall apply for
a permit as in the instance of an initial application.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.11 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   (A)   The county reserves the right to disconnect the services connected
with monitoring of any alarm system after giving 60 days’ written notice of
intention to disconnect.
   (B)   The county is under no obligation to provide this special type of
monitoring service to any person, and the county expressly reserves the right
to deny to any person the privilege of connecting an alarm system to facilities
of the county.
   (C)   In those instances in which an alarm is activated and a Deputy Sheriff
responds by going to the premises, and finds no evidence of breaking and
entering, the Deputy shall not be required to remain at the premises.
   (D)   In those instances in which an alarm is activated and a Deputy
responds by going to the premises, and, if he or she finds evidence of breaking
and entering, the investigating officer will remain at the premises until the
owner or his or her agent comes to the premises in response to the alarm.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Lake County Sheriff shall have the responsibility for enforcement
of this chapter.
   (B)   In connection with enforcement of this chapter, the Lake County
Sheriff may prescribe and publish minimum standards and regulations for the
construction and maintenance of all alarm systems.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense. Each day of
continuation of an offense shall be considered a separate offense.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-3) (Ord. passed 3-11-1986)
CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES AND ENVIRONMENT; SANITATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
Section
Public Nuisances
   
94.01   Title
   
94.02   Jurisdiction and applicability
   
94.03   Purpose
   
94.04   Definitions
   
94.05   Exterior property areas
   
94.06   Structures
   
94.07   Noise
   
94.08   Animals and pests
   
94.09   Certain licensed/permitted business activities
   
94.10   Hazardous dilapidated motor vehicles
   
94.11   Junk and debris
   
94.12   Non-customary outdoor storage
   
94.13   Public safety and peace
   
94.14   Public health and safety
Camps and Camp Sites
   
94.30   General provisions
   
94.31   Definitions
   
94.32   Registration required
   
94.33   Minimum standards
   
94.34   Inspections
   
94.35   Interpretation, purposes, and conflict
Administrative Adjudication
   
94.50   Creation
   
94.51   Purpose
   
94.52   Applicability
   
94.53   Definitions
   
94.54   Code Hearing Unit
   
94.55   Procedure for instituting proceedings
   
94.56   Notice of hearings; subpoenas; default
   
94.57   Representation at hearings
   
94.58   Conduct of hearings
   
94.59   Findings, determinations, and order
   
94.60   Administrative review
   
94.61   Transfer or conveyance of property
   
94.62   Collections of unpaid fines and other sanctions
   
94.63   Hearing costs
   
94.64   Procedures not exclusive
   
94.65   Separability, partial invalidity
   
94.66   Effective date
Enforcement
   
94.80   Enforcement Officers
   
94.81   Warning of violation
   
94.82   Notice of violation
   
94.83   Injunctive relief
   
94.84   Chronic nuisances
   
94.85   Separability, partial invalidity
   
94.86   Conflict
   
94.87   Compliance
   
94.88   Effective date
   
94.89   Abatement costs
 
   
94.99   Penalty
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 94.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Lake County Public Nuisance Ordinance
of the County of Lake”, hereinafter referred to as “this subchapter”.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 94.02 JURISDICTION AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to incorporated areas
(those areas which are located within the corporate limits of any city,
village, or incorporated town) as well as unincorporated areas (those areas
which are outside the corporate limits of any city, village, or incorporated
town) of Lake County, Illinois, in accordance with the jurisdictional or
contractual authority of the enforcing county department, with the exception of
§§
94.05(A), (E), (F) and (I),
94.06(A), and
94.07, which shall apply only to unincorporated areas of Lake County, Illinois.
   (B)   Enforcement. Violations of this subchapter may be cited either as an
ordinance violation through a notice to appear before the 19th Judicial Circuit
Court or through administrative adjudication pursuant to the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.66).
   (C)   Injunctive relief. In addition to or in lieu of any other remedies
provided in this chapter, the county may commence an action to enjoin, remove,
or abate any violation of this subchapter in the manner provided by law and to
restrain or enjoin any person from operating in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 16-0904, passed 10-11-2016)
§ 94.03 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define and abate public nuisances in
Lake County, Illinois.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 94.04 DEFINITIONS.
   CANNABIS. All terms and phrases used herein shall have the same meaning as
ascribed to them in the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.).
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. For purposes of this subchapter, means all items,
equipment, products and materials of any kind which may be used in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis into the human body in violation of
the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.)
   CEREMONIAL FIRE. An outdoor fire no larger than three feet by three feet by
three feet which is used for entertainment purposes as part of a specifically
scheduled public or private event and the fire does not contain non-woody
landscape waste, garbage or junk and debris.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Any property upon which two or more nuisance
activities or conditions, as defined in this subchapter, have occurred during
any three-year period; such CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY status shall result
either from:
      (1)   Two or more distinct types of nuisance conditions or activities on
such property (even if arising from the same factual circumstances or
investigation);
      (2)   Two or more separate factual events that have been separately
investigated by an enforcement officer involving the same nuisance condition or
activity; or
      (3)   A combination of two or more conditions, activities, or events as
described in divisions (1) and (2) above.
   DESIGNATED HIGH SCHOOL CAMPUS AREA. An unincorporated area less than one
square mile in size meeting the following criteria:
      (1)   The unincorporated area is adjacent to an educational facility
containing a large population of students and adults involved in activities
both inside and outside the school structure;
      (2)   The educational facility has received complaints concerning the
burning of landscape waste in the area;
      (3)   The unincorporated area is completely surrounded by one or more
municipalities that ban landscape waste burning;
      (4)   The unincorporated area is densely populated, herein defined as
containing more than 100 homes with a lot area averaging less than one acre in
size within a quarter mile of the educational facility; and
      (5)   Five hundred or more feet of unincorporated area abuts the property
border of the educational facility.
   DITCH. Any artificially constructed open drain or natural drain that has
been artificially improved.
   DRAIN. Any ditch, watercourse or conduit, whether open, covered or enclosed,
natural or artificial, or partly natural and partially artificial, by which
surface waters coming or falling upon lands are carried away.
   GARBAGE. Organic waste resulting from preparation, processing, handling, and
storage of food and all decayed or spoiled food from any source.
   GRAFFITI. Any symbol, announcement, insignia, name, identification,
inscription, picture, or similar marking, including, without limitation any
letter, word, numeral, emblem, or combination thereof that is painted, written,
drawn, scratched, marked, etched, sprayed, engraved, or any other way placed on
or affixed to any wall, fence, sign, building, or any other structure, or any
sidewalk, pavement, curb, post, stone, tree, or other public or private
property without the prior written permission of the owner or occupant of the
property, except as permitted by federal, state, or county statute, ordinance,
or regulation.
   HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle with a substantial
number of essential parts, as defined by Section 1-118 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, either damaged, removed, or altered or otherwise so treated that the
vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power or, which by its
general state of deterioration, poses a threat to the public’s health, safety,
and welfare. ESSENTIAL PARTS includes the following, as defined by Section 1-
118 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, vehicle hulks, shells, chassis, frames, front
end assemblies, front clip, rear clip, doors, hatchbacks, fenders, cabs, cab
clips, cowls, hoods, trunk lids, deck lids, T-Tops, sunroofs, moon roofs, astro
roofs, transmissions of vehicles of the second division, seats, aluminum
wheels, engines and similar parts. HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR VEHICLE shall
not include any motor vehicle that has been rendered temporarily incapable of
being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or
repair operations.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department
or a designated agent.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least
seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which
the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power. Any
motor vehicle that does not have a current license plate or current license
tags attached to it shall also be considered an INOPERABLE VEHICLE. INOPERABLE
MOTOR VEHICLE does not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations.
   JUNK AND DEBRIS. Includes but is not limited to garbage, tree branches,
grass clippings, yard trimmings, leaves, paper, cardboard, cartons, boxes,
barrels, wood, lumber, concrete, appliances, furniture, glass, bottles,
crockery, tin cans, vehicle parts, boats, furniture, and any other manufactured
or constructed object which has outlived its usefulness in its original form
(notwithstanding the fact that the object may have scrap value or could be
reconditioned with substantial repair) where such object, due to its present
condition and/or visibility, may reasonably be construed to be unsightly,
dangerous, or creating a condition that is detrimental or potentially
detrimental to the health and/or safety of the inhabitants of Lake County,
Illinois. As used herein, the phrase JUNK AND DEBRIS does not include
inoperable vehicles or landscape waste stored in accordance with §
94.05(B).
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which is propelled by a motor or engine, but is not
operated upon rails.
   NON-CUSTOMARY OUTDOOR STORAGE. The accumulation of items in excess of what
is reasonable and customarily necessary for the use of the property and/or
which, by its placement and/or condition whether reusable or not has the
potential to (1) cause, through visual blight or odor, impairment of the use or
enjoyment of neighboring properties, (2) pose a risk to public health by
creating conditions favorable for the harboring of vermin, (3) pose a risk of
environmental contamination and/or (4) pose a risk to public safety. Such
material accumulation may include, but is not limited to junk and debris;
rubbish, garbage or refuse; vehicle parts; business supplies or inventory;
construction materials not incidental to an active permitted construction
project on-site; ground storage of construction materials for a permitted
construction project tools, storage of yard maintenance equipment vehicles,
vehicle parts, recreational equipment or lawn furniture in numbers or variety
beyond customarily necessary for the use of the property; any item in a visible
state of deterioration as reasonably evidenced by rust or other condition,
abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment, not customarily stored
outside such as indoor furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, washers/
dryers or other appliances, electronic equipment, boxes and other containers;
clothing; or any combinations thereof.
   NON-WOODY LANDSCAPE WASTE. All accumulations of shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
grass clippings, or other landscape materials not otherwise defined as woody
landscape waste accumulated as a result of care of real property.
   OPEN BURNING. The combustion of any matter outdoors in such a way that the
products of the combustion are emitted to the open air without first
originating in or passing through equipment for which a permit has been issued
by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable
interest in the property. OWNER includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   A mortgagee in possession in who is vested:
         (a)   All or part of the legal title to the property; and
         (b)   All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises.
      (2)   An occupant who can control what occurs on the property.
   PRESCRIBED HABITAT AND ECOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE BURNS. Burns carried out by or
on behalf of local governments, homeowner associations, large landowners or
other entities responsible for the care and oversight of sensitive ecological
areas, conducted under the management of professionals trained and/or certified
in accordance with the Illinois Prescribed Burn Act (525 ILCS 37) and other
state requirements, and organized and executed in accordance with an Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency approved open burn permit, associated
prescribed burn plan, and/or any other applicable Illinois state licensing or
permitting requirements.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor fire no larger than three feet by three feet
by three feet which is used for warmth, cooking for human consumption and/or
temporary non-ceremonial purposes where the fire does not contain non-woody
landscape waste, garbage, or junk and debris.
   WEEDS. An undesirable composition of plants that interferes with the
maintenance or management objectives for a given property or area of land.
   WOODY LANDSCAPE WASTE. Trees, other woody plants, and accumulated residuals
of the same, including but not limited to sticks, branches, limbs, trunks,
stumps, or sawdust, and excluding leaves from the same.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. passed 9-9-2014; Ord. passed 2-10-2015;
Ord. 16-0904, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 22-0011, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 94.05 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   (A)   Motor vehicles.
      (1)   Inoperable vehicle. It is a public nuisance to keep or store any
inoperable vehicle on public or private property unless said motor vehicle is:
         (a)   Kept within an enclosed building; or
         (b)   Is stored or kept on premises properly zoned for and engaged in
the business of wrecking or junking motor vehicles or an approved vehicle
repair use as defined in the Unified Development Ordinance (
Chapter 151, §§
151.001 through
151.285).
      (2)   Hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle.  It is a public nuisance to
proliferate a hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle, whether on public or private
property, in view of the public.
   (B)   Junk and debris. It is a public nuisance to keep or store junk and
debris on public or private property, except in a state-permitted landfill or
on premises properly zoned for, and engaged in the business of, a junk yard.
Excluded from this provision are the following:
      (1)   Landscape waste generated on-site and stored in a designated
enclosure or area shall not be considered junk and debris when all of the
following restrictions are met.
         (a)   No landscape waste pile shall exceed four feet in height nor
shall exceed 100 square feet in area. More than one pile shall be permitted if
necessary to accommodate storage.
         (b)   Any landscape waste pile shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from any existing structure on any adjoining parcel, not including storage
structures such as garages or sheds.
   (C)   High grass and/or weeds. It is a public nuisance to fail to maintain a
property free from grass and/or weed growth in excess of ten inches in height
within platted subdivisions. Excluded from this provision are the following:
      (1)   Areas preserved within an open space easement or plat-designated
natural area;
      (2)   Plant growth that, in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer,
enhances, protects, restores or otherwise supports an identified natural
resource; and
      (3)   Plant growth within the tree-line of a natural wooded area.
   (D)   Disruption of a ditch or natural drain/ standing water. It is a public
nuisance to disrupt, disturb or interfere with any ditches or natural drains
across land in such a manner that such ditches or natural drains shall fill or
become obstructed with any matter which materially impedes or interferes with
the flow of water or redirects water onto another’s property, except as
otherwise authorized by law, or to otherwise create or permit the continued
existence of a condition of standing water where the standing water may
facilitate or encourage the breeding of mosquitoes.
   (E)   Storage of construction materials. It is a public nuisance to store
lumber or other building materials, construction vehicles, and/or construction
equipment, not in connection with a permitted building project in progress on
the property.
   (F)   Graffiti. It is a public nuisance for any person to place graffiti on
any property or for any person having control of any property to allow, permit,
or otherwise tolerate graffiti to be placed on or to remain on that property.
   (G)   Accumulation of rubbish, garbage or refuse. It is a public nuisance to
allow accumulation of rubbish, garbage, or refuse on any property.
   (H)   Burning rubbish, garbage, refuse, or construction debris. It is a
public nuisance to burn rubbish, garbage, refuse, or construction debris on any
property.
   (I)   Open burning of landscape waste. It is a public nuisance to conduct
open burning of landscape waste in the unincorporated area, subject to the
following exceptions:
      (1)   This division (I) shall not apply to:
         (a)   Recreational fires, campfires, self-contained outdoor burn
devices, and ceremonial fires if no garbage, junk and debris, or non-woody
landscape waste are burned in such fires.
         (b)   Prescribed habitat and ecological landscape burns.
         (c)   Disposal of disaster debris as authorized by county authorities.
      (2)   This division (I) shall not apply to the open burning of woody
landscape waste when all of the following restrictions are met:
         (a)   The burning occurs between November 1 to March 31;
         (b)   The burning occurs between sunrise and sunset;
         (c)   The burning occurs when wind speeds do no exceed ten miles per
hour (MPH);
         (d)   The burning occurs on a day during which Lake County is not
subject to an advisory from the National Weather Service regarding critical
fire weather conditions nor an air quality advisory from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency wherein air quality in Lake County is
designated as unhealthy for sensitive groups or the general public;
 
COMMENTARY:
Critical fire weather conditions means conditions related to a combination of
wind high temperatures and low humidity leading to an increased risk of erratic
or extreme fire behavior and new fire starts or similar circumstances as
determined by the National Weather Service as referenced in www.weather.gov.
 
 
COMMENTARY:
The Air Quality Index was devised by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency to communicate air quality conditions to the public. The Air Quality
Index is available at www.airnow.gov.
 
         (e)   The burning occurs on the premises where the woody materials
were generated;
         (f)   The burning is supervised until the fire is extinguished. A fire
extinguisher or garden hose or water source shall be available at the burning
site;
         (g)   Reserved.
         (h)   The burning, if located within the Designated High School Area,
is conducted between sunrise and sunset only on Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays.
   (J)   Non-customary outdoor storage. It is a public nuisance to accumulate
or allow to be accumulated non-customary outdoor storage on public or private
property except in a state-permitted landfill or on premises properly zoned for
and engaged in the business of a junk yard.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. passed 9-9-2014; Ord. passed 2-10-2015;
Ord. 22-0011, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 25-0961, passed 8-12- 2025) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Dangerous structures. It is a public nuisance to allow any building,
mobile home, shed, fence, or other man-made structure to exist that is
hazardous to public health and/or safety because of its condition, faulty
construction, lack of proper repair or its openness to intrusion.
   (B)   Renting or leasing unfit living quarters. It is a public nuisance to
rent or lease quarters for human habitation that, as determined by the Health
Officer, are unfit for human habitation, or present/contain conditions that are
detrimental to the health of the inhabitants, including but not limited to: a
lack of potable water supply or a lack of adequate means of wastewater
disposal.
   (C)   Lead mitigation. It is a public nuisance for a property owner to fail
to mitigate a lead hazard in a structure in a manner and/or timeframe
prescribed by the Health Officer, or to fail to allow access to the Health
Officer to perform a lead risk assessment of a structure when the Health
Officer is in receipt of a report of a confirmed blood lead level from a child
that resides or resided in the structure.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012; Am. Ord. 15- 1241, passed 12-8-2015) Penalty,
see §
94.99
§ 94.07 NOISE.
   (A)   Sound amplification. It is a public nuisance to operate or permit
operation of any radio or stereo sound amplification system or other sound
amplification equipment which:
      (1)   Can be heard at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source
vehicle;
      (2)   Can be heard at a distance of 100 feet from the property line of
the source property; or
      (3)   Which exceeds 70db(A) (slow meter response) at the property line of
any neighboring property zoned and used for residential purposes.
   (B)   Construction noise. It is a public nuisance to perform or allow to be
performed construction, repair or remodeling work, lawn mowing, or to utilize
power or non power tools where the noise from such can be heard from a distance
of 100 feet or more from the property line of the source of the noise between
9:00 p.m. and 6:00) a.m., Monday through Friday, and on Saturdays, Sundays, and
legal holidays between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Excluded from the provisions of
this subsection (B) are lands or portions of any lands zoned and used for
agricultural purposes, and work performed by or on behalf of any public body or
in response to emergencies.
   (C)   Noise from off road vehicles. It is a public nuisance to operate off
road motor vehicles, including motorcycles, mini-bikes, all terrain cycles,
snowmobiles or other like or similar motor vehicles, on private property where
the noise from which can be heard from a distance of 100 feet or more from the
property line of the source of the noise in such a manner as to disturb the
peace and comfort of occupants of neighboring or surrounding properties.
Excluded from the provisions of this subsection (C) are agricultural motor
vehicles used for agricultural purposes and work performed by or on behalf of
any public body.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.08 ANIMALS AND PESTS.
   (A)   Pet/animal feces or manure, urine. It is a public nuisance for a
person:
      (1)   To allow the buildup on their property of pet/animal feces or
manure to the extent that it creates a condition that is detrimental or
potentially detrimental to the health and/or safety of the inhabitants of Lake
County, Illinois;
      (2)   Who has a right of property in an animal to allow the animal to
deposit feces on another person’s property without removing it, or to allow the
animal to deposit urine on another person’s property to the extent that it
causes property damage or loss; or
      (3)   Who acts as an animal’s custodian by providing it with medical
care, or food or shelter on a property they own or control, to allow the animal
to deposit feces on another person’s property without removing it, or to allow
the animal to deposit urine on another person’s property to the extent that it
causes property damage or loss.
   (B)   Pests or vermin infestations. It is a public nuisance to allow any
infestation in a structure or on a property of pests or vermin, or to fail to
remove conditions in a structure or on a property that may permit such
infestation.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. passed 9-9-2014; Ord. 16-0652, passed 6-
23-2016; Ord. 25-0961, passed 8-12-2025) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.09 CERTAIN LICENSED/PERMITTED BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Tanning facilities. It is a public nuisance to operate a tanning
facility without a valid permit issued by the Illinois Department of Public
Health contrary to the provisions of the Illinois Tanning Facility Permit Act
or the Illinois Department of Public Health Tanning Facilities Code.
   (B)   Tattoo and body piercing establishments. It is a public nuisance to
operate a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment without a valid permit
issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health contrary to the provisions
of the Illinois Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act or the
Illinois Department of Public Health Body Art Code.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.10 HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Authority to abate. Notwithstanding any other enforcement provision of
§§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89, Lake County Sheriff is authorized to immediately remove the hazardous
dilapidated motor vehicle(s) or parts thereof from private or public property.
   (B)   Notice. The real property owner where the vehicle is located or the
vehicle owner shall be given ten days' notice, via certified mail, prior to
removal of any hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle.
   (C)   Objection. The real property owner where the vehicle is located or the
vehicle owner subject to abatement may request a hearing before the
Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer. The request for hearing must be
made within ten days of the date of the notice and must be made in writing to
the Enforcement Programs Manager. The hearing shall be scheduled on the next
Administrative Adjudication hearing date. If a request for hearing is received,
abatement will be stayed until after the hearing has been conducted.
   (D)   Costs. If the Lake County Sheriff authorizes the immediate removal of
the hazardous dilapidated vehicle, the respondent will be responsible for all
costs associated with the removal and storage of the vehicle.
(Ord. passed 9-9-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.11 JUNK AND DEBRIS.
   Notwithstanding any other enforcement provision of §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89, after a finding that any individual has kept or stored junk and debris
on public or private property in violation of §§
94.01 through
94.12 by either a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, the
Enforcement Officer is authorized to abate such nuisance. The Enforcement
Officer may abate the nuisance after expiration of 35 days, unless judicial
review is not sought. If judicial review is sought, abatement shall be stayed
until final determination on the matter. If the Enforcement Officer abates the
violation, the respondent will be responsible for all costs incurred to bring
the property into compliance with §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89.
(Ord. passed 9-9-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.12 NON-CUSTOMARY OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   Notwithstanding any other enforcement provision of §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89, after a finding that any individual has stored items outdoors in a
manner as defined in §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89 on public or private property in violation of §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89 by either a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, the
Enforcement Officer is authorized to abate such nuisance. The Enforcement
Officer may abate the nuisance after expiration of 35 days, unless judicial
review is not sought. If judicial review is sought, abatement shall be staved
until final determination on the matter. If the Enforcement Officer abates the
violation, the respondent will be responsible for all costs incurred to bring
the property into compliance with §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2015) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.13 PUBLIC SAFETY AND PEACE.
   (A)   Public intoxication. It is a public nuisance for any person to be in
an intoxicated condition on any highway, street, alley, or thoroughfare or
other public place. Nor shall any person drink any alcoholic liquor on any
public way.
   (B)   Disorderly conduct. It is a public nuisance for any person to engage
in the following acts:
      (1)   Perform any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or
disturb another and provoke a breach of peace;
      (2)   Enter upon the property of another for a lewd or unlawful purpose;
      (3)   Engage in the use of insulting, indecent or immoral language; or
      (4)   Engage in any indecent, insulting or immoral conduct or behavior,
or appearing in public in a state of nudity. However, a mother may breast feed
her baby in any location, public or private, where the mother is otherwise
authorized to be, irrespective of whether the nipple of the mother's breast is
uncovered during or incidental to the breast feeding.
   (C)   Dumping. It is a public nuisance for any person to dump or deposit, or
cause to be dumped or deposited, within a public place in unincorporated areas
of Lake County or unlawfully enter the property of another person to dump or
deposit, any garbage, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, miscellaneous waste,
manure or any substance that may contain disease, germs or be scattered by the
wind or decompose, or become filthy, noxious, or unhealthful, except at a
sanitary landfill site for which a permit has been lawfully issued.
   (D)   Trespassing. It is a public nuisance for any person of engage in the
following acts:
      (1)   Enter upon any property of another after receiving, notice from the
owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or to remain upon the property
of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart.
      (2)   A person shall be deemed to have received notice from the owner or
occupant within the meaning of this section if he or she has been notified
personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice
forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted at the main entrance to
said property or the forbidden part thereof.
      (3)   Enter upon the property of a cemetery after dark whether signs
indicating trespassing is prohibited are posted or not.
      (4)   Enter upon railroad property. No person may walk, ride, drive or be
upon or along the right-of-way or rail yard of a rail carrier.
   (E)   Loitering. It is a public nuisance for a person to congregate about or
in front of any business or place of dwelling, theater, hall, school, church or
elsewhere, and by so doing obstruct or interfere with the free passage of
persons entering or occupying any such premises, or by his language,
conversation or conduct annoy, insult or disturb persons passing along the
streets or alleys or occupying, residing or doing business in any such houses
or places.
   (F)   Reckless conduct. It is a public nuisance for a person to engage in
any of the following conduct:
      (1)   Recklessly perform an act or acts that cause bodily harm to or
endanger his or her safety or the safety of another person, by any means lawful
or unlawful.
      (2)   Consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
circumstances exist or that a result will follow and such disregard constitutes
a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would
exercise in the situation.
   (G)   Possession of cannabis. It is a public nuisance for a person to
possess ten grams or less of a substance containing cannabis.
   (H)   Possession of cannabis paraphernalia. It is a public nuisance for a
person to possess any item of cannabis paraphernalia when the person also
possesses ten grams or less of a substance containing cannabis.
(Ord. 15-0374, passed 4-14-2015; Ord. 16-0904, passed 10-11-2016) Penalty, see
§
94.99
§ 94.14 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.
   Actions detrimental to the public's health and/or safety. It is a public
nuisance for a person to create conditions, or to allow conditions to remain
that the Health Officer determines are detrimental or potentially detrimental
to the health and/or safety of the inhabitants of Lake County, Illinois,
including, but not limited to, failing to maintain proper sanitation in public
areas such as restrooms, showers, or recreation/exercise areas or facilities,
or failure to correct conditions that support the presence of mold in a rental
property.
(Ord. 16-0652, passed 6-23-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
CAMPS AND CAMP SITES
§ 94.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter requires registration of camp sites, establishes minimum
standards governing the operation of camps, and authorizes the issuing of
permits for the operation of camps and camp sites.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-2) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. II] passed 3-19-1959)
§ 94.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The Lake County Board of Health or its authorized
representative.
   CAMP. An organized assemblage in an outdoor setting of children and adults
for recreational or educational purposes for a period of time to be not less
than four hours, but shall not include social gatherings such as picnics.
   CAMP SITE. The land area, buildings, and appurtenances serving the camp.
   CAMPER. Any person attending a camp.
   PERSON. Any institution, corporation, individual, partnership, or other
entity.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-2) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. II] passed 3-19-1959)
§ 94.32 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the operation of a
camp site in the county without a certificate of registration from the Lake
County Board of Health.
   (B)   Application of registration shall be made to the Lake County Board of
Health on forms supplied by the Board.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-2) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. II] passed 3-19-1959)
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.33 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The Lake County Board of Health is authorized to adopt reasonable rules and
regulations governing the operation of camps and camp sites in order to protect
the health and safety of campers and the people of the county.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-2) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. II] passed 3-19-1959)
§ 94.34 INSPECTIONS.
   The Lake County Board of Health is hereby authorized and empowered to make
inspections of camps and camp sites as necessary to determine satisfactory
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-2) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. II] passed 3-19-1959)
§ 94.35 INTERPRETATION, PURPOSES, AND CONFLICT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
and general welfare. It is not intended by this subchapter to interfere with,
abrogate, annul, or repeal any ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation
heretofore adopted which does not conflict with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-2) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. II] passed 3-19-1959)
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
§ 94.50 CREATION.
   Pursuant to the authority in 55 ILCS 5/5-43005 et seq., in its current form
and as it may be amended from time to time, the county hereby creates a code
hearing unit which is hereby authorized to conduct administrative adjudication
of violations of Lake County ordinances.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.51 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the system of administrative adjudication of charges of
ordinance violations is to provide a procedure by which charges of ordinance
violations can be administratively adjudicated equitably and efficiently by
Administrative Hearing Officers.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.52 APPLICABILITY.
   Administrative adjudication of charges of ordinance violations is available
to each Lake County ordinance that provides for such process.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.53 DEFINITIONS.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A county employee, as identified in each specific
ordinance, authorized to issue violations for county ordinance violations and
to conduct inspections of public or private real property to determine whether
ordinance violations exist. Per the provisions of §§
172.05(A),
172.06(A), (B) and (E),
172.07(A) and (B),
172.11,
172.13 and
172.14, an employee of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office who is authorized to
issue violations shall be deemed an appropriate designated agent of the
Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department. However, nothing shall
be construed to allow for administrative adjudication of an ordinance violation
in the case where a state statute or administrative rule provides for a
specific method or procedure to be followed, other than administrative
adjudication, in enforcing a county ordinance.
   HEARING OFFICER. A person other than an Enforcement Officer or law
enforcement officer, who is appointed by the Chair of the County Board, with
the consent of the County Board, to preside over administrative hearings. Every
HEARING OFFICER must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of
Illinois for at least three years. Prior to conducting administrative
adjudication proceedings, a HEARING OFFICER shall have successfully completed a
formal training program which includes the following:
      (1)   Instruction on rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
which he or she will conduct;
      (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the ordinance violations he or
she will adjudicate;
      (3)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or
equitable interest in the property. PROPERTY OWNER includes, but is not limited
to:
      (1)   A mortgagee in possession in who is vested:
         (a)   All or part of the legal title to the property.
         (b)   All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises.
      (2)   An occupant who can control what occurs on the property.
   RESPONDENT. A property owner, or other individual, charged with liability
for an alleged ordinance violation and the individual to whom the notice of
violation is directed.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.54 CODE HEARING UNIT.
   (A)   The Code Hearing Unit shall consist of a Hearing Officer,
administrative assistant and recording secretary. The function of the code
hearing unit shall be to expedite the prosecution and correction of violations
of the Lake County ordinances defined in §
94.52, as they may be amended. Charges of ordinance violations are to be heard
and adjudicated by a Hearing Officer.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer has the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the ordinance violation;
      (2)   Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing or for the production of relevant documents, upon the
request of the parties or their representatives;
      (3)   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      (4)   Issuing a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, of whether an ordinance violation existed at the time of citation,
which shall be in writing and shall include written findings of fact, a
decision, and order including the fine, penalty, or action with which the
respondent must comply; and
      (5)   Imposing penalties as specified in §
94.59 and the applicable Lake County ordinance, as they may be amended, and
assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.55 PROCEDURE FOR INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   A Notice of Ordinance Violation may be issued in accordance with the
Lake County ordinances defined in §
94.52.
   (B)   The Notice of Ordinance Violation shall identify the violation for
which it is being issued, shall provide notice of the adjudicatory hearing
specifying the next scheduled hearing date and location and the authority and
jurisdiction for the hearing, the notice shall also specify the penalties for
failure to appear and the fine amount established in the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Fee Schedule.
   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall certify the correctness of the Notice of
Ordinance Violation information required by subsection (B) above by signing his
or her name to the Notice of Ordinance Violation, and indicate the date on
which this was done. Failure to certify does not invalidate the Notice of
Ordinance Violation, but will not establish a prima facie case at the
administrative hearing.
   (D)   Prior to the hearing date documented on the Notice of Ordinance
Violation, the respondent may elect to abate or cease the violation for which
the Notice of Ordinance Violation was issued, pay the fine listed on the Notice
of Ordinance Violation (which shall be set at the minimum of the range of
applicable fines, as established in §
94.59), and not participate in the hearing.
   (E)   The option of a pre-hearing meeting shall be communicated to the
respondent on the Notice of Ordinance Violation. The pre-hearing meeting shall
occur prior to the administrative hearing and shall consist of a meeting
between the respondent and Lake County staff. A compliance time-line shall be
established and documented with an agreement and filed with the code hearing
unit prior to the administrative hearing.
   (F)   A copy of the Notice of Ordinance Violation shall be filed with the
code hearing unit and served on the respondent, not less than 15 days before
the hearing is scheduled, either personally or by regular U.S. mail, postage
prepaid, sent to the address of the respondent. If the name of the respondent
cannot be ascertained or if the service on the respondent cannot be made by
regular U.S. mail, service may be made on the respondent property owner or
manager by posting a copy of the Notice of Ordinance Violation in a prominent
place on the property where the violation was found.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.56 NOTICE OF HEARINGS; SUBPOENAS; DEFAULT.
   (A)   All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for
hearing. For good cause shown, a continuance may be granted at the discretion
of the Hearing Officer. Lack of preparation or lack of material progress in
resolving the violation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Continuances
shall not go beyond 65 days.
   (B)   At any time prior to the hearing date, at the request of the
Enforcement Officer, the attorney for the county, the respondent, or the
attorney for the respondent, the Hearing Officer assigned to hear the case may
issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing
or for the production of relevant documents. Service of the subpoena shall be
the responsibility of the requesting party.
   (C)   If, at the time set for hearing, the respondent or his or her attorney
fails to appear, the Hearing Officer shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relating to the existence of an ordinance violation. At the close of
the hearing, upon sufficient evidence of a violation, the Hearing Officer may
enter a default judgment of liability against the respondent and impose fines
and assess costs. A copy of the order of default shall be served promptly in
any manner for service of a notice of violation permitted by §
94.55 and applicable to the violation. A copy of the default judgment, which is
a final determination, shall apprise the respondent of the procedure for
setting aside the default judgment and also shall apprise the respondent of the
availability of an appeal of the default judgment to the Circuit Court for the
19th Judicial Circuit, Lake County, IL.
   (D)   A respondent against whom a default judgment has been entered may file
a motion with the Code Enforcement Unit to set aside the default judgment and
for a new hearing. A motion to set aside a default judgment shall be filed
within 21 days of entry of the default judgment. A motion to set aside a
default judgment shall set forth the reason(s) the respondent failed to appear
on the original hearing date. The motion will be heard and ruled upon by the
Hearing Officer at the next scheduled hearing date. If the judgment is set
aside, a new hearing date will be set.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 25-0511,
passed 5-13-2025)
§ 94.57 REPRESENTATION AT HEARINGS.
   (A)   The case for the county may be presented by an Enforcement Officer or
by the State’s Attorney. In no event, however, may the case for the county be
presented by an employee of the Code Hearing Unit.
   (B)   The case for the respondent may be presented by the respondent or the
respondent’s attorney. If the respondent is a corporation, it may appear
through any officer, director, manager, or supervisor of the corporation.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.58 CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.
   The Hearing Officer shall preside at the hearing, shall hear testimony, and
shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of an
ordinance violation on the property indicated. All parties may present
evidence, witnesses and cross-examine opposing witnesses. The Enforcement
Officer’s signed violation notice and report form shall be prima facie evidence
of the existence of the ordinance violation described in the form. The strict
rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings do not apply to hearings
authorized under this subchapter. The burden of proof is a preponderance of the
evidence.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.59 FINDINGS, DETERMINATIONS, AND ORDER.
   (A)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether an ordinance violation existed at the time of the Notice of Ordinance
Violation. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as the
Hearing Officer’s findings, decision, and order. The findings, decision, and
order shall include the hearings officer’s findings of fact, a determination of
whether an ordinance violation existed at the time of the Notice of Ordinance
Violation based on the findings of fact, and an order imposing a fine or other
penalty and directing the respondent to correct the violation, or dismissing
the case if the violation is not proved.
   (B)   If the Hearing Officer determines that the respondent is liable for
the cited violation, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order imposing fines
for the violations proven in the range of $115 to $1,000 (or the maximum amount
allowed by applicable State of Illinois statute(s)), depending upon the
severity and nature of the violation, except where other applicable Lake County
ordinances provide for a specified fee/fine. The Hearing Officer may also
impose fines not specified in this subchapter, but any imposition of fines or
fees shall be in accordance with applicable State of Illinois statutes and/or
other Lake County ordinances. Costs may be recovered in the same manner as
fines and penalties. In such cases that the respondent does not appear at the
hearing, a copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served by
personal service or by any method provided for service of the Notice of
Ordinance Violation under §
94.55.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.60 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   The findings, decision, and order of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to
review in the Circuit Court for the 19th Judicial Circuit, Lake County. The
Administrative Review Law and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to
and govern every action for the judicial review of the final findings,
decision, and order of a Hearing Officer under §
94.59.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.61 TRANSFER OR CONVEYANCE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   The order to correct an ordinance violation and the sanctions imposed
by the Hearing Officer against a respondent property owner as the result of a
finding of an ordinance violation under this section shall attach to the
property, subject to the interests of all lien holders of record, as well as to
the owner of the property, so that the owner cannot avoid the finding of an
ordinance violation against the owner by conveying or transferring the property
to another.
   (B)   Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes the property
subject to the findings, decision, and order of a Hearing Officer under this
section if a notice consisting of a copy of the order to correct a ordinance
violation and imposing any sanctions and costs, if applicable, and a
description of the real estate affected that is sufficient to identify the real
estate has been filed in the Office of the Lake County Recorder by the county
prior to the transfer or conveyance to the subsequent transferee or owner.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.62 COLLECTIONS OF UNPAID FINES AND OTHER SANCTIONS.
   (A)   For any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or any part of any
fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining wholly unpaid after 35 days of
the fine, other sanction or cost being assessed, a late fee of 100% may be
assessed.
   (B)   Additionally, any fine or other sanction or costs imposed, or any part
of any fine or other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of or failure to exhaust procedures for judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law is a debt due and owed to Lake County and, as such,
may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 25-0511,
passed 5-13-2025)
§ 94.63 HEARING COSTS.
   (A)   If an administrative hearing is held, and the Hearing Officer
determines that the respondent is liable for the cited violation, the
respondent shall be required to pay the hearing costs in the amount of $75.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer may, in an appropriate case, and for good cause
shown, waive or reduce the hearing costs.
   (C)   The county, by separate ordinance or resolution may provide for
additional or increased costs to be recovered.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 25-0312,
passed 3-11-2025)
§ 94.64 PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The adoption by the county of a system of administrative adjudication does
not preclude the county from using other methods to enforce the Lake County
ordinances identified in §
94.52, as they may be amended, including, but not limited to, relief in the
Circuit Court for the 19th Judicial Circuit, Lake County, Illinois.
(Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.65 SEPARABILITY, PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be separable. In the event any
section, clause or provision of this subchapter is declared to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remainder of the subchapter not specifically included in said decision
which shall remain effective, it being the intent of this County Board that
this subchapter would have been approved without such invalid provisions,
clauses or sections.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 94.66 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be published and take effect as provided by law.
(Ord. 12-0447, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 13-0739, passed 7-9-2013)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 94.80 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   Sections
94.02,
94.05(J) and (K),
94.06(B),
94.08, and
94.09 (where such authority is established by contract, agent agreement,
statute, or administrative rule) of the public nuisances subchapter shall be
primarily enforced by the Lake County Health Department. Section
94.13 of the public nuisances subchapter shall be primarily enforced by the
Lake County Sheriff’s Office. All other sections of the public nuisances
subchapter shall by jointly enforced by the Lake County Health Department, the
Lake County Planning, Building and Development Department, and the Lake County
Sheriff’s Office.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. 16-0904, passed 10-11-2016)
§ 94.81 WARNING OF VIOLATION.
   The Enforcement Officer, as defined in §
94.80, shall have the authority to issue a warning of ordinance violation when
an individual or owner has been found to be, or may be, in violation of any
section of the public nuisances subchapter or any Lake County ordinance as
stipulated in §
94.52. The warning of ordinance violation may be provided by any of the
following methods: (1) by posting a warning of ordinance violation on the
property; (2) personally handing a warning of ordinance violation to the
individual found to be in possession or control of the property; or (3) in the
form of a letter, sent via regular U.S. mail, to the owner of the property. The
warning shall, at a minimum, identify the violation for which it is being
issued, shall include the address where the violation, or potential violation,
is located, shall require the violator and/or property owner to cease the
violation(s) or abate the violation(s) within no less than seven days, and
shall state that a notice of ordinance violation may be issued if the
violation, or potential violation, has not ceased nor has been abated.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. passed 9-9-2014; Ord. 16-0501, passed 6-7-
2016; Ord. 16-0904, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 25–0511, passed 5-13-2025)
§ 94.82 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   If an individual or owner has previously been issued a warning of ordinance
violation and fails to abate the violation by the date specified in the
warning, or if an individual or owner is in violation of any section of the
public nuisances subchapter, the Enforcement Officer shall have authority to
issue a notice of ordinance violation. If administrative adjudication is found
to be the appropriate remedy to resolve the violation, the notice must be
served in accordance with and shall contain all information specified and
required in the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.65). Prior to the hearing date documented on the notice of ordinance
violation, the respondent may elect to abate or cease the violation for which
the notice of ordinance violation was issued, pay the fine listed on the notice
of ordinance violation, and not participate in the hearing.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. passed 9-9-2014; Ord. 16-0501, passed 6-7-
2016)
§ 94.83 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   In addition to or in lieu of the actions authorized under any other
provision of the public nuisances subchapter, the county may request a court of
competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief, a cease and desist order, or any
other necessary or convenient relief to abate all nuisances.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 94.84 CHRONIC NUISANCES.
   Upon determination by the Enforcement Officer that a property is a chronic
nuisance property, the Enforcement Officer shall cause to be served upon the
owner of such property a notice that the property has been found to be a
chronic nuisance property. If the owner of such property cannot be found after
reasonable efforts, the notice required by this provision may be served upon
the occupant of the property or upon the person or persons causing, permitting,
or maintaining any then-existing nuisances on the property. The notice shall
direct the recipient of the notice to abate or remove such nuisance within 24
hours or such time as is reasonable, and shall state that if the nuisance is
not abated or removed in such time, the county may take appropriate action to
abate or remove such nuisance at the sole cost and expense of the recipient of
the notice.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 94.85 SEPARABILITY, PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   The provisions of the public nuisances subchapter shall be separable. In the
event any section, clause, or provision of the public nuisances subchapter is
declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the public nuisances
subchapter not specifically included in said decision which shall remain
effective, it being the intent of this County Board that the public nuisances
subchapter would have been approved without such invalid provisions, clauses,
or sections.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 94.86 CONFLICT.
   If the provisions of the public nuisances subchapter conflict with
provisions found in any other adopted ordinances or regulations of the county,
or with any federal or State of Illinois law, the more restrictive provision of
ordinance or law will control. The inclusion of provisions in the public
nuisances subchapter that are also contained in other Lake County ordinances or
regulations does not negate the ability of the Enforcement Officer to enforce
these provisions under the terms and authority of these other ordinances or
regulations. However, in no case shall any provision contained in the public
nuisances subchapter be enforced under the terms and authority of more than one
Lake County ordinance or regulation.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 94.87 COMPLIANCE.
   Compliance with the public nuisances subchapter does not release persons
from compliance with applicable federal or State of Illinois law, or other Lake
County ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 94.88 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The public nuisances subchapter shall be in full force and effect
immediately upon its passage.
(Ord. 12-0446, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 94.89 ABATEMENT COSTS.
   If the respondent fails to abate any violation, and the Lake County Sheriff
or Enforcement Officer abate the violation as provided for in §§
94.10 through
94.12 and
94.89, the respondent shall be liable for all costs of abatement. The costs of
abatement will, after a hearing, be set by the court or the Administrative
Adjudication Hearing Officer. The respondent shall be given at least ten days
written notice of the hearing to assess the costs via regular mail to the
respondent's last known address.
(Ord. passed 9-9-2014)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Public nuisances.
      (1)   Initiation of enforcement action. After Lake County has given
notice in accordance with §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89, in addition to all other remedies available to Lake County, and upon the
failure of the recipient of the notice to abate or remove nuisances on the
property within the time specified by such notice, Lake County may initiate
abatement or enforcement actions with respect to any new, recurring, or
continued nuisance condition or activity without further notice.
      (2)   Assessment of fines. As pertains to any fines authorized by §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89, by any other Lake County ordinance, Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance, or by State of Illinois statute, whoever suffers or
permits any public nuisance or nuisance as specified in §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89 to exist or continue in violation of §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89 shall be subject to a separate fine for each offense. Fines may also be
assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer pursuant to
the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance for failure to abate
violations of §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89 in accordance with §§
94.01 through
94.12 and
94.80 through
94.89, State of Illinois statute or the Lake County Administrative Adjudication
Ordinance. Each day that a violation of this subsection (B) exists or continues
shall be considered a separate offense and any fine or fines for these separate
offenses shall be assessed in accordance with applicable State of Illinois
statutes.
      (3)   Chronic nuisance properties. Upon the finding by a court of
competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer pursuant to the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance, the county may record on the chain of
title for such property in the Lake County Recorder's Office a notice that such
property is a chronic nuisance, provided that a further notice shall later be
recorded at such time that the property ceases to be a chronic nuisance
property. A property that is found to be a chronic nuisance property shall
remain a chronic nuisance property until such time that the Enforcement Officer
or the Enforcement Officer's designee certifies that the property has remained
nuisance-free for 24 consecutive months.
   (C)   Camps and camping sites. Any person who fails to comply with the
provisions of §§
94.30 through
94.35 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to arrest
and, upon conviction, subject to a fine of not more than $200 for each day that
the violation exists. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-2) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. II] passed 3-19-1959; Ord.
passed 10-9-1984; Ord. passed 5-12-1987; Ord. passed 5-13-2003; Ord. passed 7-
12-2011; Ord. passed 9-13-2011; Ord. passed 9-9-2014)
CHAPTER 95: SMOKE-FREE ENVIRONMENT
Section
   
95.01   Recitals
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Smoking prohibited in public places and places of employment within
unincorporated Lake County
   
95.04   Reasonable distance
   
95.05   Exemptions
   
95.06   Designation of other no-smoking areas
   
95.07   Responsibilities of proprietors
   
95.08   Enforcement
   
95.09   Non-compliance
   
95.10   Public education
   
95.11   Effective date
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 RECITALS.
   The following recitals are incorporated into this chapter.
   (A)   The County Board finds that smoking is dangerous to human beings and a
hazard to public health and welfare;
   (B)   The Smoke Free Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82/65) authorizes any non-home
rule county to regulate smoking in public places in the unincorporated
territory of the county; and
   (C)   The County Board enacts this chapter known as the “Smoke-Free
Environment Ordinance of the County of Lake”, herein referred to as “this
chapter”, to regulate smoking in public places within unincorporated Lake
County.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 23-1563, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages
for consumption by guests and patrons on the premises and in which the serving
of food is either not done or is only incidental to the consumption of those
beverages, including but not limited to taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
and cabarets.
   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
whether for-profit or not-for-profit, or any other business entity within
unincorporated Lake County, including but not limited to retail businesses and
service businesses where goods or services are sold to the public; and
professional corporations, partnerships, or other business entities wherein
legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional
services are provided. A BUSINESS shall include a private club, as defined in
this section, and any government entity subject to county ordinances.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine or any
other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person in
any manner for the purpose of inhaling vapor or aerosol from the product.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE includes any such product, whether manufactured,
distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or
vape pen or under any other product name or descriptor.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, business, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual
persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space in any structure, or portion thereof, located
between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by walls, windows,
doorways, or combinations thereof that extend from the floor to the ceiling.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or treatment
of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control
clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories,
and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians,
dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall
include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms, and
wards within HEALTH CARE FACILITIES.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area of a business within unincorporated
Lake County where one or more employees are required or permitted by an
employer to work in the course of their employment, including without
limitation the generality of the foregoing work areas, private offices,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, cafeterias, employee
lounges, stairs, elevators, hallways, and restrooms. A PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT
shall include enclosed areas of a private club.
   PRIVATE CLUB. An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the
owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively
for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational,
fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but
not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to
its operation.
   PUBLIC ENTRANCE. Every doorway or other entrance to a public place or a
place of employment.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area in a building or structure within
unincorporated Lake County which members of the public are invited or permitted
to visit or use, including lobbies, hallways, stairways, elevators, and other
common enclosed areas of businesses or apartment buildings, condominiums,
cooperatives, congregate housing, and other multiple-unit residential
structures, including without limitation the following:
      (1)   Arcades;
      (2)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums;
      (3)   Bars;
      (4)   Bingo facilities;
      (5)   Bowling alleys;
      (6)   Convention facilities;
      (7)   Day care centers, nursery schools, elementary schools, high
schools, community colleges, technical training establishments, specialty
schools, colleges and universities;
      (8)   Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage,
drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance;
      (9)   Gaming facilities;
      (10)   Vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the county for county
business;
      (11)   Grocery stores;
      (12)   Health care facilities, adult care facilities, and nursing homes;
      (13)   Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings,
condominiums, and enclosed common areas in trailer parks;
      (14)   Polling places;
      (15)   Private clubs;
      (16)   Public elevators and all retail stores where merchandise is
displayed and offered for sale;
      (17)   Public conveyances and transportation facilities, including
without limitation buses, trains, taxicabs, and limousines as well as enclosed
areas for ticketing, boarding, and waiting areas at public transit stations;
      (18)   Restaurants, including a bar attached to or within a restaurant;
      (19)   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other enclosed
common-use areas;
      (20)   Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including
without limitation school buildings, under the control of an agency, board,
commission, committee or council;
      (21)   Service lines;
      (22)   Shopping malls; and
      (23)   Sports arenas, gymnasiums, or recreational areas, including
without limitation enclosed areas within outdoor arenas.
   RESTAURANT. An eating establishment, including but not limited to coffee or
sandwich shops, cafeterias, and private and public school cafeterias, which
gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as
kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for
serving elsewhere. The term RESTAURANT shall include a bar attached to or
within the RESTAURANT.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment within unincorporated Lake
County that derives more than 80% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose
tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, electronic cigarettes, cigarettes, pipes,
and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories
and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO
STORE includes an enclosed workplace that manufactures, imports, or distributes
tobacco, electronic cigarettes, or tobacco products, when, as a necessary and
integral part of the process of making, manufacturing, importing, or
distributing a tobacco product or electronic cigarette for the eventual retail
sale of that tobacco, electronic cigarette, or tobacco product, tobacco is
heated, burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco product is tested, provided
that the involved business entity: (1) maintains a specially designated area or
areas within the workplace for the purpose of the heating, burning, smoking, or
lighting activities, and does not create a facility that permits smoking
throughout; (2) satisfies the 80% requirement related to gross sales; and (3)
delivers tobacco products or electronic cigarettes to consumers, retail
establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of its business.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco or electronic cigarette
department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment
with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
   SERVICE LINE. An indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or
receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange
of money.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of
any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment. SMOKE or SMOKING includes the use of an electronic
cigarette. SMOKE or SMOKING does not include smoking that is associated with a
native recognized religious ceremony, ritual, or activity by American Indians
that is in accordance with the federal American Indian Religious Freedom Act,
42 U.S.C. 1996 and 1996a.
   SPORTS ARENA. A sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing
arena, swimming pool, roller or ice rink, and other similar places where
members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise,
participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events.
   TOBACCO. Any item, product, or substance containing tobacco leaf, including
specifically but without limitation cigarettes, cigars, snuff, and pipe,
chewing, or dipping tobacco.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 23-1563, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 95.03 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT WITHIN
UNINCORPORATED LAKE COUNTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place or
place of employment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for an employer to permit smoking in any place of
employment.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant, or lessee, as
the case may be, in control of a public place to permit smoking in a public
place.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant, or lessee, as
the case may be, in control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove
ashtrays, as provided in §
95.07.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 23-1563, passed 11-14-2023)
Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 REASONABLE DISTANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to smoke within 20 feet of an entrance of a
public place or a place of employment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to smoke within 20 feet of an operable window of
a public place or place of employment.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to smoke within 20 feet of a ventilation air
intake of either a public place or a place of employment.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 23-1563, passed 11-14-2023)
Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Personal vehicles, other than vehicles used for public conveyance or
owned or leased by the county;
   (B)   Private residences or dwelling places, including a private residence
or dwelling place that is used for home occupation purposes pursuant to the
Lake County Unified Development Ordinance (codified at
Chapter 151, §§
151.001 through
151.285) provided there are no non-resident employees or clients/customers
during the posted hours of business in that portion of the dwelling used for
the home occupation. This exemption shall not apply to a private residence or
dwelling place used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility
open to the public; or
   (C)   An established smoking area incidental to sales in retail tobacco
stores, provided that the smoking area is in existence and operational as of
the adoption date of this chapter, and provided that smoke does not infiltrate
into an area where smoking is otherwise prohibited under this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 23-1563, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 95.06 DESIGNATION OF OTHER NO- SMOKING AREAS.
   This chapter does not limit the existing right of any employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, manager, or other person in control of any public place or
place of employment to designate any non-enclosed area, including outdoor
areas, as an area where smoking is prohibited.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007)
§ 95.07 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPRIETORS.
   Each owner, lessee, occupant, employer, or other person in control of a
public place or a place of employment shall be responsible for all the
following:
   (A)   Post conspicuous signs in the entrance or vestibule to the public
place, place of employment, or the building wherein they are located, as the
case may be, bearing the text “No Smoking” or the international “No Smoking”
symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in
a circle with a bar across it;
   (B)   Remove ashtrays or other similar containers intended for the deposit
of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars, or other tobacco products from the public
place; and
   (C)   Notify employees regarding the requirements of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007)
§ 95.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   Violations of this chapter shall be enforced within unincorporated Lake
County by the Lake County Sheriff or their designees(s), or by the Executive
Director of the Lake County Health Department or their designee(s). The
enforcement of violations may proceed either through a notice to appear before
the 19th Judicial Circuit Court or through administrative adjudication pursuant
to the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance. (§§
94.50 -
94.66).
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 15-0376, passed 4-14-2015;
Ord. 23-1563, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 95.09 NON-COMPLIANCE.
   In addition to the fines established by §
95.99, violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter by a
person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or
place of employment is hereby declared a public nuisance and the county may, in
addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter,
commence an action to enjoin or abate the nuisance in any manner provided by
law.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007)
§ 95.10 PUBLIC EDUCATION.
   The County Board may engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify
the purposes and requirements of this chapter to citizens affected by it, and
to guide owners, lessees, occupants, operators, and managers in their
compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for
affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this chapter.
The failure of the County Board to take these steps, however, shall not be a
defense or excuse for non-compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007)
§ 95.11 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective on January 1, 2008; provided however,
that the provisions of this chapter shall not be effective until January 1,
2009, as to any business that both:
   (A)   Holds a valid Class A liquor license from the County Liquor Commission
as of the adoption date of this chapter; and
   (B)   Does not hold and is not required to obtain a food service facility
permit pursuant to §§
173.01 through
173.11.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Citation filed in Circuit Court. If the ordinance violation is cited
for enforcement before the 19th Judicial Circuit, the fine amount shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Any person who violates §
95.03(A) or any of the provisions of §
95.04 shall be fined $50 for each violation.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
95.03(B), (C), or (D) shall be fined $100 for each violation. Each day during
which a violation of §
95.03(B), (C), or (D) continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of violation. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Process, the minimum fine amount shall be $115 for
each violation.
(1977 Code, § 1:4-5A) (Ord. passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 15-0376, passed 4-14-2015;
Ord. 23-1563, passed 11-14-2023)
CHAPTER 96: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON LAND
Section
Bikeways
   
96.01   Authorization
   
96.02   Applicability
   
96.03   Permitted and restricted uses
   
96.04   Signs
   
96.05   Enforcement
   
96.06   Effective date
   
96.07   Amendments
 
   
96.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Signage for snowmobiles, see
Ch. 72
BIKEWAYS
§ 96.01 AUTHORIZATION.
   The county is desirous of designating certain bikeways as county bikeways
and, pursuant to 605 ILCS 30/0.01 et seq., as amended, is authorized to
regulate the use of bikeways for the safety and convenience of the public;
pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208 is authorized to regulate the operation of
bicycles; and pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-1067 is authorized to name bikeways under
its jurisdiction.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:1-12, 4:1-13, 4:1-14, 4:1-15) (Res./Ord. passed 6-13-1988;
Res./Ord. passed 7-9-1991; Res. Ord. passed 5-13-1997; Res./Ord. passed 1-12-
1999; Res./Ord. passed 2-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Res./Ord. passed
11-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord.
passed 4-13-2004; Res./Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Res./Ord. passed 2-10-2009; Ord.
16-1073, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 96.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to each bikeway, multi-use path, shared use path and
trail (referred to as “bikeways” in this subchapter) officially designated by
the County Board.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:1-12, 4:1-13, 4:1-14, 4:1-15) (Res./Ord. passed 6-13-1988;
Res./Ord. passed 7-9-1991; Res. Ord. passed 5-13-1997; Res./Ord. passed 1-12-
1999; Res./Ord. passed 2-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Res./Ord. passed
11-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord.
passed 4-13-2004; Res./Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Res./Ord. passed 2-10-2009)
§ 96.03 PERMITTED AND RESTRICTED USES.
   (A)   Any use of a bikeway is prohibited until it is officially opened to
public use by the County Engineer.
   (B)   Bikeways are restricted to the following uses:
      (1)   Bicycles;
      (2)   Pedestrians;
      (3)   All vehicles and equipment of the Lake County Division of
Transportation or its authorized agents;
      (4)   Police and emergency vehicles;
      (5)   Vehicles and equipment of government, or private utility companies,
for the maintenance of their utilities along the bike path; and
      (6)   Any use in accordance with the terms of a permit issued by a
government having such authority and jurisdiction.
   (C)   All other motorized and non-motorized vehicles and means of
conveyances are prohibited from using a bikeway, including but not limited to
the following:
      (1)   Motor vehicles;
      (2)   Motorcycles;
      (3)   Motor bikes;
      (4)   Mini-bikes;
      (5)   Mopeds;
      (6)   Go-carts;
      (7)   Dirt bikes;
      (8)   All terrain vehicles;
      (9)   Equine;
      (10)   Equine drawn vehicles; and
      (11)   Snowmobiles.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:1-12, 4:1-13, 4:1-14, 4:1-15) (Res./Ord. passed 6-13-1988;
Res./Ord. passed 7-9-1991; Res. Ord. passed 5-13-1997; Res./Ord. passed 1-12-
1999; Res./Ord. passed 2-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Res./Ord. passed
11-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord.
passed 4-13-2004; Res./Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Res./Ord. passed 2-10-2009)
§ 96.04 SIGNS.
   This subchapter shall not be enforceable on a particular Lake County bikeway
until such time as:
   (A)   The traffic control device(s) regulating the operation of bicycles, as
warranted by conditions on the bikeway, in accordance with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) have been posted by the County
Engineer; and
   (B)   With respect to enforcement of §
96.03 signs giving notice that motorized vehicles and equines are not allowed
on the bikeway have been posted by the County Engineer at entrances to the
bikeway from public streets crossing the bikeway.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:1-12, 4:1-13, 4:1-14, 4:1-15) (Res./Ord. passed 6-13-1988;
Res./Ord. passed 7-9-1991; Res. Ord. passed 5-13-1997; Res./Ord. passed 1-12-
1999; Res./Ord. passed 2-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Res./Ord. passed
11-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord.
passed 4-13-2004; Res./Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Res./Ord. passed 2-10-2009; Ord.
16-1073, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 96.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter shall be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff, the appropriate
municipal police, or his or her designee(s) who, at his or her discretion, may
either issue a ticket to proceed through:
   (A)   The Circuit Court of the 19th Judicial Circuit; or
   (B)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication, set forth in the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66) for tickets issued by the Lake County Sheriff.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:1-12, 4:1-13, 4:1-14, 4:1-15) (Res./Ord. passed 6-13-1988;
Res./Ord. passed 7-9-1991; Res. Ord. passed 5-13-1997; Res./Ord. passed 1-12-
1999; Res./Ord. passed 2-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Res./Ord. passed
11-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord.
passed 4-13-2004; Res./Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Res./Ord. passed 2-10-2009; Ord.
15-0369, passed 4-14-2015; Ord. 16-1073, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 96.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter takes effect upon designation of a bikeway by the County
Board.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:1-12, 4:1-13, 4:1-14, 4:1-15) (Res./Ord. passed 6-13-1988;
Res./Ord. passed 7-9-1991; Res. Ord. passed 5-13-1997; Res./Ord. passed 1-12-
1999; Res./Ord. passed 2-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Res./Ord. passed
11-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord.
passed 4-13-2004; Res./Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Res./Ord. passed 2-10-2009)
§ 96.07 AMENDMENTS.
   This subchapter may from time to time be amended as seen fit by the county.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:1-12, 4:1-13, 4:1-14, 4:1-15) (Res./Ord. passed 6-13-1988;
Res./Ord. passed 7-9-1991; Res. Ord. passed 5-13-1997; Res./Ord. passed 1-12-
1999; Res./Ord. passed 2-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Res./Ord. passed
11-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord.
passed 4-13-2004; Res./Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Res./Ord. passed 2-10-2009)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to penalties set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Lake County Sheriff's Office Citation filed in Circuit Court. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement before the 19th Judicial Circuit,
the fine amount for violations of § 96.03 shall be not less than $50 nor more
than $500 for a first violation. For a second or subsequent violation, the fine
amount for a violation of § 96.03 shall not be less than $500 nor more than
$1,000.
   (C)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§ 94.50 - 94.66), the minimum fine
amount shall be not less than $115 for the first violation. For a second or
subsequent violation, the fine amount shall not be less than $300 nor more than
$1,000.
(1977 Code, §§ 4:1-12, 4:1-13, 4:1-14, 4:1-15) (Res./Ord. passed 6-13-1988;
Res./Ord. passed 7-9-1991; Res. Ord. passed 5-13-1997; Res./Ord. passed 1-12-
1999; Res./Ord. passed 2-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 6-8-1999; Res./Ord. passed
11-9-1999; Res./Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Res./Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Res./Ord.
passed 4-13-2004; Res./Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Res./Ord. passed 2-10-2009; Ord.
15-0369, passed 4-14-2015; Ord. 16-1073, passed 11-8-2016)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSING OF AMUSEMENTS
      
111.   ALCOHOL REGULATIONS
      
112.   RESERVED
      
113.   ADULT USE LICENSING
      
114.   MASSAGE THERAPY
      
115.   VIDEO GAMING
      
116.   DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION
CHAPTER 110: LICENSING OF AMUSEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Tables for pinball, bagatelle, or pigeonhole prohibited
   
110.02   Motor vehicle races and stunt events
Raffles
   
110.15   Definitions
   
110.16   License required
   
110.17   Eligibility
   
110.18   Limitations
   
110.19   Restrictions
   
110.20   Applications
   
110.21   License fee
   
110.22   Submittal and approval
   
110.23   Records
Amusement Devices
   
110.35   Purpose
   
110.36   License required
   
110.37   Imposition and amount of license fee
   
110.38   Application
   
110.39   Licenses
   
110.40   Seizure of devices
   
110.41   Confiscation and forfeiture; hearing; sale
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Video gaming, see
Ch. 115
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 TABLES FOR PINBALL, BAGATELLE, OR PIGEONHOLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or use in any place of
public resort within the unincorporated area of Lake County any tables or
implements for any game of pinball, bagatelle, or pigeonhole.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
      PINBALL, BAGATELLE, or PIGEONHOLE. A game played with any number of balls
or spheres upon a table or board having holes, pockets, or cups into which such
balls or spheres may drop or become lodged and having arches, pins, and
springs, or any of them, to control, deflect, or impede the direction or speed
of the balls or spheres put in motion by the player, and shall include the
modern variety of bagatelle or pigeonhole commonly known as pin games.
      PLACE OF PUBLIC RESORT. Any premises wherein any service or merchandise
is offered for sale to the public or where tables or implements for playing the
game of bagatelle or pigeonhole are kept for gain or profit, or any premises
used as a clubhouse or clubrooms.
   (C)   It is hereby made the duty of every police officer to seize any table
or implement kept or used in violation of this section, and upon conviction of
the keeper thereof, such table or implement so seized may be destroyed. Any
person obstructing or resisting any police officer in the performance of any
act authorized by this section shall be fined as set forth in §
110.99.
(1977 Code, § 3:1-3) (Ord. passed 1-11-1966) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.02 MOTOR VEHICLE RACES AND STUNT EVENTS.
   (A)   A permit fee for all motor vehicle races and motor vehicle stunt
events for one single day be and it is hereby fixed in the sum of $35.
   (B)   The Chair of the County Board is hereby authorized to collect the fees
and to issue permits, and to pay over the monies collected to the Lake County
Treasurer, to be by him or her distributed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 5-9002 of the Counties Code, 55 ILCS 5/5-9002.
(1977 Code, § 3:5-4) (Res. passed 5-10-1955)
RAFFLES
§ 110.15 DEFINITIONS.
   All definitions contained in the Illinois Raffles Act, being 230 ILCS 15/
0.01 et seq., shall apply to this subchapter, and in case of any conflict
between the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of the Illinois
Raffles Act, as amended, the Illinois Raffles Act shall control.
   BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial, and
civil interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions or a higher degree of efficiency in their
respective occupations.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961,
conducted by an organization licensed under the Illinois Raffles Act, in which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance or
ticket, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be
designated the winning chance or ticket; and
      (2)   The winning chance or ticket is to be determined through a drawing
or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts
on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that
the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for
the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are VETERANS of military service, the
primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public
benefit.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 110.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct a raffle without having first
obtained a license therefor pursuant to this subchapter and the Illinois
Raffles Act. Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for one
raffle or for a specified number of raffles to be conducted during a specified
period, not to exceed one year.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.17 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, business, fraternal, educational, veterans' organizations, as defined in
§
110.15, or other bona fide not-for-profit organizations which operate without a
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five years immediately before making application for a license, and
which have had during that entire five-year period engaged in carrying out
their objectives; or to a non-profit fundraising organization organized for the
sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or
group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardships as the result of an
illness, disability, accident, or disaster or to any law enforcement agencies
or associations that represent law enforcement officials.
   (B)   The following are ineligible for any license under this subchapter:
      (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      (3)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      (4)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsections
(B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) above has a proprietary, equitable or credit
interest, or in which the person is active or employed;
      (5)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsections (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) above is an officer, director, or employee, whether
compensated or not; and
      (6)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsections (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) above is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle as defined in the Illinois Raffles Act.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 20-0419, passed 3-10-2020;
Ord. 20-0419, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 110.18 LIMITATIONS.
   Raffles are subject to the following limitations:
   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle under this subchapter is limited to $50,000;
   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle is limited to $35,000;
   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle ticket issued
or sold is limited to $200; and
   (D)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
is limited to 180 days.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 110.19 RESTRICTIONS.
   Raffles are subject to the following restrictions.
   (A)   Proceeds. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
raffle.
   (B)   Participation in management. No person except a bona fide member of
the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of
the raffle.
   (C)   Remuneration. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   Premises. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning ticket or tickets in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this subchapter.
   (E)   Locations. Raffle tickets may be sold or issued only within the area
specified on the license and winning tickets may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.
   (F)   Age. A person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles only with the permission of a parent or guardian. A
person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where drawings are held
only when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.20 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for a license must contain the following information:
   (A)   Name of applicant;
   (B)   Address;
   (C)   Purpose of raffle(s);
   (D)   Area(s) within unincorporated Lake County where tickets will be sold;
   (E)   Time period(s) during which tickets will be sold or issued;
   (F)   Sworn statement attesting to not-for-profit character of the
prospective licensee organization, signed by presiding officer and secretary of
organization;
   (G)   Time(s) and location(s) within unincorporated Lake County at which
winning ticket(s) will be determined;
   (H)   The license fee;
   (I)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be awarded
at each raffle;
   (J)   The maximum retail value of each prize or each specific type of prize
to be awarded by a licensee at each raffle; and
   (K)   The maximum amount to be charged for each raffle ticket and the number
of tickets to be issued for each raffle.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 110.21 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for a license to conduct a raffle(s) shall be $5. No application for
a license will be approved prior to receipt of the license fee.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 110.22 SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL.
   Applications may be filed in person or by mail at the Office of the Lake
County Board, 18 N. County Street, Waukegan, Illinois. Applications will be
evaluated within 30 days of receipt. An approved application for a license
shall constitute the license for the conduct of the raffle applied for by the
applicant.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
§ 110.23 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct a raffle shall keep such records
and shall also keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds
for each single gathering or occasion at which winning tickets are determined.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of each raffle shall be segregated
from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if
bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization pursuant to
license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of Illinois, and shall be
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of
its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses, and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   (1)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report in
writing within 30 days after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership,
and to the office of the County Board, its gross receipts, expenses, and net
proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as
required in the Illinois Raffles Act.
      (2)   Where an organization is licensed to conduct more than one raffle,
the report may be filed within 30 days after the conclusion of the last raffle
drawing.
(1977 Code, § 3:6-13) (Ord. passed 11-13-2001)
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 110.35 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is an ordinance of the county providing for the licensing,
regulation, and control of coin-operated entertainment, amusement and
recreation devices in the county outside the corporate boundaries of any city,
village, or incorporated town.
(1977 Code, § 3:1) (Ord. passed 5-12-1998)
§ 110.36 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Display. Any person, firm, partnership, club, association, or
corporation which displays any coin-in-the-slot operated amusement device to be
played or operated by the public in unincorporated Lake County shall obtain a
license from the county.
   (B)   Distribution. Any person, firm, operator, partnership, club,
association, or corporation engaged in the business of distributing or leasing
coin-in-the-slot operated amusement devices to be played or operated by the
public within unincorporated Lake County shall, before entering any lease,
retail agreement, distribution agreement, or contract with the owner of lessees
of any premises, obtain a license from the county for the purpose of engaging
in the business of distributing, leasing, or renting the devices.
   (C)   Ownership and display. Any person, firm, operator, partnership, club,
association, or corporation owning coin-in-the-slot operated amusement devices
and also displaying these devices to be played or operated by the public within
unincorporated Lake County, shall obtain a license for the purpose of so
displaying the devices for use or operation by the public.
(1977 Code, § 3:1) (Ord. passed 5-12-1998)
§ 110.37 IMPOSITION AND AMOUNT OF LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Display. There is hereby imposed on the display of every coin-in-the-
slot operated amusement device in the county, outside the corporate limits of
any city, village, or incorporated town, which does not return to the player
thereof any money or property or right to receive money or property, an annual
license fee of $50 for each machine for which a license is sought.
   (B)   Distribution. There is hereby imposed on the business of distribution
or lease of coin-in-the-slot operated amusement devices to be played or
operated by the public within the jurisdiction of the county an annual license
fee of $200.
   (C)   Payment of fees. All fees for licenses issued under this subchapter
shall be delivered to the Chair of the County Board on or before July 1 of the
year for which the license is to be issued. For the period of July 2 through
July 31, a license may only be renewed only by payment of the original fee and
a $10 per-day penalty. This penalty shall commence on July 2 and accrue until
the Chair of the County Board has actual receipt of the fee, including the day
of actual receipt, but in no event after July 31. Where a license application,
license fee and respective penalty are not received on or before July 31, in
the discretion of the Chair of the County Board, the application for renewal
may be denied. If the license application is granted, the fee shall be
deposited by the Lake County Treasurer, in the General Corporate Fund of the
county. If the application for license is denied, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant.
(1977 Code, § 3:1) (Ord. passed 5-12-1998)
§ 110.38 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application and fee. The application for license shall be made to the
Chair of the County Board in a form prescribed by the Chair. This application
for license shall be accompanied by the annual license fee, which shall be paid
to the County of Lake and collected by the Chair of the County Board. All
monies received by the Chair under this subchapter shall be promptly paid to
the Treasurer of the county and deposited into the General Corporate Fund of
the county.
   (B)   Form of application.
      (1)   The application shall require the full name, address, and
fingerprints of the applicant, including the full names, addresses, and
fingerprints of all partners if the applicant is a partnership, and the full
names, addresses, and fingerprints of all officers, directors, and stockholders
owning 5% or more of the corporate stock if the applicant is a corporation. The
application shall also contain such relevant data, including but not limited to
individual, partnership, firm, club, association, or corporate records, bills
of sale, or information regarding the origin and ownership of the devices and
the division of revenues generated by the devices.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to under oath, signed by the
applicant(s), and notarized. If the applicant is a partnership, firm,
association, or club, then the application shall be signed by at least two
members. If the applicant is a corporation, then the application shall be
signed by at least the president and secretary of the corporation.
   (C)   Hearing on application. The Chair of the County Board may conduct a
hearing on the issue of whether a license shall be issued. The Chair may
question the applicant(s) or other persons on any relevant matter.
   (D)   Restrictions upon issuance.
      (1)   No license shall be issued hereunder to any person who has been
convicted of a felony or who has been convicted of any forcible felony or a
crime of moral turpitude as defined by § 124-1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or
any amendment thereto. No license shall be issued to a partnership where any
partner has been so convicted; nor to a corporation where any officer or
stockholder owning 5% or more of the corporate stock has been so convicted.
      (2)   No license shall be issued to any persons, firm, club, association,
partnership, or corporation who has violated this subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 3:1) (Ord. passed 5-12-1998; Ord. 20-0419, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 110.39 LICENSES.
   (A)   Display upon issuance. If the application is approved and the annual
license fee is paid, the Chair shall provide a form of license setting forth
the name of the licensee and the year for which the license is issued, and if
authorizing the display of devices, the number of devices the licensee is
authorized to display. Every licensee under the provisions of this subchapter
shall exhibit the license at all times in a conspicuous place within the same
location as that in which the devices are located; or in the case of a license
for distribution, the license shall be affixed to the device itself. The Chair
of the County Board or his or her authorized agents, or the Lake County
Sheriff, or his or her duly authorized deputies, shall have the right to
inspect premises or devices for the exhibition of the license without notice to
the licensee.
   (B)   License period. The license period for all licenses issued hereunder
shall be for one year from July 1 to June 30 of each year. No refund or rebate
shall be made to any applicant whenever any license is denied, suspended,
revoked, or surrendered for any reason, and no license fee shall be prorated
for any portion of any year.
   (C)   Personal nature of licenses.
      (1)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, valid for not to
exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this section
provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of the testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease, upon the death of the licensee.
      (2)   When the licensee is a partnership or corporation, the license
shall terminate whenever there is a transfer of 50% or more of the ownership
interest. Provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection (C)(2) and
of subsection (C)(3) below shall not apply where the transfer of an ownership
interest is made to a partner or to an officer or stockholder named on the
original license application.
      (3)   Whenever there is a transfer of 50% of the ownership interest of a
licensee, the licensee shall within ten days of the effective date of the
transfer surrender the license issued to the Chair of the County Board. The
licensee may make new application for license; and if the application and fee
are submitted within ten days of the effective date of the transfer, the Chair
may, at his or her discretion, issue an interim license. The interim license
shall be valid until the new application shall be issued or denied, but in no
event shall it be effective after the date at which the license surrendered
would have expired.
(1977 Code, § 3:1) (Ord. passed 5-12-1998)
§ 110.40 SEIZURE OF DEVICES.
   (A)   Any duly authorized employee of the Lake County Sheriff may, without a
search warrant, seize any coin-in-the-slot operated amusement device which is
being displayed in his or her presence in a manner that violates any provision
of this act.
   (B)   The amusement device so seized shall be subject to confiscation and
forfeiture as hereinafter provided.
(1977 Code, § 3:1) (Ord. passed 5-12-1998)
§ 110.41 CONFISCATION AND FORFEITURE; HEARING; SALE.
   (A)   Hearing. After seizing any coin-in-the-slot operated amusement device,
as provided in §
110.40, the Chair of the County Board shall hold a hearing in the county and
shall determine whether the amusement device was being displayed in a manner
which violates any provision of this subchapter. The proof shall be by a
preponderance of the evidence.
      (1)   The Chair shall give not less than seven days notice of the time
and place of the hearing to the owner of the amusement device if he or she is
known, and also to the person in whose possession the amusement device seized
was found, if the person is known and if the person in possession is not the
owner of the amusement device.
      (2)   In case neither the owner or the person in possession of the
amusement device is known, the Chair shall cause publication of the time and
place of the hearing to be made at least once in each week for three weeks
successively in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
   (B)   Order of confiscation. If, as the result of the hearing, the Chair
shall determine that the amusement device seized was, at the time of seizure,
being displayed in a manner in violation of this subchapter, the Chair shall
enter an order declaring the amusement device confiscated and forfeited to the
county, and to be sold by the county in the manner hereinafter provided. The
Chair shall give notice of the order to the owner of the amusement device if he
or she is known, and also to the person in whose possession the amusement
device so taken was found, if the person is known and if the person in
possession is not the owner of the amusement device. In case neither the owner
nor the person in possession of the amusement device is known, the Chair shall
cause publication of the order to be made at least once in each week for three
weeks successively in any newspaper of general circulation in the county.
   (C)   Reclamation of confiscated devices. The person from whom the amusement
device has been seized (or the owner of the device if that is a different
person) may redeem and reclaim the device within 30 days after the Chair’s
order of confiscation and forfeiture becomes final by payment of an amount
equal to twice the annual license fee applicable to the amusement device, plus
a penalty of 10%.
   (D)   Sale. When any amusement device shall have been declared forfeited to
the county by the Chair, as provided in this section, and when all proceedings
for the judicial review of the Chair’s decision have terminated, the Chair
shall (if the amusement device is not redeemed and reclaimed within the time
and in the manner provided for in this section) sell the amusement device for
the best price obtainable and shall forthwith pay over the proceeds of the sale
to the Lake County Treasurer; provided, however, that if the value of the
property sold shall be $500 or more, the property shall be sold only to the
highest and best bidder on those terms and conditions and on open competitive
bidding after public advertisement.
(1977 Code, § 3:1) (Ord. passed 5-12-1998)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Tables for pinball, bagatelle or pigeonhole. Any person who violates §
110.01 shall be subject to prosecution and, if adjudicated guilty, shall pay a
fine of not more than $500 per offense. The ownership and operation of each
machine shall constitute a separate offense, and each day the violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Motor vehicle races and stunts.
      (1)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
110.02 shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $200, for each offense,
and each day that the violation continues shall be regarded as constituting a
distinct and separate offense.
      (2)   Any person obstructing or resisting any police officer in the
performance of any act authorized by §
110.02 shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $200, for each offense.
(1977 Code, § 3:1-3)
   (D)   Amusement devices. Any person or persons, firm, club, association,
partnership, or corporation who shall use or operate any device which is
required to be licensed under §§
110.35 through
110.41 for other than lawful purposes, or permits the display or operation of
the device upon their premises contrary to the provisions of §§
110.35 through
110.41, shall be guilty of a violation of §§
110.35 through
110.41. The violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500. Each
day the violation exists shall be considered a separate offence.
      (1)   False application or information. Any person or persons, firm,
club, association, partnership or corporation who shall knowingly file a false
application or knowingly provide false information on the application required
by §
110.38 shall be deemed to be in violation of §§
110.35 through
110.41.
      (2)   Casino type gambling devices. No persons, firm, club, association,
partnership, or corporation shall operate or distribute any gambling device as
defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-2.
      (3)   Suspension or revocation. The license of any person or persons,
firm, club, association, partnership, or corporation who commits any of the
violations set forth above is subject to suspension or revocation.
(1977 Code, § 3:1)
(Ord. passed 1-11-1966; Ord. passed 5-12-1998; Ord. 09-2023, passed 10-13-2009)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOL REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Construction; purpose
   
111.002   Words and phrases defined
Local Liquor Control Commissioner and Local Liquor Control Commission
   
111.015   Commissioner defined
   
111.016   Liquor Control Commission
   
111.017   Filing of appointments
   
111.018   Powers and duties of the Liquor Control Commissioner
   
111.019   Transfer to different premises
   
111.020   Commission’s duties
Licenses
   
111.035   License required; regulations
   
111.036   Prohibited transactions
   
111.037   Application for license
   
111.038   Ineligible applicants
   
111.039   Termination date
   
111.040   Regulations applicable to all licensees
   
111.041   Regulations applicable to licensees with state video gaming licenses
   
111.042   Classification of fees and number of licenses
   
111.043   Number of licenses
   
111.044   List of licenses
   
111.045   License is a privilege
   
111.046   Renewals
   
111.047   Payment and disposition of fees
   
111.048   Change of personnel
   
111.049   Terminations
   
111.050   Relinquishment upon sale
   
111.051   Prohibited sales
   
111.052   Display of license
Procedure
   
111.065   Type of notice required
   
111.066   Hearings
   
111.067   Decisions
   
111.068   Entry onto premises
   
111.069   Waiver
   
111.070   Continuances for hearings
   
111.071   Appeal on the record
   111.072   Enforcement
 
   
111.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Minors consuming alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs at social events, see
Ch. 131
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 CONSTRUCTION; PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health,
safety, and welfare of the people of this county may thereby be protected, and
to the end that temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors may be
encouraged and fostered by judicious and careful regulation and control of the
sale and distribution of alcoholic liquors.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.002 WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED.
   (A)   All words and phrases used in this chapter, and defined in the
Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., entitled An Act
Relating to Alcoholic Liquors), enacted January 31, 1934 and in effect July 1,
1934, shall have the same meaning herein as they have in that Act.
   (B)   The words “Lake County” or “county” as used in this chapter shall be
taken to mean and include all territory within the geographical limits of this
County of Lake, State of Illinois, which is not within the limits of any city,
incorporated town, or village.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER AND LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION
§ 111.015 COMMISSIONER DEFINED.
   The Chair of the County Board of this county shall be the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, and shall act as such in and for that area in this county
which is not within the limits of any city, incorporated town, or village.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.016 LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner may appoint a person or persons to serve at
the will of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and to advise him or her in
the exercise of his or her powers and duties as the Commissioner. These persons
shall be members of the County Board of this county and shall constitute the
Liquor Control Commission of Lake County.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.017 FILING OF APPOINTMENTS.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall file a written appointment of the
members of the Liquor Control Commission of the county in the Office of the
Lake County Clerk, within five days after making the appointment of the members
of the Liquor Control Commission.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.018 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To grant, suspend for not more than 30 days, or to revoke for cause,
all local licenses issued to persons, firms, or corporations subject to his or
her jurisdiction;
   (B)   To enter, or to authorize any inspector, law enforcement officer, or
peace officer to enter, at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder for
the purpose of determining whether any of the provisions of this chapter have
been or are being violated, and to inspect or examine the premises at the time
of entry thereon;
   (C)   To require that all licensed premises be maintained and operated in a
sanitary condition, in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of
the Lake County Health Department, in compliance with all zoning regulations of
this county, and require any additional security or enforcement to assure
compliance with all applicable rules, regulations, and ordinances of the county
and the state; to assure the public safety, welfare, and best interests of
people of the county; to determine the environmental and economic impact of the
area surrounding the licensed premises; and to enforce the ordinances against
any public nuisance;
   (D)   To require that any licensee secure and file with his or her office a
certificate of approval showing compliance with all applicable rules or
regulations of the Lake County Health Department, and a certificate of approval
from the Planning, Building and Development Department, showing compliance with
all applicable rules and regulations of the Lake County Department of Planning,
Building and Development;
   (E)   To require each licensee dispensing draught beer to have coils and
other equipment used in drawing draught beer cleaned at least once each week by
either chemical or mechanical means approved by the Lake County Health
Department, and to prohibit the use of cleaning by steam, or hot water alone;
   (F)   To require each licensee to be responsible for the person or persons
cleaning coils and that the person or persons maintain a written record of the
dates on which the coils were cleaned;
   (G)   To receive complaints from any citizen regarding violations of any of
the provisions of this chapter or of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or
complaints regarding any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or
regulations concerning violations thereof, and to act upon the complaints as
herein provided;
   (H)   To receive all local license fees and to pay the same forthwith to the
Lake County Treasurer;
   (I)   To serve notice of hearing upon any licensee to consider suspension or
revocation of a license under circumstances which involve repeated reports of
law enforcement officers or violations of the law upon the premises (real
estate) adjacent to, and surrounding the structure in which alcoholic liquors
are served pursuant to a license issued in compliance with this chapter and
which violations consist of offensive language, or loud music, affrays,
assaults, and other breaches of the peace amounting to a nuisance; and
   (J)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right hereunder to
examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a license, or
for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom a notice of revocation or
suspension has been served, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books
and records of any applicant or licensee. The Commissioner, in conducting the
examination, may hear testimony and receive proof for his or her information in
the performance of his or her duties, and in connection with the examination
may issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. In
conducting the examinations, the Liquor Control Commissioner may authorize his
or her agent to act on his or her behalf.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.019 TRANSFER TO DIFFERENT PREMISES.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, the movement of a business from one
location to a second location shall constitute a “transfer”. The sale or
disposition of a business by the licensee to a person who will continue the
business on the same location shall constitute a “waiver”.
   (B)   After a license has been granted for a particular premises, the
Commissioner, upon proper showing, may permit the licensee to abandon the
premises therein described and to move his or her place of business to other
premises approved by the Commissioner. However, in order to obtain a hearing on
the matter, the licensee shall make written application to the Commissioner and
pay a hearing fee of $200. The application shall contain proof that notice of
application was served upon the owner of the original premises. The applicant
has the burden of showing that the premises to which removal is to be made
complies in all respects with the provisions of all applicable ordinances of
the county pertaining to zoning, health, and safety. Upon receipt of this
request, the Commissioner will conduct a hearing to inquire into, and receive
evidence bearing upon the question of removal to other premises. No person may
transfer a license to a new location unless he or she has operated the current
licenses premises for a reasonable period of time.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.020 COMMISSION’S DUTIES.
   The Liquor Control Commission shall have the following duties:
   (A)   To recommend to the County Board of this county any further
regulations and restrictions regarding the issuance of, and operations under
local licenses, not inconsistent with law, as the public good and convenience
may require; and
   (B)   To conduct hearings upon all matters referred to it by the Liquor
Control Commissioner and to make recommendations thereon to the Liquor Control
Commissioner.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
LICENSES
§ 111.035 LICENSE REQUIRED; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall sell or permit the sale, use or consumption of any
alcoholic liquors in the county in that territory subject to the control of the
Liquor Commissioner without first having obtained a license to sell such
liquors in each location, place, or premises wherein it is proposed by a
prospective licensee to sell such liquors.
   (B)   Restaurants, dining rooms, cabarets, night clubs, dance halls, and
places in which entertainment is provided or food served and which are not part
of a premises licensed hereunder, are prohibited from allowing patrons to bring
upon the premises alcoholic beverages to be there served or consumed by said
patrons.
   (C)   When two or more locations, places, or premises are under the same
roof, or, are located at one street address, a separate license shall be
obtained for each such location, place, or premises, unless all rooms in which
it is intended to serve alcoholic liquors are directly connected or are
adjacent to, and accessible to each other without leaving the building. Each
licensee shall define with certainty the room or rooms in which liquor is to be
sold.
   (D)   No person licensed to sell liquor under any license issued by the
Liquor Commissioner shall be permitted to sell, give away, or otherwise dispose
of alcoholic liquor at any place other than the place specifically described in
his license whether such place be in the same building or not provided, that
nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent any hotel
operator, or motel operator licensed under this chapter from serving alcoholic
liquor to registered guests of the hotel, or motel in any room or part of the
hotel or motel. However, such liquor so served shall be kept in and served from
a licensed location, place or room in said hotel or motel. The foregoing
provisions shall apply only to hotels and motels conducted and maintained as
such.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. 14-1198, passed 8-13-2013) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.036 PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS.
   No person shall sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish, or possess any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes, except as specifically provided in 235
ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. (Liquor Control Act of January 31, 1934) and, the provisions
of this chapter.
   (A)   No licensee under this chapter, nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of such licensee shall sell, give, or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or, to any
intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be an habitual drunkard,
or an insane, mentally ill, or mentally deficient person.
   (B)   Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift of such
alcoholic liquor, nor shall such person have alcoholic liquor in his
possession.
   (C)   If a licensee or his agents or employees believe, or have reason to
believe, that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because
of the age of the prospective recipient, he or such agents or employees shall,
before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of
positive identification, showing proof of age, which identification has been
issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
   (D)   Any person under the age of 21 years who misrepresents his or her age
for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage in any place
where such a beverage is sold, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500. No person shall transfer, alter,
or deface an identification card, use the identification card of another, carry
or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain an identification card
by means of false information. Any person found guilty of any of the foregoing
acts shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$500.
   (E)   Prohibitions regarding minors, subject to the exceptions set forth
below:
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase, obtain, receive, accept, have in his or her possession or control,
sell, give, deliver, mix, dispense, serve, furnish or consume alcoholic liquor.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   The possession, mixing, dispensing and serving, or consumption
of alcoholic liquor by a minor in the performance of a bona fide religious
service or ceremony is not prohibited by this chapter.
         (b)   The possession, mixing, dispensing and serving, or consumption,
of alcoholic liquor by a minor under the direct supervision and approval of a
parent or legal guardian in the privacy of such parent's or legal guardian's
residence is not prohibited by this chapter; provided, however, that this
exception shall not extend to any other occupant, invitee, visitor or guest
that is a minor.
         (c)   The possession and serving of alcoholic liquor by a minor as an
employee of any licensee under this section in such licensee's licensed
premises is not prohibited by this chapter; provided, however, that this
exception shall not extend to those persons under the age of 18 years nor shall
this exception extend to the mixing or dispensing of alcoholic liquor, or to
bartending, by any minor.
         (d)   The possession and delivery of any alcoholic liquor in its
original package and not for consumption on the premises where sold by a minor
as an employee of any licensee under this section or pursuant to the order of
his or her parent or legal guardian is not prohibited by this chapter.
         (e)   Any person found guilty of any of the foregoing acts shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500.
   (F)   No person shall operate, or attempt to operate any premises for the
sale of alcoholic beverages for which the license has been revoked, for any
cause, for the period of one year after such revocation.
   (G)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a
church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor provided that such
sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely
for the promotion of some common object other than the sale of alcoholic
liquors.
   (H)   No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member representative, agent,
or employee of such licensee shall permit anyone to carry, possess, or
discharge any firearm, stun gun, laser, or other deadly weapon on or about said
licensed premises or grounds thereon, except that the owner or licensed
manager, with a valid firearm permit, may keep such firearm on said premises.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. 14-1198, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 17-1380, passed 1-
16-2018) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.037 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a license hereunder shall be made to the Liquor Control
Commissioner in writing, under oath, signed by the applicant, if an individual,
or, by the duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, and, shall
include a $250 application fee (to be applied to the license fee if applicant
is approved), and the following information and statements:
   (A)   The name, age, last three residences and Social Security number of the
applicant. In the case of a partnership, the application must contain the
names, ages, and last three residence addresses and Social Security number of
each partner. If a corporate license is sought, the application must contain
the name of the corporation, the date of incorporation, the articles of
incorporation, the names and addresses and Social Security numbers of all
officers and directors. If a majority of the stock of such corporation is owned
by one person, or his nominee, the name, address and Social Security number of
each such person shall be set forth in the application.
   (B)   In the case of an individual, the application must contain his place
of birth, and if the applicant is a naturalized citizen, then the date and
place of naturalization must be shown.
   (C)   The capital investment which the applicant intends to make in the
business of selling liquor at retail upon receipt of a license.
   (D)   The location, address and legal description of the premises to be
licensed. If the premises are leased, the applicant shall attach a copy of the
lease to the license application.
   (E)   A statement whether applicant has made any other application in
Illinois for a liquor license and what disposition, if any, was made of such
application and a statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws
of the State of Illinois, or of the United States, and, that the applicant will
not violate any of the ordinances of Lake County.
   (F)   A statement whether or not applicant was ever convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor.
   (G)   The applicant, and in the case of a corporation, all officers and
persons owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of the corporate
applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Lake County Sheriff, and the applicant
shall pay all appropriate fees for said fingerprinting to the Sheriff, and such
applicants shall obtain a signed affidavit from said Sheriff, clearing the
applicants, which clearance shall be filed by the applicants in the office of
the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (H)   The applicant, or applicants, shall obtain a certificate of approval
from the Health Department and the Planning, Building and Development
Department, and, shall file such approval in the office of the Liquor
Commissioner with any application for a license.
   (I)   A statement whether the applicant intends to obtain a state video
gaming license and, if so, provide documentation to support that either at
least 60% of the establishment's annual gross revenue shall be from food and
beverage sales or that no more than 10% of its space will be dedicated to video
gaming.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. 14-1198, passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.038 INELIGIBLE APPLICANTS.
   No license shall be issued to:
   (A)   Any person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides or does business;
   (B)   Any applicant who is not a resident of the county, must have a manager
on premises for at least 40 hours a week, that is a resident of the county;
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, if the Commissioner determines, after an investigation, that the person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant public trust;
   (D)   An applicant who has been convicted of being the keeper of, or who is
keeping a house of ill fame;
   (E)   An applicant who has been convicted of pandering or other crimes or
misdemeanors opposed to decency and morality;
   (F)   An applicant whose license issued under the Illinois Liquor Control
Act has been revoked for cause;
   (G)   An applicant who, at the time of the application for renewal of any
license issued or revoked, would not be eligible for license upon first
application;
   (H)   A partnership, unless all of the members of the partnership shall be
qualified for a license;
   (I)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate of more than 5% of the
stock of the corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder
for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the county;
   (J)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in this state, or unless it
is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business
Corporation Act to transact business in this state;
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless the manager or agent possess the same qualifications required of the
licensee, and the manager shall reside within this county;
   (L)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
has forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for the
violation;
   (M)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (N)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the local
liquor control commissions, any mayor, alderman, or member of the city council
or commission, any president of a village board of trustees, or any president
or member of a county board; and no such official shall be interested directly
in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a
license may be granted to the official in relation to premises which are not
located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if
the issuance of the license is approved by the State Liquor Control Commission;
   (O)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (P)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
any of the subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of § 28-1, or as proscribed by §
28-3, of the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or
hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the
aforesaid statutory provisions;
   (Q)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period;
   (R)   A partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period;
   (S)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of the
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp for the current tax period;
   (T)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period;
   (U)   Any person, firm, association, or corporation not eligible for a state
retail liquor license;
   (V)   Any person who owns or is an employee of a manufacturer or distributor
of alcoholic liquors;
   (W)   Any person, where the premises for which the license is sought has had
a liquor license revoked within the one year of the date of application;
   (X)   Any person who has not paid the appropriate fees required by this
chapter on the dates specified, or for failure to pay for a county annual
amusement license fee for amusement devices located on the establishment; or
   (Y)   A person who is legally indebted to the state or county for payment of
other fees, charges, bills, or taxes which have remained unpaid for more than
60 days.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 20-0419, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 111.039 TERMINATION DATE.
   Every Class A, B, C, E, and G license shall terminate on June 30 following
its issuance.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.040 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL LICENSEES.
   All licenses shall be granted subject to the following regulations, and, by
the act of acceptance of a license to sell alcoholic liquors at retail, all
licensees agree:
   (A)   To operate the licensed premises in compliance with all applicable
statutes and ordinances and all applicable zoning, building, fire, health, and
other regulations of the county.
   (B)   To see that the premises are at all times kept free of all persons
under 21 years of age who are not escorted by a parent or legal guardian.
However, this restriction does not prohibit the serving of food to persons
under 21 years of age in a dining room on the premises separated from any bar
for the serving of alcoholic liquors.
   (C)   That any false or untrue statements contained in the application for
license or at license hearing or, any violations of the terms and conditions of
the application, or, of any of the statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations
hereof, shall be cause for revocation or suspension of the license by the
Liquor Control Commissioner as is provided in the Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS
5/1-1 et seq.).
   (D)   Not to employ any persons under 16 years of age, nor, to employ any
persons under the age of 21 years for the purpose of drawing, pouring, or
mixing any alcoholic liquor. The term "employee" shall mean any person hired to
work at the premises and listed on the establishment's payroll.
   (E)   However, a person less than 21 years of age, but, at least 18 years of
age, may serve or deliver alcoholic liquor when in the presence of and under
the direct supervision and control of an employee 21 years of age or older. A
Class C license holder must employ a person 21 years of age for the purpose of
selling package liquor.
   (F)   Not to employ any waitress under 18 years of age.
   (G)   Not to permit the following conduct on licensed premises:
      (1)   Performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or other
sexual act.
      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus or genitals.
      (3)   The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic
hair, anus, vulva, or genitals.
      (4)   Permitting any person to remain upon licensed premises who exposes
to public view any portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, genitals, vulva, or
anus.
      (5)   The display of films or photographs, including slides, depicting a
live performance of anything prohibited in divisions (G)(1), (G)(2), (G)(3), or
(G)(4), above.
   (H)   To operate licensed premises so that assaults, fights and disorderly
conduct do not occur on or about the licenses premises.
   (I)   Persons holding Class A, B, D, or E licenses may not sell, permit to
be sold, give away or allow to be consumed, any alcoholic beverages between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on weekdays, and between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays, and New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, and Labor Day, effective July 1, 1999. It is unlawful to have licensed
premises open for business or to admit the public to such premises during
restricted hours.
      (1)   Persons holding Class C licenses shall not sell, permit to be sold,
or give away any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:
00 a.m. on any day and must illuminate the licensed premises by means of an
electric light of at least 25 watts power located at the rear of the premises
and visible from the street.
      (2)   Persons holding Class G licenses shall not sell, permit to be sold,
or give away any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. on any day and must illuminate the licensed premises in such a manner to
allow the front, rear and sides of the business to provide adequate visibility.
   (J)   To show evidence, satisfactory to the Commission, of the issuance of a
policy of liquor liability insurance (dram shop) and insuring against liability
for any injury or death on account of acts of negligence, omission, or
violating the Liquor Control Act. Said policy shall carry a minimum of $50,000
per person and $100,000 per occurrence for injury or death; and $50,000 for
loss of means of support. Each licensee shall furnish the Commission a
certificate of such insurance and, in the event of cancellation, notify the
Commission immediately of such cancellation.
   (K)   BASSET Training Program:
      (1)   For licenses effective on or after July 1, 1995, for liquor
licenses originally issued thereafter, all liquor licenses except Class D
licenses shall be accompanied with proof of completion of a State Certified
Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Educational Training (BASSET) program for
all persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel
working on the premises, and anyone whose job description entails the checking
of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to that
license.
      (2)   A state certified BASSET training program shall be defined as a
BASSET program licensed by the State of Illinois Department of Alcoholism and
Substance Abuse (DASA) as required by 235 ILCS 5/6-27 and regulated under Title
77 of the Illinois Administrative Code, Chapter X, Section 2056 Subpart F.
Providers of BASSET training shall be required to have on file with the Liquor
Commission all licenses and certificates to prove current qualifications.
      (3)   After the effective date of passage, any new employee, manager, or
agent of any liquor establishment so designated by the Liquor Control
Commission Chairman may be required to attend BASSET training shall be
maintained by the establishment in a manner that will allow inspection upon
demand by any designee of the Liquor Control Commission.
   (L)   To operate the licensed premises in compliance with all applicable
statutes and ordinances relating to Smoke Free Illinois Act, the Lake County
Smoke Free Ordinance and the Sale of Tobacco to Minors Act.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. 14-1198, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 22-1426, passed
10-11-2022)
§ 111.041 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO LICENSEES WITH STATE VIDEO GAMING LICENSES.
   Video gaming shall be a secondary use of any establishment obtaining a
license under this chapter. All licensees with a state video gaming license
shall be subject to the following regulations, and, by the act of acceptance of
a license to sell alcoholic liquors at retail under this chapter, agree:
   (A)   To comply with all provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   To obtain, and maintain, a valid video gaming terminal permit sticker
for each video gaming terminal at the establishment;
   (C)   To post, except for establishments which are strictly limited to
access by persons 21 years or older, a sign immediately outside the doorway or
portal to the designated gaming area which sign shall be as follows:
      (1)   The sign shall be constructed of sturdy material not less than 12
inches by 16 inches;
      (2)   The sign shall be conspicuous and legible at a distance of not less
than 20 feet, and shall be in a well lit location;
      (3)   The licensee shall be responsible to maintain the sign and keep it
in good repair, continuously legible;
      (4)   The sign shall contain the following words and symbols:
   NO PERSONS UNDER 21 ALLOWED
   (D)   To post a sign in a conspicuous location within the designated gaming
area, which sign shall be as follows:
      (1)   The sign shall be constructed of sturdy material not less than 8½
inches by 11 inches;
      (2)   The sign shall be conspicuous and legible at a distance of not less
than five feet and shall be well lit;
      (3)   All print on the sign shall be not less than 14-point font;
      (4)   The licensee shall be responsible to maintain the sign and keep it
in good repair, continuously legible;
      (5)   The sign shall contain the following words and symbols:
 
How do you know if you have a gambling problem?
Review the following questions:
• You have often gambled longer than you had planned.
• You have often gambled until your last dollar was gone.
• Thoughts of gambling have caused you to lose sleep.
• You have used your income or savings to gamble while letting bills go unpaid.
• You have made repeated, unsuccessful attempts to stop gambling.
• You have broken the law or considered breaking the law to finance your
gambling.
• You have borrowed money to finance your gambling.
• You have felt depressed or suicidal because of your gambling losses.
• You have been remorseful after gambling.
• You have gambled to get money to meet your financial obligations.
If you or someone you know answers yes to any of these questions, consider
seeking professional help or advice by calling the National Problem Gambling
Helpline at 1-800-522-4700 or the State of Illinois Hotline: 1-800-426-2537.
 
(Ord. 14-1198, passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.042 CLASSIFICATION OF FEES AND NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The classes of licenses and schedule of fees are established pursuant to
subsections (A) through (H). In the event that any new applicant is issued, a
license which terminates and expires less than 12 months before June 30, the
applicant shall pay the initial application fee plus the renewal fee for any
classification. For new applicants, the renewal fee shall be prorated according
to the number of months remaining in the license year, including the month
during which the application is approved.
   (A)   Class A licenses. A Class A license shall permit the holder to sell,
deal, or traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed only on the premises so
licensed, and in the original package for consumption off the premises. Any
display area of alcoholic liquor for retail sale in the original package shall
not exceed 18 square feet in the premises so licensed, and no advertising of
retail sales of package goods shall be carried on, other than the price of the
package being attached to the display area. The renewal fee for the license
shall be $1,500 annually. The initial application fee for a Class A license
shall be $1,000.
   (B)   Class B licenses. Holders of Class A licenses may apply for a Class B
license to operate, outside of the structure designated for the sale, upon
those premises a beer garden or area for use of umbrella- or cabana-type
structures for serving alcoholic liquors at retail. The license may be issued
pursuant to written application, after hearing before the Liquor Control
Commission, and payment of an additional fee of $500 annually.
   (C)   Class C licenses. A Class C license shall permit the holder to sell at
retail, but not for consumption on the premises where sold, alcoholic liquor in
the original package, and without any limitation of inside display area or
advertising by a person so engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor. The
renewal fee for this license shall be $1,750 annually. The initial application
fee for a Class C license shall be $750.
   (D)   Class D licenses. A Class D license shall permit the holder to sell,
deal, and traffic in intoxicating liquor only on the premises so licensed for a
24-hour period. A fee will be charged by the Planning, Building and Development
Department for a temporary use permit. In addition, the fee for the Class D
permit shall be $75 for a period of 24 hours, provided that the permit may be
extended to 96 hours, consecutively, at a fee of $25 for each additional 24-
hour period or fraction thereof. Class D permits shall be available only to
not-for-profit organizations registered with this state, political
organizations, or for any other group or organization that for good cause shown
to the Liquor Control Commissioner would qualify. An unlimited number of Class
D permits may be issued, but no organization shall be granted more than three
permits during the calendar year without permission from the Liquor Control
Commissioner. Each Class D applicant shall furnish evidence, satisfactory to
the Commission, of the issuance of a policy of liquor liability insurance (Dram
Shop) and insuring against liability for any injury or death on account of acts
of negligence, omission, or violating the Liquor Control Act. The policy shall
carry a minimum of $50,000 per person and $100,000 per occurrence for injury or
death; and $50,000 for loss of means of support.
   (E)   Class E licenses. A Class E license shall permit the holder to sell,
deal, or traffic in beer and wine to be consumed only on the premises so
licensed.
      (1)   To qualify for this license, a business must have a service bar
serviced by at least one waiter or waitress. The licensed premises must have a
kitchen and serve food to be eaten on the premises and the premises must have
minimum seating at tables for 80 patrons.
      (2)   The renewal fee for this license shall be $850 annually. The
initial application fee for a Class E license shall be $1,150.
   (F)   Class G licenses. A Class G license shall permit the holder to sell at
retail, but not for consumption on the premises where sold, alcoholic liquor in
the original package, and without any limitation of inside display area or
advertising by a person so engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor. The
Class G licenses shall be available only to businesses in which greater than
50% of gross sales of the business are derived from the sale of petroleum
products. The total number of Class G licenses available for the above
businesses shall be up to 15. The renewal fee for the license shall be $1,750
annually. The initial application fee for a Class G license shall be $750.
   (G)   Class H licenses. A Class H license shall permit a caterer to serve
alcoholic liquor as an incidental part of a food service that prepares meals,
but excludes the serving of snacks as a primary meal, at private or public
facilities in unincorporated areas of the county. All applicants for a Class H
license must meet all other requirements of this chapter, and the applicant
must prove it is operating a bona fide catering business. The renewal fee for
the license shall be $500 annually.
   (H)   Class I licenses. A Class I license shall permit the retail sale and
sale for resale of wine, for consumption both on and off the premises
specified. All applicants for a Class I license must meet all other
requirements of this chapter. The renewal fee for the license shall be $850
annually. The initial application fee for such license shall be $1,150.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-12-2008; Ord. passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 14-
0261, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 20-1403, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 111.043 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The following shall be the number of licenses to be issued.
   (A)   There shall be issued no more than 115 Class A, C, E, G, H and I
licenses, in the aggregate of which four shall be available for fraternal and
service organizations, and four licenses shall be available for the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources and the Lake County Forest Preserve District.
   (B)   Be it understood that the designated number of licenses for fraternal
and service organizations, Illinois Department of Conservation, and the Lake
County Forest Preserve District shall be allotted from the next available
license on the waiting list by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   The County Board reserves the right to increase the number of licenses
when it determines that the additional licenses and issuance thereof will
promote new economic development in the county.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 15-0730, passed 6-9-2015;
Ord. 17-1380, passed 1-16-2018; Ord. 19-0279, passed 2-12-2019; Ord. 19-0936,
passed 6-11-2019; Ord. 19-1173, passed 7-9-2019; Ord. 21-1471, passed 10-12-
2021; Ord. 24-0018, passed 1-16-2024; Ord. 24-1571, passed 11-12-2024; Ord. 25-
1425, passed 12-9-2025)
§ 111.044 LIST OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a
complete record of all licenses issued by him or her under this chapter, and
shall furnish the Lake County Clerk and Lake County Treasurer each with copies
thereof. Upon the issuance of any new license, or the revocation of any old
license, the Commissioner shall give written notice of that action to these
officers within 48 hours.
   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall report to the County Board all
of his or her acts in the enforcement of this chapter, and in regard to the
collection of liquor license fees, the date collected, and the date the fees
were turned over to the Lake County Treasurer, whenever a report is requested
by the County Board.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.045 LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE.
   (A)   A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, and shall expire on the next June 30 following the issuance thereof
and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to be encumbered or hypothecated. The
license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but
shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided the personal
representative of any deceased licensee, when the decedent’s estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, shall apply for a license within 90 days following
the death of the licensee. Under these circumstances, no initial license fee
shall be required; however, the applicant shall pay a $250 hearing fee as well
as all renewal fees when they become due. A license issued under this provision
shall expire upon the closure of the decedent’s estate or two years, whichever
occurs first.
   (B)   This section shall not restrict or be construed to restrict the
provisions of §
111.049.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 21-0266, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 111.046 RENEWALS.
   (A)   Any licensee may apply for renewal of his license at the expiration
thereof, provided, however, that he is then qualified as for an original
application, and, provided that the premises for which such renewal of license
is sought are in compliance with all applicable ordinances of the county.
   (B)   The right to file an application for renewal of a license hereunder
shall not be construed to create any vested interest, or right in an applicant.
An application for renewal of a license hereunder shall not prevent the Liquor
Commissioner from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within his
jurisdiction.
   (C)   At the time of renewal, any licensee with a state video gaming license
must provide documentation to show that either at least 60% of the annual gross
revenue is generated from food and beverage sales or that no more than 10% of
the space is dedicated to video gaming.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. 14-1198, passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.047 PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   (A)   All fees for licenses issued under this chapter shall be delivered to
the Liquor Control Commissioner on or before July 1 of the year for which the
license is to be issued.
   (B)   For the period of July 2 through July 31, a license may only be
renewed by payment of the original fee and a $10 per-day penalty. This penalty
shall commence July 2 and accrue until the Liquor Control Commissioner has
actual receipt of the fee, including the day of the actual receipt but in no
event after July 31.
   (C)   Where a license application, license fee, and respective penalty are
not received on or before July 31, in the discretion of the Liquor Control
Commissioner, the application for renewal may be denied.
   (D)   If the license application is granted, the fee shall be deposited by
the Lake County Treasurer in the General Corporate Fund of this county. If the
application for license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.048 CHANGE OF PERSONNEL.
   All changes in partnerships, officers, directors, or persons holding
directly, or beneficially, more than 5% of the stock or ownership interest or,
in managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in
writing to the Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the change. All
personnel shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter. All
these changes in personnel shall be subject to review, or hearing, by the
Liquor Control Commissioner in his or her discretion.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.049 TERMINATIONS.
   (A)   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs, resulting in the creation of a partnership interest in a
person who is not eligible to receive a liquor license, the license shall
thereby be terminated.
   (B)   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place as to officers, directors, or of shareholders holding more than 5% of the
stock, or in a manager resulting in the holding of office, or if a change takes
place in the transfer of shares to one who is not eligible for a license, the
license shall thereby terminate.
   (C)   When a license has been issued to an individual who becomes ineligible
to receive a license, the license theretofore issued to the individual shall
thereby terminate.
   (D)   In the case of a license issued to a corporation or partnership, the
transfer of more than 30% of the ownership interest of the original
stockholders or original members of the partnership to a person with no
ownership interest in the corporation or partnership at the time of the
transfer, the transfer or transfers, shall constitute the basis for a new
license application, and the initial license fee shall then be payable.
   (E)   Any licensee who ceases to do business for whatever reason, or who
closes his or her place of business for whatever reason for a period in excess
of 45 days, should notify the Commissioner in writing of the same. The licensee
may be required by the Liquor Control Commissioner, after receipt of notice of
a hearing, to show cause why the license for the establishment should not be
terminated.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.050 RELINQUISHMENT UPON SALE.
   If a current liquor license holder proposes to sell its business and
presents to the Liquor Commission a proposed contract with a non-liquor license
holder, the Commissioner may accept the relinquishment of the current license
and consider at a hearing the application of the proposed license holder, and
in the Commissioner's discretion, tender the seller's current license to the
buyer upon completion of the sale. Before receiving this license, the buyer
must meet all requirements of the liquor license process before the
relinquishment to the buyer becomes effective.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 20-0419, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 111.051 PROHIBITED SALES.
   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within 100 feet of any church, school other than an institution of higher
learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
spouses or children, or any military reservation or naval station; provided,
that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels or motels offering restaurant
services, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other
places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried
on, if the place of business so exempted shall have been established for those
purposes prior to the taking effect of 235 ILCS 5/6-11; and provided that the
prohibition shall not apply to renewal of a license for the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church or school where the
church or school has been established within the 100 feet since the issuance of
the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall
be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or
educational programs and not to property boundaries.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.052 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be displayed in plain view in a
conspicuous place within the licensed premises.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
PROCEDURE
§ 111.065 TYPE OF NOTICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever this chapter required a hearing before the Liquor Control
Commission or the Commissioner acts affirmatively concerning a license or
licensee, the licensee shall be afforded reasonable notice of the hearing.
   (B)   The notice shall state:
      (1)   The time, place, and nature of the hearing;
      (2)   A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held;
      (3)   A reference to the particular sections of the ordinances involved;
and
      (4)   A statement informing the licensee of his or her ability to respond
by presenting evidence and argument.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.066 HEARINGS.
   (A)   A hearing required under this chapter shall be held in accordance with
the following rules:
      (1)   A hearing shall be held at a reasonable time, date, and place;
      (2)   No cause shall be heard earlier than three days after receipt by a
licensee of the notice required under this subchapter;
      (3)   A licensee may present evidence and argument; and
      (4)   The Commission or Commissioner may limit, but not prohibit, the
presentation of evidence and argument.
   (B)   Where a licensee has received the requisite notice under this
subchapter and fails to appear at a hearing, the Commission or Commissioner may
act ex parte. The Liquor Control Commissioner may also have informal hearings
where the liquor license will not be affirmatively acted on at the hearing.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.067 DECISIONS.
   Any decision, order, or determination rendered by the Commission or
Commissioner which affects the rights, duties, or privileges of a licensee,
shall be in writing and shall notify the licensee personally or by certified
mail of the decision.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.068 ENTRY ONTO PREMISES.
   Any entry authorized by this chapter onto premises licensed under this
chapter shall be accomplished without a breach of the peace.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.069 WAIVER.
   Compliance with any or all of the provisions of this subchapter concerning
procedure may be waived by written stipulation of all parties.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.070 CONTINUANCES FOR HEARINGS.
   (A)   A request for a continuance of any hearing in any matter before the
Commission will not be allowed by the Commission unless for good and valid
reason in writing and unless made at least two days prior to the date set for
hearing.
   (B)   The Commission may, in its discretion, grant a continuance if
extenuating and unusual circumstances are presented in support of the request
for continuance.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.071 APPEAL ON THE RECORD.
   Any appeal taken from a decision of the Commissioner shall be reviewed on
the record taken by and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013)
§ 111.072 ENFORCEMENT.
   Violations of §
111.036 may be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff or his or her designess(s),
and, at his or her discretion, may proceed either through a notice to appear
before the 19th Judicial Circuit Court or through administrative adjudication
pursuant to the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66).
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015)
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not more than $1,000 for a first offense within a 12-month period, $1,500
for a second offense within a 12-month period, and $2,500 for a third or
subsequent offense within a 12-month period, and every day that the violation
is continued shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition
thereto, the Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend for not more than 30 days
or revoke any license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the
licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of
the Illinois Liquor Control Act, and when a license shall have been revoked for
any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year
thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic liquors in the
premises described in the revoked license. In addition, any licensee found
guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall pay all costs of the
public hearing incurred by the county in an amount not to exceed $250. Not more
than $15,000 in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee
during the period of his or her license (one year).
   (B)   Any person who violates or assists in the violation of §
111.036 shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and shall be
fined as set forth below (except for violations of §
111.036(D) which are set forth in that section). Each 24 hour period in which,
or during which, a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
      (1)   Lake County Sheriff's Office Citation filed in Circuit Court. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement before the 19th Judicial
Circuit, the fine amount shall be as follows:
         (a)   The first violation of §
111.036 shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $250.
         (b)   A second violation of any provision of §
111.036 by the same person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a
fine of no less than $500.
         (c)   A third or subsequent violation of any provision of §
111.036 by the same person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a
fine of no less than $750.
      (2)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Process, the minimum fine amount shall be $115 for
each violation.
(Ord. passed 6-14-2005; Ord. passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 15-0373, passed 4-14-2015)
CHAPTER 112: RESERVED
CHAPTER 113: ADULT USE LICENSING
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Recitals
   
113.02   Short title
   
113.03   Definitions
   
113.04   Adult Use Commissioner and Adult Use Commission
Licensing
   
113.15   Adult establishment licenses generally
   
113.16   Form and submittal of license application
   
113.17   Processing of license application
   
113.18   Standards for issuance or denial of license
   
113.19   Inspections by the county
   
113.20   Change in information
Regulations, General and Special
   
113.35   Regulations applicable to all adult entertainment establishments
   
113.36   Special regulations for adult booths
   
113.37   Special regulations for adult cabarets
   
113.38   Special regulations for adult stores
   
113.39   Special regulations for adult theaters
Violations; Enforcement; Recordkeeping
   
113.50   Licensee responsibility for employees
   
113.51   License revocation or suspension
   
113.52   Administrative record
   
113.53   Employee registration and recordkeeping by licensee
   
113.54   Nuisance declared
 
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 RECITALS.
   The recitals attached to the ordinance establishing this chapter and to the
licensing ordinance adopted February 10, 1998, are incorporated herein as the
findings and determinations of the Chair and members of the County Board.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.02 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the “Lake County
Adult Use Ordinance” or “this chapter”.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   ADULT BOOTH. Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off from
the remainder of the establishment by one or more walls or other dividers or
partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials
or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISH- MENT. Any of the following commercial
establishments, as defined herein.
      (1)   ADULT CABARET. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial
or significant portion of its business regularly features any of the following:
         (a)   Persons who appear semi-nude; or
         (b)   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
      (2)   ADULT STORE. Any commercial establishment that:
         (a)   Contains one or more adult booths;
         (b)   As a substantial or significant portion of its business offers
for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials; or
         (c)   Has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult
materials.
      (3)   ADULT THEATER. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial
or significant portion of its business regularly features for presentation
films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or
other visual representations or recordings that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of
specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual
activities.
      (4)   SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF ITS BUSINESS. For purposes of
the definitions in the subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this definition, the
phrase SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF ITS BUSINESS shall be deemed to
apply to any commercial establishment that satisfies one or more of the
following criteria:
         (a)   Gross sales. 30% or more of the retail dollar value of the
commercial establishment’s annual gross sales derives from the sale, rental, or
viewing of adult materials;
         (b)   Floor area. 30% or more of the floor area of the commercial
establishment is devoted to the display, viewing, or presentation of adult
materials, not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any
other portion of the commercial establishment not open to the public;
         (c)   Merchandise displayed. 30% or more of the retail dollar value of
all merchandise displayed at any one time is attributable to adult materials;
         (d)   Inventory. 30% or more of all inventory of the commercial
establishment (whether measured by retail dollar value or number of items)
consists at any one time of adult materials;
         (e)   Stock in trade. 30% or more of the stock in trade at the
commercial establishment consists at any one time of adult materials; or
         (f)   Live performances. Live performances by persons appearing semi-
nude, or live performances that are otherwise distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities, and that are
taking place 30% or more of the time during which the commercial establishment
is open for business.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT EMPLOYEE. Any individual, including entertainers, who
work in or at, or render any services directly related to the operation of, an
adult entertainment establishment; provided, however, that this definition
shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult
materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the
licensed premises.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE. A license issued for an adult entertainment
establishment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT PATRON. Any individual, other than an adult
establishment employee, present in or at any adult entertainment establishment
at any time when the adult entertainment establishment is open for business;
provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering
goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or
performing maintenance or repairs to the licensed premises.
   ADULT MATERIAL. Any of the following, whether new or used:
      (1)   Any of the following, whether new or used, that are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of
specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual
activities:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
digitally-stored materials;
         (b)   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides,
computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind;
or
         (c)   Live performances.
      (2)   Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or
describe specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT USE COMMISSION. A commission appointed by the Adult Use Commissioner
pursuant to §
113.04.
   ADULT USE COMMISSIONER. The Chair of the County Board of this county,
pursuant to §
113.04.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where admission, services, performances,
or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of consideration.
   COUNTY UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. The ordinance known and referred to as
the Unified Development Ordinance of Lake County, as it may be amended from
time to time, codified as Chapter 151.
   DAYS. Calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this
chapter.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The place or location described in an adult establishment
license where an adult entertainment establishment is authorized to operate. No
sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights-of-way, or grounds adjacent to
any such place or location shall be included within the LICENSED PREMISES.
   LICENSEE. Any person or entity that has been issued an adult establishment
license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. A state of dress or undress that exposes to view:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel, provided the areola is not exposed; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn,
simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   REVIEWING DEPARTMENTS. Lake County Sheriff’s Office, the Lake County Health
Department and Community Health Center, and the Lake County Department of
Planning, Building and Development.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region, and areolas of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor
accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areolas, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female
breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn,
simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT. Any unlawful lewd, indecent, or immoral sexual
conduct, including specifically but without limitation any of the lewd,
indecent, or immoral sexual criminal acts specified in any of the following
statutes:
      (1)   Article II of the Illinois Criminal Code (sex offenses);
      (2)   Section 26-4 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/26-4
(unauthorized videotaping);
      (3)   Section 12C-30 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/12C-30
(contributing to the delinquency or criminal delinquency of a juvenile);
      (4)   The Obscene Phone Call Act, 720 ILCS 135/0.01 et seq.;
      (5)   The Wrongs to Children Act, 720 ILCS 150/0.01 et seq.;
      (6)   The Improper Supervision of Children Act, 720 ILCS 640/0.01 et
seq.; and
      (7)   The Sale of Immoral Publications to Children Act, 720 ILCS 670/0.01
et seq.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   Actual physical touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breasts;
      (2)   Actual physical sexual acts, normal or perverted, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Actual masturbation;
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence; and
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections (1), (2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   STRADDLE DANCE.
      (1)   The use by any person, including specifically but without
limitation an adult establishment employee, or any part of his or her body to
deliberately touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast
of any adult establishment patron or any other person, or the deliberate
touching of the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any
person by any adult establishment patron.
      (2)   Conduct shall be a STRADDLE DANCE regardless of whether the “touch”
or “touching” occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified
anatomical area. Conduct shall also be a STRADDLE DANCE regardless of whether
the “touch” or “touching” is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly
referred to by the slang terms LAP DANCE, TABLE DANCE, and FACE DANCE shall be
included within this definition of STRADDLE DANCE.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
Editor’s note:
   720 ILCS 135 was repealed by P.A. 97-1108
§ 113.04 ADULT USE COMMISSIONER AND ADULT USE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Adult Use Commissioner. The Chair of the County Board of Lake County
is hereby designated as the Adult Use Commissioner pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this chapter. The Adult Use Commissioner shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   To administer and rule upon the applications for and the issuance,
renewal, suspension, and revocation of adult establishment licenses as set
forth in this chapter;
      (2)   To conduct or provide for inspections of adult entertainment
establishments as shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of law;
      (3)   To periodically review the provisions of this chapter and the
conduct and operation of adult entertainment establishments and adult
establishment licensees, and to make related reports and recommendations to the
County Board as the Adult Use Commissioner shall deem necessary;
      (4)   To appoint County Board members to serve on the Adult Use
Commission as set forth in subsection (B) of this section;
      (5)   To direct the Adult Use Commission to conduct the hearings,
studies, and reports on adult entertainment establishments, and the regulations
relating thereto, as the Adult Use Commissioner shall deem necessary; and
      (6)   To take any further actions as the Adult Use Commissioner shall
deem necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and to
exercise such additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied or
incident to those powers and duties expressly set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Adult Use Commission.
      (1)   Creation. A commission entitled “Adult Use Commission” is hereby
created and established for the purposes set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   Composition. The Adult Use Commissioner may appoint one or more
current members of the County Board of the county to serve at the will of the
Adult Use Commissioner and to advise the Adult Use Commissioner on matters
relating to the implementation and enforcement of the regulations set forth in
this chapter and to the exercise of the Adult Use Commissioner’s powers and
duties under this chapter. The person or persons appointed by the Adult Use
Commissioner, along with the Adult Use Commissioner, shall comprise the Adult
Use Commission.
      (3)   Filing of appointments. The Adult Use Commissioner shall file a
written appointment of each of the members of the Adult Use Commission in the
office of the Lake County Clerk within five days after each appointment.
      (4)   Duties. The Adult Use Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
         (a)   At the direction of the Adult Use Commissioner, to recommend to
the Adult Use Commissioner any further regulations regarding adult
entertainment establishments and adult establishment licenses as the members of
the Commission may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare or to otherwise carry out the purposes and objectives of the
regulations established pursuant to this chapter;
         (b)   To conduct and prepare hearings, studies, and reports upon
matters referred to the Commission by the Adult Use Commissioner and to make
reports and recommendations relating thereto as are requested by the Adult Use
Commissioner; and
         (c)   To conduct hearings on the revocation or suspension of an adult
establishment license as required pursuant to §
113.51.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
LICENSING
§ 113.15 ADULT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES GENERALLY.
   (A)   Adult establishment license required. An adult establishment license
shall be required to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment
establishment within the unincorporated area of Lake County.
   (B)   Operation without license prohibited. Except as provided in subsection
(F) of this section with regard to adult entertainment establishments existing
prior to the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person not having a current and valid adult establishment license to establish,
operate, or maintain an adult entertainment establishment within the
unincorporated area of Lake County at any time after the effective date of this
chapter.
   (C)   Operation in violation of license prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any licensee to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment
establishment within the unincorporated area of Lake County except in the
manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter
and the licensee’s adult establishment license.
   (D)   Content and display of license. Every adult establishment license
shall be provided by the county and shall, at a minimum, prominently state on
its face the name of the licensee, the expiration date, and the address of the
adult entertainment establishment. Every licensee shall cause the licensee’s
adult establishment license to be framed, covered by glass, and hung at all
times in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises so that it
can be easily seen and read at any time by any person entering the licensed
premises.
   (E)   License term. Except as hereinafter provided, adult establishment
licenses shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended, or
revoked, for a term of one year commencing on January 1 of the year following
the year of issuance and terminating on December 31 of that same year. Adult
establishment licenses issued after January 1 of any year for operations to
commence in that year shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated,
suspended, or revoked, for a term commencing on the date of issuance and
terminating on December 31 of that same year.
   (F)   Existing establishments. An adult entertainment establishment existing
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall:
      (1)   Submit an application for an adult establishment license no later
than May 11, 1998;
      (2)   Cease operations on November 11, 1998, unless it has secured, by
that date, an adult establishment license pursuant to this chapter; and
      (3)   Be subject to all other provisions of this chapter as of November
11, 1998.
   (G)   Renewal. An adult establishment license may be renewed only by making
application as required for an initial license pursuant to §
113.16. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration of the then-current license term. The expiration of the license
shall not be affected or extended by a renewal application that is made less
than 30 days before expiration.
   (H)   Continuation of commercial establishment as non-adult entertainment
establishment. Whenever any adult establishment licensee intends to cease
operations of its commercial establishment as an adult entertainment
establishment but to continue to operate the commercial establishment on the
licensed premises as any commercial establishment other than an adult
entertainment establishment, the licensee shall, at least 45 days before the
expiration of the then-current license term, notify the Adult Use Commissioner
in writing of the change of use. The notification shall include any documents
and information, verified by affidavit, necessary to demonstrate that the
commercial establishment will not be an adult entertainment establishment under
the definitions set forth in §
113.03. Specifically, but without limitation, the licensee shall provide
evidence, verified by affidavit, to the Adult Use Commissioner that the
commercial establishment will not satisfy any of the criteria set forth in
subsection (4) of the definition for “adult entertainment establishment” set
forth in §
113.03.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.16 FORM AND SUBMITTAL OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Required form.
      (1)   An application for an adult establishment license, or the renewal
thereof, shall be made in writing to the Adult Use Commissioner on a form
prescribed by the Adult Use Commissioner and shall be signed:
         (a)   By the applicant, if the applicant is an individual;
         (b)   By at least one of the persons entitled to share in the profits
of the organization and having unlimited personal liability for the obligations
of the organization and the right to bind all other such persons, if the
applicant is a partnership (general or limited), joint venture, or any other
type of organization where two or more persons share in the profits and
liabilities of the organization;
         (c)   By a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a corporation;
or
         (d)   By the trustee, if the applicant is a land trust.
      (2)   The application shall be verified by oath or affidavit as to all
statements made on or in connection with the application and any attachments
thereto. Each application shall specifically identify the applicant and the
licensed premises for which an adult establishment license is sought. Each
initial or renewal application shall be accompanied by seven identical copies.
   (B)   Administrative processing fee. Every applicant for an adult
establishment license or for the renewal of an existing adult establishment
license shall pay an administrative processing fee in the amount of $200 by
certified check to the county at the time of filing the application. The
administrative processing fee shall in all cases be non-refundable and shall be
deposited in the general corporate fund of the county.
   (C)   Required information and documents. Each application shall include the
following information and documents:
      (1)   (a)   Individuals. The applicant’s legal name, all of the
applicant’s aliases, the applicant’s business address, written proof of the
applicant’s age, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of the applicant’s naturalization.
         (b)   Corporations. The applicant corporation’s complete name and
official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages and
business addresses of all of the directors, officers, and managers of the
corporation and of every person owning or controlling more than 50% of the
voting shares of the corporation; the corporation’s date and place of
incorporation and the objects for which it was formed; proof that the
corporation is a corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct
business in this state; and the name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service of process.
         (c)   Partnerships (general or limited), joint ventures, or any other
type of organization where two or more persons share in the profits and
liabilities of the organization. The applicant organization’s complete name and
official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages and
business addresses of each partner (other than limited partners) or any other
person entitled to share in the profits of the organization, whether or not the
person is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the organization.
         (d)   Land trusts. The applicant land trust’s complete name; the legal
name, all aliases, and the business address of the trustee of the land trust;
the legal name, all aliases, and the ages and business addresses of each
beneficiary of the land trust and the specific interest of each beneficiary in
the land trust; and the interest, if any, that the land trust holds in the
licensed premises.
      (2)   If a corporation or partnership is an interest holder that must be
disclosed pursuant to subsections (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) above, then the
interest holders shall disclose the information required in those divisions
with respect to their interest holders;
      (3)   The general character and nature of the business of the applicant;
      (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of
the character specified in response to subsection (C)(3) above;
      (5)   The location, including street address and legal description, and
telephone number, of the premises for which the adult establishment license is
sought;
      (6)   The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the
adult establishment license;
      (7)   The identity of each fee simple owner of the licensed premises;
      (8)   A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the
licensed premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the fixed
structural internal features of the licensed premises, plus the interior rooms,
walls, partitions, stages, performance areas, and restrooms. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall
not be required; provided, however, that each diagram shall be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated
scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches and
sufficient to show clearly the various interior dimensions of all areas of the
licensed premises and to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. The requirements of this subsection (C)(8) shall not apply for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted
for the license sought to be renewed and if the licensee certifies that the
licensed premises has not been altered since the immediately preceding issuance
of the license and that the previous diagram continues to accurately depict the
exterior and interior layouts of the licensed premises. The approval or use of
the diagram required pursuant to this subsection (C)(8) shall not be deemed to
be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to constitute, any other county
approval otherwise required pursuant to applicable county ordinances and
regulations;
      (9)   The specific type or types of adult entertainment establishment(s)
that the applicant proposes to operate in the licensed premises;
      (10)   A copy of each adult establishment license or any license
substantially the same as an adult establishment license currently held by the
applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to
subsections (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section;
      (11)   Whether the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the
application pursuant to subsections (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, has had a
license or other authorization to conduct or operate a business substantially
the same as an adult entertainment establishment revoked or suspended, and, if
so, the date and grounds for each revocation or suspension, and the name and
location of the establishment at issue; and
      (12)   The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day-to-
day, on-site managers of the proposed adult entertainment establishment. If the
manager is other than the applicant, the applicant shall provide, for each
manager, all of the information required pursuant to subsections (C)(1)(a), (C)
(10) and (C)(11) above.
   (D)   Incomplete applications returned. Any application for an adult
establishment license that does not include all of the information and
documents required pursuant to subsection (C) of this section, as well as the
administrative processing fee required pursuant to subsection (B) of this
section, shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted on or
processed by the county. The Adult Use Commissioner shall, within five days of
submittal, return the incomplete application to the applicant along with a
written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.17 PROCESSING OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Reviewing departments. Within three days after receipt of a complete
application for an adult establishment license that includes all of the
information and documents required pursuant to §
113.16(C) as well as the administrative processing fee required pursuant to §
113.16(B), the Adult Use Commissioner shall transmit a copy of the application
to the reviewing departments.
   (B)   Reviewing department reports. Each of the reviewing departments shall,
within 25 days after transmittal of the application thereto:
      (1)   Review the application;
      (2)   Conduct inspections of the proposed licensed premises and
background investigations of the applicant and any of the individuals
identified in the application pursuant to §
113.16(C)(1), (2), or (12) of this chapter, regarding matters within their
respective jurisdictions, as shall be reasonably necessary to verify the
information set forth in the application and to determine whether the proposed
adult entertainment establishment and licensed premises comply with the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances,
rules, and regulations; and
      (3)   Prepare and submit to the Adult Use Commissioner a written report
regarding the results and findings of the reviews, inspections, and
investigations.
   (C)   Adult Use Commissioner review. The Adult Use Commissioner shall also
conduct inspections and investigations as the Adult Use Commissioner shall deem
reasonably necessary to verify, the information set forth in the application
and to determine whether the proposed adult entertainment establishment and
licensed premises comply with the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
   (D)   Reliance on diagram. In the event that the licensed premises has not
yet been constructed or reconstructed to accommodate the proposed adult
entertainment establishment, the Adult Use Commissioner and the reviewing
departments shall base their respective written reports, investigations, and
inspections to the extent necessary, on the diagram submitted pursuant to §
113.16(C)(8). Any adult establishment license issued prior to the construction
or reconstruction necessary to accommodate the proposed adult entertainment
establishment shall contain a condition that the adult entertainment
establishment shall not open for business until the licensed premises has been
inspected and determined to be in substantial compliance with the diagram
submitted with the application.
   (E)   Applicant cooperation required. An applicant for an adult
establishment license shall cooperate fully in the inspections and
investigations conducted by the Adult Use Commissioner and the reviewing
departments. The applicant’s failure or refusal to do the following shall
constitute an admission by the applicant that the applicant is ineligible for
an adult establishment license and shall be grounds for denial of the license
by the Adult Use Commissioner:
      (1)   To give any information reasonably relevant to the investigation of
the application;
      (2)   To allow the licensed premises to be inspected;
      (3)   To appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under
oath regarding the application; or
      (4)   To otherwise cooperate with the investigation and inspection
required by this chapter.
   (F)   Time for issuance or denial. The Adult Use Commissioner shall, within
30 days after submittal of a properly completed application, either issue an
adult establishment license pursuant to the provisions of §
113.18(A) or deny issuance of the adult establishment license pursuant to the
provisions of §
113.18(B). The Adult Use Commissioner shall issue or deny the license within
the 30-day period regardless of whether or not the Adult Use Commissioner has
received all of the reviewing department reports.
   (G)   Decision final. The action taken by the Adult Use Commissioner to
issue an adult establishment license pursuant to §
113.18(A) or to deny issuance of an adult establishment license pursuant to §
113.18(B) shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.18 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Issuance. The Adult Use Commissioner shall issue an adult
establishment license to an applicant if, but only if, the Adult Use
Commissioner finds and determines all of the following, based on the reports,
investigations, and inspections conducted by the Adult Use Commissioner and the
reviewing departments and on any other credible information on which it is
reasonable for the Adult Use Commissioner to rely:
      (1)   All information and documents required by §
113.16 for issuance of an adult establishment license have been properly
provided and the material statements made in the application are true and
correct;
      (2)   For adult stores and adult theaters, all persons identified in the
application pursuant to §
113.16(C)(1), (2), or (12) of this chapter are at least 18 years of age and not
under any legal disability. For adult cabarets, all persons identified in the
application pursuant to §
113.16(C)(1), (2), or (12) are at least 21 years of age and not under any legal
disability;
      (3)   No person identified in the application pursuant to §
113.16(C)(1), (2), or (12) is residing with, or married to, a person:
         (a)   Who has been denied an adult establishment license on the
licensed premises within 12 months immediately preceding the date of the
application;
         (b)   Whose adult establishment license for the licensed premises has
been revoked within 12 months immediately preceding the date of the
application; or
         (c)   Whose adult establishment license is currently under suspension
at the time of application.
      (4)   The adult entertainment establishment and the licensed premises,
and the proposed operation of the adult entertainment establishment, comply
with all then-applicable building, health, and life safety codes and
regulations and have received all necessary zoning approvals required pursuant
to the then-applicable provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance of Lake
County (see
Chapter 151), including specifically but without limitation the zoning
certificate required for the adult entertainment establishment; and
      (5)   The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of
the application that the applicant has read this chapter and all provisions of
the Unified Development Ordinance of Lake County (
Chapter 151, §§
151.001 through
151.285) applicable to adult entertainment establishments, that the applicant
is familiar with their terms and conditions, and that the licensed premises and
the proposed adult entertainment establishment and its proposed operation are
and shall be in compliance therewith.
   (B)   Denial.
      (1)   If the Adult Use Commissioner determines that the applicant has not
met any one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection (A) of this
section, then the Adult Use Commissioner shall deny issuance of the adult
establishment license and shall give the applicant a written notification and
explanation of the denial.
      (2)   The Adult Use Commissioner’s notice of denial shall be delivered in
person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
addressed to the applicant’s address as set forth in the application.
      (3)   With regard to a license application for a new adult entertainment
establishment, the adult establishment license shall be deemed denied on the
day that the notice of denial is delivered in person or three days after it is
placed in the U.S. mail as provided in this subsection (B).
      (4)   With regard to an application for renewal of an existing adult
entertainment establishment license, in order to allow an aggrieved licensee an
opportunity to obtain judicial review, the denial shall take effect either on
the fourteenth day after the Adult Use Commissioner’s written decision is
delivered in person, or on the seventeenth day after the Adult Use
Commissioner’s written decision is placed in the U.S. mail as provided in this
subsection (B).
   (C)   License deemed to be issued. If the Adult Use Commissioner does not
issue or deny the adult establishment license within 30 days after the properly
completed application is submitted, then the adult establishment license
applied for shall be deemed to have been issued.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.19 INSPECTIONS BY THE COUNTY.
   (A)   Authority. The Adult Use Commissioner and other county representatives
and departments with jurisdiction shall periodically inspect all adult
entertainment establishments as shall be necessary to determine compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable law.
   (B)   Licensee cooperation. A licensee shall permit representatives of the
county to inspect the licensed premises and the adult entertainment
establishment for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable law at any time during which the licensed
premises is occupied or the adult entertainment establishment is open for
business.
   (C)   Interference or refusal illegal. It shall be unlawful for the
licensee, any adult establishment employee, or any other person to prohibit,
interfere with, or refuse to allow, any lawful inspection conducted by the
county pursuant to this chapter or any other authority.
   (D)   Suspension or revocation. Any prohibition, interference, or refusal
shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult establishment
license pursuant to §
113.51.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.20 CHANGE IN INFORMATION.
   During the pendency of any application for, or during the term of, any adult
establishment license, the applicant or licensee shall promptly notify the
Adult Use Commissioner in writing of any change in any material information
given by the applicant or licensee in the application for the license,
including specifically but without limitation any change in managers of the
adult entertainment establishment or in the individuals identified in the
application pursuant to §
113.16(C)(1) or (C)(2) of this chapter; or if any of the events specified in §
113.51(A) occur.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
REGULATIONS, GENERAL AND SPECIAL
§ 113.35 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   General compliance. All licensed premises and adult entertainment
establishments shall comply with the provisions of this chapter; all other
applicable county ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations; and all
other applicable federal, state, and local laws.
   (B)   Hours of operation. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open
for business at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any
weekday or Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for
business at any time on any Sunday or on any legal state or federal holiday.
   (C)   Animals. No animals, except only for seeing-eye dogs required to
assist a blind adult establishment patron, shall be permitted at any time at or
in any adult entertainment establishment or licensed premises. Any seeing-eye
dog must at all times remain at the side of the blind adult establishment
patron.
   (D)   Restrooms. All restrooms in adult entertainment establishments shall
be equipped with standard toilets, sinks, and other traditional lavatory
facilities. No adult materials or live performances shall be provided or
allowed at any time in the restrooms of an adult entertainment establishment.
Separate male and female restrooms shall be provided for and used by adult
establishment employees and adult establishment patrons.
   (E)   Restricted access. No adult establishment patron shall be permitted at
any time to enter into any of the non-public portions of any adult
entertainment establishment, including specifically but without limitation any
storage areas or dressing or other rooms provided for the benefit of adult
establishment employees. This subsection (E) shall not apply to persons
delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance
or repairs to the licensed premises; provided, however, that the persons shall
remain in the non-public areas only for the purposes and to the extent and time
necessary to perform their job duties.
   (F)   Specific prohibited acts.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or any other person at any adult
entertainment establishment shall appear, be present, or perform while nude.
      (2)   No adult establishment employee or any other person at any adult
entertainment establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual
activity with or upon any adult establishment patron or any other adult
establishment employee or any other person. No adult establishment patron or
any other person at any adult entertainment establishment shall perform or
conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any adult establishment
employee or any other adult establishment patron or any other person.
      (3)   Straddle dances shall be prohibited at all adult entertainment
establishments.
   (G)   Exterior display. No adult entertainment establishment shall be
maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public
viewing of any adult material, or any entertainment depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any
sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property other than the lot on
which the licensed premises is located. No portion of the exterior of an adult
entertainment establishment shall utilize or contain any flashing lights,
search lights, or spotlights, or any other similar lighting systems, or any
words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of any manner except to the extent specifically allowed
pursuant to subsection (H) of this section with regard to signs. This
subsection (H) shall apply to any advertisement, display, promotional material,
decoration, or sign; to any performance or show; and to any window, door, or
other opening.
   (H)   Signage limitations. All signs for adult entertainment establishments
shall be flat wall signs. The maximum allowable sign area shall be one square
foot of sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, but in no event
exceeding 32 square feet. The maximum number of signs shall be one per lot
frontage. Signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter shall contain only
the name of the adult entertainment establishment, and/or the specific type of
adult entertainment establishment conducted on the licensed premises. Temporary
signage shall not be permitted in connection with any adult entertainment
establishment.
   (I)   Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the licensed
premises shall be used at any time.
   (J)   Gambling and related devices prohibited. No adult entertainment
establishment shall contain any video, pinball, slot, bagatelle, pigeon-hole,
pool, or any other games, machines, tables, or implements.
   (K)   Manager’s station. Each adult entertainment establishment shall have
one or more manager’s stations. The interior of each adult entertainment
establishment shall be configured in such a manner that there is a direct and
substantially unobstructed view from at least one manager’s station to every
part of each area, except restrooms, of the establishment to which any adult
establishment patron is permitted access for any purpose.
   (L)   Alcohol prohibition. No alcoholic liquor of any kind shall be sold,
used, consumed, or possessed at any time on any licensed premises or at any
adult entertainment establishment.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.36 SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT BOOTHS.
   (A)   Prohibited except in adult stores. Adult booths shall be prohibited in
all adult entertainment establishments except adult stores.
   (B)   Occupancy and prohibited acts. Only one individual shall occupy an
adult booth at any one time. No individual occupying an adult booth shall
engage in any specified sexual activities. No individual shall damage or deface
any portion of an adult booth.
   (C)   Open booth requirement. In addition to satisfying the requirement of §
113.35(K) of this chapter, all adult stores containing adult booths shall be
physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of each
adult booth shall be visible from the common area of the adult store. To
satisfy this requirement, there shall be a permanently open and unobstructed
entranceway for each adult booth and for the entranceway from the area of the
adult store that provides other adult materials to the area of the adult store
containing the adult booths. Each of these entranceways shall not be capable of
being closed or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain,
partition, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever that would be capable of
wholly or partially obscuring the area of the adult store containing the adult
booths or any person situated in an adult booth. It shall be unlawful to
install adult booths within an adult entertainment establishment for the
purpose of providing secluded viewing of adult materials or live performances.
   (D)   Aisle required. There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle
alongside the adult booths provided in any adult store. Each person situated in
a booth shall be visible at all times from the aisle.
   (E)   Holes prohibited. Except for the open booth entranceway, the walls and
partitions of each adult booth shall be constructed and maintained of solid
walls or partitions without any holes or openings whatsoever.
   (F)   Signage. A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entranceway to each adult booth that states that only one person is allowed in
an adult booth at any one time, that it is unlawful to engage in any specified
sexual activities while in an adult booth, and that it is unlawful to damage or
deface any portion of an adult booth.
   (G)   Age limitations.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an
adult booth or a licensed premises that includes an adult booth shall be under
the age of 18.
      (2)   No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult booth
or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth.
      (3)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
remain at any adult booth or at any licensed premises that includes an adult
booth.
      (4)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult booth or any licensed premises
that includes an adult booth.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.37 SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT CABARETS.
   (A)   Performance area. The performance area of an adult cabaret shall be
limited to one or more stages or platforms permanently anchored to the floor (a
“cabaret stage”). Each cabaret stage shall be at least 18 inches in elevation
above the level of the patron seating areas. Each cabaret stage shall be
separated by a distance of at least eight feet from all areas of the premises
to which adult entertainment patrons have access. A continuous barrier at least
three feet in height and located at least eight feet from all points of each
cabaret stage shall separate each cabaret stage from all patron seating areas.
The barrier shall consist of horizontal or vertical members spaced no more than
nine inches apart and nine inches from the floor or the walls to which it is
attached.
   (B)   Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally
distributed throughout the public areas of the adult cabaret so that all
objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of not less
than 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on ten-foot
centers, shall be maintained at all times for all areas of the adult cabaret
where adult establishment patrons are admitted.
   (C)   Tipping.
      (1)   No tip or gratuity from any adult establishment patron may be
offered or accepted for any performance by an adult establishment employee on
any adult cabaret stage at any time prior to the completion of the performance.
      (2)   No adult establishment patron shall offer, and no adult
establishment employee having performed on any cabaret stage shall accept, any
form of tip or gratuity offered directly to the employee by the adult
establishment patron.
      (3)   Rather, following completion of a performance, all tips and
gratuities to adult establishment employees performing on any cabaret stage
shall be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of such tips and
gratuities by the adult entertainment establishment.
   (D)   Notice of select rules. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with
letters at least one inch high shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent
to every cabaret stage stating the following:
      THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE COUNTY OF LAKE. ENTERTAINERS ARE:
         1.   NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT.
         2.   NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR IN A STATE OF NUDITY.
         3.   NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS OR GRATUITIES FOR ANY PERFORMANCE
UNTIL AFTER COMPLETION OF THE PERFORMANCE.
         4.   NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS EVEN AFTER
COMPLETION OF THE PERFORMANCE. ANY SUCH TIPS MUST BE PLACED INTO THE RECEPTACLE
PROVIDED BY MANAGEMENT.
   (E)   Age limitations.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an
adult cabaret or a licensed premises used for an adult cabaret shall be under
the age of 21.
      (2)   No person under the age of 21 shall be admitted to any adult
cabaret or to any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret.
      (3)   No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to
remain at any adult cabaret or any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret.
      (4)   No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult cabaret or any licensed premises
used for an adult cabaret.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.38 SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT STORES.
   (A)   Windows and signs. Window areas for adult stores shall not be covered
or obstructed in any way. No signs or other obstructions shall be placed in the
windows.
   (B)   Age limitations.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an
adult store or a licensed premises used for an adult store shall be under the
age of 18.
      (2)   No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult store
or to any licensed premises used for an adult store.
      (3)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
remain at any adult store or any licensed premises used for an adult store.
      (4)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult store or any licensed premises
used for an adult store.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.39 SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS.
   (A)   Seating. Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual
chairs with arms or in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and
not on couches, benches, or any other multiple-person seating structures. The
number of seats shall equal the maximum number of persons who may occupy the
adult theater.
   (B)   Aisle. Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside
the seating area in order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be
visible from the aisle at all times.
   (C)   Sign. Each adult theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous
place at or near each entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists
the maximum number of persons who may occupy the auditorium area, which number
shall not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area.
   (D)   Age limitations.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an
adult theater or a licensed premises used for an adult theater shall be under
the age of 18.
      (2)   No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult
theater or to any licensed premises used for an adult theater.
      (3)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
remain at any adult theater or any licensed premises used for an adult theater.
      (4)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult theater or any licensed premises
used for an adult theater.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT;
RECORDKEEPING
§ 113.50 LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY FOR EMPLOYEES.
   Every act or omission by an adult establishment employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the act or
omission of the licensee, if the act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, or as a result of the
licensee’s negligent failure to supervise the adult establishment employee. The
licensee shall be punishable for the act or omission in the same manner as if
the licensee committed the act or caused the omission. Accordingly, any such
act or omission of the employee constituting a violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed, for purposes of determining whether the
licensee’s adult establishment license shall be revoked, suspended, or renewed,
to be the act or omission of the licensee.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.51 LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Grounds. Pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection (B) of
this section, the Adult Use Commissioner may suspend for not more than 30 days,
or revoke, any adult establishment license if the Adult Use Commissioner, based
on credible and reasonably reliable information and evidence, determines that
any one or more of the following has occurred:
      (1)   The licensee has violated any of the provisions or requirements of
this chapter or the adult establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or the
provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance of Lake County (
Chapter 151, §§
151.001 through
151.285) applicable to the licensed premises or the adult entertainment
establishment;
      (2)   The licensee either: knowingly or negligently furnished false or
misleading information or withheld information on any application or other
document submitted to the county for the issuance or renewal of any adult
establishment license; or knowingly or negligently caused or suffered any other
person to furnish or withhold that information on the licensee’s behalf;
      (3)   The licensee has committed a felony or specified criminal act on
the licensed premises;
      (4)   The licensee authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the
licensee’s negligent failure to supervise the licensed premises or the adult
entertainment establishment, allows an adult establishment employee, an adult
establishment patron, or any other person to violate any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter or of the provisions or requirements of the adult
establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or to commit any felony or
specified criminal act on the licensed premises; or
      (5)   The licensee, or any person identified pursuant to §
113.16(C)(1), (2), or (12) of this chapter, becomes disqualified for the
issuance of an adult establishment license at any time during the term of the
license at issue.
   (B)   Procedure. An adult entertainment establishment license may be
suspended for not more than 30 days or revoked pursuant to the terms and
conditions set forth in this subsection (B).
      (1)   Notice. Upon determining that one or more of the grounds for
suspension or revocation under subsection (A) of this section may exist, the
Adult Use Commissioner shall serve a written notice on the licensee in person
or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed
to the licensee’s address as set forth in the licensee’s application. The
written notice shall, at a minimum, state that Adult Use Commissioner has
determined that the adult establishment license may be subject to suspension or
revocation pursuant to subsection (A) above; identify the specific grounds for
the Adult Use Commissioner’s determination; and set a date for a hearing
regarding the Adult Use Commissioner’s determination as to the possibility of
suspension or revocation of the adult establishment license. The date of the
hearing shall be no less than five days after service of the Adult Use
Commissioner’s notice, unless an earlier date is agreed to by the licensee and
the Adult Use Commissioner.
      (2)   Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Adult Use
Commissioner, or, at the Adult Use Commissioner’s direction, by the Adult Use
Commission. At the hearing, the licensee may present and submit evidence and
witnesses to refute the grounds cited by the Adult Use Commissioner for
suspending or revoking the license and the county and any other persons may
submit evidence to sustain those grounds. The administrative record compiled on
the adult entertainment establishment pursuant to §
113.52 shall be made part of the hearing record. Within three days after the
close of the hearing, the Adult Use Commissioner shall, having considered the
record made at the hearing, render a decision in writing, setting forth the
reasons for the decision. The action taken by the Adult Use Commissioner shall
be final and shall be subject to judicial review.
      (3)   Notice and effective date of suspension or revocation. The Adult
Use Commissioner’s written decision shall be posted at the office of the Adult
Use Commissioner and shall be served on the licensee in person or by certified
U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the
licensee’s address as set forth in the licensee’s application. In order to
allow an aggrieved licensee an opportunity to obtain judicial review, any
suspension or revocation, as the case may be, shall take effect either on the
fourteenth day after the Adult Use Commissioner’s written decision is delivered
in person, or on the seventeenth day after the Adult Use Commissioner’s written
decision is placed in the U.S. mail as provided in this subsection (B)(3).
      (4)   Surrender of license. Upon the suspension or revocation of an adult
establishment license pursuant to this chapter, the Adult Use Commissioner
shall take custody of the suspended or revoked license.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.52 ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD.
   The Adult Use Commissioner shall cause to be kept in the Adult Use
Commissioner’s office an accurate record of every adult establishment license
application received and acted on, together with all relevant information and
material pertaining to the application, any adult establishment license issued
pursuant thereto, and any adult entertainment establishment operated pursuant
to the adult establishment license.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.53 EMPLOYEE REGISTRATION AND RECORDKEEPING BY LICENSEE.
   (A)   Registration. The licensee of every adult entertainment establishment
shall register each of the licensee’s adult establishment employees with the
Adult Use Commissioner by providing the following information to the Adult Use
Commissioner no later than the business day immediately preceding the day of
commencement of the employee’s employment at the adult entertainment
establishment:
      (1)   Legal name;
      (2)   Date of birth;
      (3)   Gender, height, weight, hair and eye color;
      (4)   Date of commencement of employment;
      (5)   Specific job or employment duties;
      (6)   The names of each governmental body, including the county, from
which, within three years immediately preceding the date of registration, the
employee has received an adult establishment license, or any other official
authorization to operate or to be employed at an adult entertainment
establishment or a business substantially the same as an adult entertainment
establishment. For each license or authorization, the licensee shall provide
the name and address of the business; and
      (7)   Whether the employee has had any such license or authorization
revoked or suspended, and, if so, the date and grounds for each revocation or
suspension, and the name and location of the establishment at issue.
   (B)   Employee register. The licensee of every adult entertainment
establishment shall maintain a register of all of its adult establishment
employees. For each employee, the register shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Legal name;
      (2)   Date of birth;
      (3)   Gender;
      (4)   Date of commencement of employment;
      (5)   Date of employment termination, if applicable; and
      (6)   Specific job or employment duties.
   (C)   Records. The register shall be maintained for all current employees
and all employees employed at any time during the preceding 36 months. The
licensee shall make the register of its adult establishment employees available
for inspection by the county immediately upon demand at all reasonable times.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
§ 113.54 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Any adult entertainment establishment established, operated, or maintained
in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or of any
adult establishment license shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful
and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of any other
remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove, or
abate the nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take other steps and
apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as
will abate or remove the public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person
from establishing, operating, or maintaining an adult entertainment
establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists or
participates in any way in the violation of, any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter, or of any of the provisions or requirements of
any adult establishment license, shall be fined not more than $500 for each
violation. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The Adult Use Commissioner shall give written notice to the person of
the violation and the fine imposed by serving a citation in person or by
certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to
the licensee’s address as set forth in the licensee’s application.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-15) (Ord. 6:1-15, passed 10-9-2001)
CHAPTER 114: MASSAGE THERAPY
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Jurisdiction
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   License required
   
114.04   Application for license
   
114.05   License fee
   
114.06   Term of license
   
114.07   License Officer
   
114.08   Duties of License Officer
   
114.09   License hearing
   
114.10   Effective date
Operations
   
114.20   Operating requirements
   
114.21   Definition of sexual or genital area
   
114.22   Employment of persons under age 18 prohibited
   
114.23   Advertising
   
114.24   Out-call massage service
License Renewal; Display; Currency of Information; Revocation or Suspension
   
114.35   Renewal of license
   
114.36   Nature of license
   
114.37   Inspections
   
114.38   Display of license
   
114.39   Change of business location
   
114.40   Current list of employees
   
114.41   Agency; liability of licensee
   
114.42   Suspension and revocation
   
114.43   Cause for denial, revocation, or suspension of license
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of Lake County,
Illinois.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, bathing, touching, binding, painting, irritating,
or stimulating of external soft parts of the body with hands or with the aid of
any manual, mechanical, or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without
such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptic oils, powder,
creams, lotions, soaps, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used
in this practice.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. As used herein, any building, room, place, or
establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital, dispensary, or nursing
home, where non-medical and non-surgical manipulative exercises are practiced
upon the human body or where activities described in the definition of
“massage” are engaged in for a fee or other gratuity.
   MASSEUSE or MASSEUR. An individual who administers massages for
compensation. A MASSEUSE or MASSEUR is not anyone who is a physician, surgeon,
physical therapist, chiropractor, barber, or cosmetologist, provided that each
of the foregoing are currently properly licensed or registered under the laws
of this state, and practicing only within the guidelines of that license or
registration. Nor is it anyone employed or acting as a coach or trainer in
connection with any professional or amateur athletic activity or facility.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a massage establishment or hold himself or herself
out as a masseuse or masseur operating within unincorporated areas of Lake
County, Illinois a massage establishment without first having obtained a
license therefor from the county. A masseuse or masseur must comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Every applicant for a license to operate a massage establishment shall
file an application under oath with the Chair of the County Board on a form
provided by the county along with the proper license fee.
   (B)   The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant. If applicant is a corporation, the
name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of
Incorporation;
      (2)   Social Security number and written evidence that applicant is at
least 18 years of age;
      (3)   Residential addresses of applicant for the past three years;
      (4)   Business, occupation, or employment of applicant for the past three
years;
      (5)   Previous experience in the massage therapy business, and whether or
not any previous license to operate a massage establishment has ever been
suspended or revoked;
      (6)   Criminal history check, fingerprints, and photographs (the
applicant would be responsible for any fees); or in lieu of the criminal
history check and fingerprints, a copy of a currently valid massage therapy
license issued by the State of Illinois;
      (7)   Address of place of business which is the subject of application
for permit;
      (8)   If applicant is a partnership or corporation, application shall
include the names of all partners and any stockholder holding more than 5% of
the stock of the corporation;
      (9)   List containing the names and current addresses of all employees;
      (10)   Certification from the Lake County Health Department and Community
Health Center that proposed licensed premises are in conformity with all
regulations and ordinances of the department;
      (11)   Certification from the Department of Planning, Building and
Development that proposed licensed premises are in conformity with all
regulations and ordinances of the Department; and
      (12)   The applicant masseuse or masseur shall provide proof of
successful completion of a massage therapy program that is accredited by a
massage therapy association or shall have passed the National Certification
Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994; Ord. 15-0539, passed 5-12-2015)
§ 114.05 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee shall be $100 for each applicant. This fee shall
accompany the application and shall be refunded in those cases where the
application for a license is denied. The Lake County Health Department and
Community Health Center, and Lake County Planning, Building and Development
Department shall charge reasonable fees as determined by their Department for
the establishment, administration, regulation, and inspection of massage
establishments and masseurs operating out-call massage services.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994; Ord. 15-0539, passed 5-12-2015)
§ 114.06 TERM OF LICENSE.
   Every massage establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter will
terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless
sooner revoked or suspended.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.07 LICENSE OFFICER.
   The Chair of the County Board shall act as License Officer hereunder.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.08 DUTIES OF LICENSE OFFICER.
   The duties of the License Officer shall be as follows:
   (A)   To receive applications and fees;
   (B)   To keep records of licenses issued;
   (C)   To preside at all hearings required under this chapter; and
   (D)   To make findings and recommendations to the County Board concerning
issuance, denial, suspension, and revocation of licenses.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.09 LICENSE HEARING.
   Within 30 days after an application has been received, the License Officer
shall either make a recommendation to the County Board that a license be issued
or shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60 days of the date of the
receipt of the application. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may have an
attorney present with him or her at the hearing. A certified shorthand reporter
shall record the proceedings and prepare a transcript thereof, all at the
expense of the applicant. The License Officer shall submit the record of the
hearing along with his or her findings and recommendations to the County Board
at the next scheduled County Board meeting. The County Board, by a majority of
its members present, shall at the earliest convenient date decide whether or
not to issue or deny the license, and is not bound by the recommendation of the
License Officer. A license shall be issued to all qualified applicants, and may
be denied only for cause (see §
114.43).
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994; Ord. 15-0539, passed 5-12-2015)
§ 114.10 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from December 13, 1977, when
it was passed and approved by the County Board. All persons who presently
operate massage establishments or out-call massage services in the
unincorporated areas of Lake County, Illinois must file an application for
license within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994; Ord. 15-0539, passed 5-12-2015)
OPERATIONS
§ 114.20 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment and all mechanical and
therapeutic devices that come into contact with the human body shall be kept
cleaned, sanitized, and operated under sanitary conditions.
   (B)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms,
and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor cabinets,
shower compartments and toilet room shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the
business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned
after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
   (C)   Each masseur and masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper disinfectant soap, before administering a massage to each
patron. Hand-washing facilities should be in each room or as close as
practicable.
   (D)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. All towels and linens furnished for
use of one patron shall not be furnished for use of another until laundered.
   (E)   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by non-
transparent towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an
employee, masseur, or masseuse.
   (F)   All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and
wear clean, non-transparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital
areas while administering a massage.
   (G)   No masseur or masseuse shall administer a massage to a patron who
exhibits any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, skin eruption, or
skin lesions (open or healing sores); unless a physician duly licensed by the
state certified in writing that the person may be safely massaged.
   (H)   No person suffering from any symptoms described in subsection (G)
above shall work or be employed in a massage establishment.
   (I)   Oils, creams, lotions, or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (J)   Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work areas.
   (K)   No masseur or masseuse, employee or operator shall perform, offer or
agree to perform, any act which would require the touching of the patron’s
genital area. It shall be unlawful for any person in the massage parlor to
touch, fondle, or massage a sexual or genital area of any other patron.
   (L)   Each masseur or masseuse shall disclose to each patron health problems
that may be contraindicated to the administration of massage therapy.
   (M)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
   (N)   Alcohol shall not be served or sold on the premises.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.21 DEFINITION OF SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA.
   For purposes of this chapter,  SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA is defined as the
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva
or breasts of a female.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.22 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, proprietor, manager, or other
person in charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not
at least 18 years of age.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.23 ADVERTISING.
   False and misleading advertising by operators of massage establishments is
prohibited.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.24 OUT-CALL MASSAGE SERVICE.
   No out-call massage service may be operated other than by a licensee
hereunder. All massages performed by an out-call massage service shall be
performed in conformance with this chapter. An OUT-CALL MASSAGE SERVICE is a
business which gives massages at a location designated by the customer or
client rather than at a fixed and permanent location.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
114.99
LICENSE RENEWAL; DISPLAY; CURRENCY OF INFORMATION; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
§ 114.35 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The procedure to be followed in renewing a license is the same
procedure set forth for obtaining the initial license.
   (B)   Applications seeking to renew a license must be filed at least 30 days
prior to the date the current license is due to expire. Licenses of qualified
applicants shall be renewed.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.36 NATURE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The license granted hereunder is a personal privilege and shall
constitute property.
   (B)   All licenses are non-transferable.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.37 INSPECTIONS.
   Inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It
shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow the inspection officer
access to the premises or to hinder the officer in any manner.
   (A)   The Lake County Sheriff’s Office and Planning, Building and
Development Department may make inspections of the massage establishments for
the purposes of determining whether or not the provisions of this chapter and
other applicable county ordinances and state and federal laws are being
complied with.
   (B)   (1)   The Lake County Health Department and Community Health Center
shall make inspections of the massage establishments granted a license
hereunder for the purpose of determining compliance with public health
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Lake County Health Department shall adopt and implement massage
establishment regulations approved by the Lake County Board of Health.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.38 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place within
the massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons
entering the premises.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.39 CHANGE OF BUSINESS LOCATION.
   Licensees shall notify the License Officer ten days in advance of any change
of business location and must obtain the License Officer’s written approval of
the change of business location.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.40 CURRENT LIST OF EMPLOYEES.
   Licensees shall notify the License Officer of any change of employees or any
change in the addresses of any employees within ten days after the change.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.41 AGENCY; LIABILITY OF LICENSEE.
   Every act of omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager, or other
agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of
the employer or licensee, and the employer or licensee shall be punishable in
the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by him or
her personally.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.42 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Any license issued for a massage establishment may be suspended or revoked
for good cause. If the License Officer has reason to believe that good cause to
suspend or revoke a license exists, he or she shall notify the licensee in
writing at least ten days in advance that a hearing will be held and advising
him or her of the specific charges made against him or her. The licensee may
have an attorney present with him or her at the hearing. A certified shorthand
reporter shall record the proceedings and prepare a transcript thereof, all at
the expense of the licensee. The License Officer shall submit the record of the
hearing along with his or her findings and recommendations to the County Board
within ten days of the hearing. The County Board, by a majority of its members
present, shall at the earliest convenient date decide whether or not to revoke
or suspend the license and the length of suspension, and is not bound by the
recommendation of the License Officer. Notice to the licensee of any suspension
or revocation shall be in writing and shall state the reason or reasons
therefor.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
§ 114.43 CAUSE FOR DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The following is an inclusive but not exclusive list of reasons why a
massage establishment may be denied, revoked, or suspended:
   (A)   The correct license fee has not been tendered to the County Board;
   (B)   The applicant for or holder of a license, if an individual; or any of
the stockholders holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation, any of
the officers and directors, if the applicant or license holder is a
corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant or license holder is a partnership; or the manager or any other
person principally in charge of the massage establishment has been convicted of
any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense that would have
constituted any of the following offenses within the past five years:
      (1)   An offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person
of another that amounts to a felony; or
      (2)   An offense involving sexual misconduct, which constitutes a felony,
misdemeanor, or ordinance violation.
   (C)   The applicant for or holder of a license has knowingly made any false,
misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application, or in
any document required by the county in connection with this subchapter;
   (D)   The applicant or license holder has had a permit or license denied,
revoked, or suspended by the county or any other federal, state, or local
agency within the past five years;
   (E)   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors,
if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of
18 years;
   (F)   The application was not completely filled out or the application was
not correctly filled out;
   (G)   The massage establishment would not comply with all applicable laws,
including but not limited to the county’s building, zoning, and health
regulations, and with this chapter;
   (H)   Any person has committed, on the premises of the establishment, an act
that would constitute prostitution pursuant to the laws of the state, or any
offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs, or gambling, whether or not the
person has been convicted of the prostitution, narcotics, dangerous drugs, or
gambling offense under the laws of the state;
   (I)   The massage establishment or any employee of the massage establishment
has not complied with the provisions of this chapter; and/or
   (J)   The license may be denied, revoked, or suspended for just cause.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994; Ord. 15-0539, passed 5-12-2015)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense. Each day a violation is continued
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The State’s Attorney shall be
authorized to obtain an injunction against the operation of any massage
establishment or out-call massage service being operated in violation of any
provision of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 6:1-14) (Ord. passed 9-13-1994)
CHAPTER 115: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
115.01   Qualified exemption from gaming
   
115.02   Video gaming permit required
   
115.03   Video gaming terminal permit sticker and fee
   
115.04   Regulations for operating video gaming terminals
   
115.05   Inspection of premises
   
115.06   Revocation/suspension of license and permit sticker
   
115.07   Seizure of unlawful video gaming terminals
§ 115.01 QUALIFIED EXEMPTION FROM GAMING
   (A)   Licensed video gaming exemption. The prohibitions of this chapter and
any other chapter or section of the County Code that may reference or govern
gambling or gaming shall not apply to any video gaming terminal that has a
valid video gaming terminal permit sticker and is being operated by a licensed
liquor, fraternal, veterans, or truck stop establishment which has a valid
county video gaming establishment license and is in full compliance with this
chapter.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT OR LICENSED PREMISES. Any establishment which
holds a valid license to sell liquor at retail for consumption on the premises
under the Lake County Liquor Control Ordinance and is licensed by the Illinois
Gaming Board to operate a video gaming terminal on its premises, or any
fraternal establishment, veterans establishment or truck stop establishment
that is licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board to operate a video gaming
terminal on its premises.
      VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, utilizing a
video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games,
receipts or credits which can be redeemed for cash. VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL does
not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for
amusement purposes only.
(Ord. 13-0868, passed - -2013)
§ 115.02 VIDEO GAMING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for a licensed establishment to operate any video
gaming terminal, unless the licensed establishment obtains and maintains a
valid video gaming terminal permit sticker from the county for each video
gaming terminal to be operated on the licensed premises.
(Ord. 13-0868, passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL PERMIT STICKER AND FEE.
   (A)   In order for any video gaming terminal to be operated at a licensed
establishment, the licensed establishment is required to obtain an annual video
gaming terminal permit sticker from the county for each video gaming terminal
located on its premises by submitting a written application, on a form provided
by the county, to the Liquor Control Commissioner or his or her designee. The
burden is upon each applicant to demonstrate its suitability and qualifications
for the permit sticker. Each video gaming terminal permit sticker issued by the
county shall expire June 30 next, after date of issue, unless sooner revoked as
provided by law, with an annual fee of $250 per video gaming terminal payable
in full at the time the application is filed with the county.
   (B)   A video gaming terminal permit shall be purely a personal privilege
and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered by any interest
other than the interest of the applicant.
(Ord. 13-0868, passed - -2013; Ord. 22-1297, passed 9-13-2022)
§ 115.04 REGULATIONS FOR OPERATING VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS.
   The following regulations apply to all licensed establishments operating a
video gaming terminal on the licensed premises with valid video gaming terminal
permit sticker for each video gaming terminal.
   (A)   A valid Illinois Gaming Board video gaming license must be clearly
displayed at all times.
   (B)   A valid county video gaming terminal permit sticker shall be clearly
displayed at all times on each video gaming terminal on the licensed premises
whether operational or not.
   (C)   No more than the allowed number of video gaming terminals pursuant to
the State Video Gaming Act may be located on the licensed premises.
   (D)   Other than having the allowed number of video gaming terminals
pursuant to the State Video Gaming Act with valid video gaming terminal permit
stickers, a licensed establishment is prohibited from having, anywhere on its
premises, an electronic video gaming machine which may be available to play or
simulate the play of poker, line up, blackjack, faro, roulette, craps, slots,
or any other card or dice game or other game of chance, or that is otherwise
similar to a gambling or gaming device under this code, even if solely for
amusement purposes.
   (E)   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons 21 years of age or older. The entrance to such area must, at all times,
be within the view of at least one employee of the licensee who is at least 21
years of age.
   (F)   No licensed establishment may cause, suffer, or permit any person
under the age of 21 years to use, play, or operate a video gaming terminal.
   (G)   For licensed establishments with a liquor license, no video gaming
terminal may be played, except during the legal hours of operation allowed for
the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed establishment pursuant
to the Lake County Liquor Control Ordinance (
Chapter 111, §§
111.001 through
111.999).
   (H)   The licensed establishment must fully comply with the Illinois Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as amended, and all rules, regulations and
restrictions imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board.
   (I)   The licensed establishment must fully comply with all applicable Lake
County ordinances, including, the Lake County Liquor Control Ordinance (
Chapter 111, §§
111.001 through
111.999), as well as any applicable federal and Illinois laws or regulations.
   (J)   Licensed establishments must immediately notify the Liquor Control
Commissioner in the event the Illinois Gaming Board revokes or suspends the
licensed establishment’s video gaming license. The revocation, loss, or
suspension of a valid Illinois Gaming Board video gaming license shall
automatically result in the revocation, loss or suspension of the county video
gaming permit stickers, without refund of any fee, for all video gaming
terminals permitted for the establishment.
(Ord. 13-0868, passed - -2013; Ord. 19-1613, passed 10-8-2019)
§ 115.05 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Every licensed establishment where a video gaming terminal is kept shall be
subject to inspection by the Lake County Sheriff or his or her authorized
agents, at any time, to ensure compliance with this chapter. This includes
licensed establishments applying for a video gaming establishment license and/
or video gaming terminal permit sticker. It shall be unlawful for any person to
hinder, resist, oppose, or attempt to hinder, resist or oppose the Lake County
Sheriff or his or her respective agents in the course of an inspection.
(Ord. 13-0868, passed - -2013)
§ 115.06 REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF LICENSE AND PERMIT STICKER.
   (A)   The Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend any video gaming
terminal permit sticker issued by the county if the Liquor Control Commissioner
determines the licensed establishment has violated any of the provisions of
this chapter, any provision of other county ordinances, or any applicable state
or federal statute. No video gaming terminal permit shall be revoked or
suspended, except after a public hearing before the Liquor Control
Commissioner, with a three-day written notice to the licensed establishment,
served upon the licensee or the licensee’s manager of the licensed premises.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any licensed establishment which has
its liquor license forfeited, revoked, or suspended by the county or by the
Illinois State Liquor Commission, or has its state video gaming license revoked
or suspended by the Illinois Gaming Board, shall forthwith, without a hearing
before the Liquor Control Commissioner, have all of its county video gaming
terminal permit stickers revoked or suspended for the duration for which its
liquor and/or Illinois Gaming Board gaming license is suspended, as the case
may be.
(Ord. 13-0868, passed - -2013)
§ 115.07 SEIZURE OF UNLAWFUL VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS.
   Every video gaming terminal which does not have a valid video gaming
terminal permit sticker or is otherwise unlawful shall be considered a gambling
device subject to seizure the Lake County Sheriff or his or her respective
agents and shall be turned over to the Illinois Gaming Board, in accordance
with Board regulations and applicable law, unless otherwise ordered by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 13-0868, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 116: DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Solicitor regulations
   
116.03   Registration
   
116.04   Enforcement
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   OWNER OR OCCUPANT. Any person who is the owner, resident, or tenant of a
residence.
   RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons contained within any type of building or structure.
   SOLICITING. Any one or more of the following activities without prior
consent of the owner or occupant:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, real property or personal property or services of any
kind for any consideration whatsoever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind, or character; or
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication.
   SOLICITOR. A person engaged in the act of soliciting, including: hawkers,
peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise. Except that
minors under the age of 18 who participate in solicitation activities for
fundraising purposes only and persons exercising their first amendment rights,
including the free exercise of religion, the freedom of speech or press, the
right of assembly and not engaged soliciting shall not be deemed to be
solicitors.
(Ord. 15-0377, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 116.02 SOLICITOR REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Solicitors. A solicitor who solicits, or assists in solicitation, in
an area of unincorporated Lake County must conform to the following
regulations:
      (1)   Register with the Lake County Clerk, at no charge to the
registrant.
      (2)   Only solicit between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor entering upon any
residential property to be observant for the presence of a "No Solicitors" or
"No soliciting" sign. If such a sign is present the solicitor shall immediately
and peacefully depart from the residence.
      (4)   Any solicitor who has gained entry onto any residential property
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do
so by the owner or occupant.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any premises and
ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon or rap
or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner to attract the
attention of the owner or occupant of such residence for the purpose of
securing an audience with the owner or occupant thereof and engage in
soliciting contrary to the notice exhibited.
   (B)   Notice. Every owner or occupant who desires no solicitors at his or
her residence shall provide notice of such by:
      (1)   Exhibiting or posting upon or near the front entrance door to the
residence a card, decal or sticker containing the following language or
language similar to the following:
   NO SOLICITORS or NO SOLICITING
      (2)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor that solicitation of the owner or occupant of the premises is
prohibited.
      (3)   Lack of notice shall not prohibit an owner or occupant from
verbally requesting that a solicitor leave his or her premises.
(Ord. 15-0377, passed 4-14-2015) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.03 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to engage in, or
assist in, business as a solicitor for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales,
subscriptions, or business of any kind, without first registering with the Lake
County Clerk's Office and obtaining a certificate of registration. A copy of
the certificate of registration shall be delivered by the solicitor to the Lake
County Sheriff's Office.
   (B)   The solicitor shall provide his or her complete name, address and date
of birth along with a recent picture identification, his or her signature, the
name of his or her employer, the nature of his or her product or services in
which he or she is soliciting, the names of the manufacturers of such products
or of the organization which he or she is representing and the proposed method
of operation, i.e. door-to-door sales.
   (C)   Solicitor registrations are not transferable from person to person or
from business or employer to business or employer. If this information required
to be provided for registration changes, the solicitor shall relinquish his or
her current registration and obtain a new certificate of registration.
   (D)   No person shall make any false statement upon an application for a
certificate of registration. Providing false information will be cause for
immediate revocation of the certificate of registration.
   (E)   Each person shall, at all times while engaged in, or assisting in, the
business of soliciting in unincorporated Lake County carry upon his or her
person the certificate of registration or a legible photocopy thereof issued
pursuant to this chapter. This certificate shall be exhibited by the solicitor
whenever he or she is requested to do so by a Lake County Sheriff's deputy or
by any person being solicited.
   (F)   Any registration pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Lake
County Sheriff upon conviction of or plea of guilty to any violation by the
solicitor of this chapter, or any other similar ordinance, or any state
statute.
   (G)   Registration shall expire on December 31st of each year and must be
renewed by the solicitor.
(Ord. 15-0377, passed 4-14-2015) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   Violations of this chapter shall be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff or
his or her designee(s) and, at his or her discretion, may proceed either
through a notice to appear before the 19th Judicial Circuit Court or through
administrative adjudication pursuant to the Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance.
(Ord. 15-0377, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and
shall be fined as set forth below. Each 24 hour period in which, or during
which, a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Lake County Sheriff's Office Citation filed in Circuit Court. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement before the 19th Judicial Circuit,
the fine amount shall be as follows:
      (1)   The first violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
of no less than $250.
      (2)   A second violation of this chapter by the same person, within a 12
month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $500.
      (3)   A third or subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person,
within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $750.
   (C)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Process, the minimum fine amount shall be $115 for
each violation.
(Ord. 15-0377, passed 4-14-2015)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
131.   MINORS
      
132.   DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
Vandalism and Property Defacing
   
130.01   Graffiti; defacement of private and public property
   
130.02   Acts of vandalism prohibited
   
130.03   Parental responsibility for vandalism and other violations by minors
 
   
130.99   Penalty
VANDALISM AND PROPERTY DEFACING
§ 130.01 GRAFFITI; DEFACEMENT OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   This section shall be known as and may be referred to as the “Lake
County Graffiti Ordinance”.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply.
      GRAFFITI. Any symbol, announcement, insignia, name, identification,
inscription, picture, or similar marking, including without limitation any
letter, word, numeral, emblem, or combination thereof that is painted, written,
drawn, scratched, marked, etched, sprayed, engraved, or in any other way placed
on or affixed to any wall, fence, sign, building, or any other structure, or
any sidewalk, pavement, curb, post, stone, tree, or other public or private
property without the prior written permission of the owner or occupant of the
property, except as permitted by federal, state, or county statute, ordinance,
or regulation.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other
legal entity.
   (C)   It is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to
place graffiti on any property or for any owner or person having control of any
property to allow, permit, or otherwise tolerate graffiti to be placed on or to
remain on that property.
   (D)   Every owner of property or person having control of property shall, at
his or her own expense, completely remove, cover or otherwise eradicate any
graffiti that exists on that property within 14 calendar days after written
notification from the county. The county’s written notification shall identify
the address or location of the property on which the graffiti exists, describe
the condition constituting graffiti, and shall direct the complete removal,
covering, or eradication of the graffiti.
(1977 Code, § 3:4-4) (Ord. passed 4-11-2000) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 ACTS OF VANDALISM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or
negligently break, deface, injure, or destroy any property within the
unincorporated areas of this county, whether the property is owned by the
state, county, village, or any other governmental body, or owned by any private
person.
   (B)   This section shall be in full force and effect 30 days after its
original adoption date of June 13, 1977. Publication to appear in the newspaper
of county-wide circulation within ten days from the date of passage.
(1977 Code, § 3:4-3) (Ord. passed 6-13-1977) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR VANDALISM AND OTHER VIOLATIONS BY MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section, the terms specified have the
meanings ascribed to them.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor
by a Circuit Court of Illinois, but does not include a person appointed
guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act.
      MINOR. A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 13 years of
age.
   (B)   Responsibility of parent. The parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to
exercise proper parental responsibility of the minor [who] shall be deemed to
have committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of
the parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of
the events described in subsections (B)(1), (B)(2), and (B)(3) below:
      (1)   An unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law, or
statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property, or shall have incurred non- judicial sanctions from another official
agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law,
or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property;
      (2)   The parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the
Lake County Sheriff’s Office, following the adjudication or non-judicial
sanction; and
      (3)   If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set
forth in subsection (B)(2) above, the minor is either adjudicated to be in
violation by reason of acts committed in the unincorporated limits of this
county of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (B)(1)
above, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another official
agency resulting from an admission of guilt of a violation by reason of acts
committed in the unincorporated limits of the county of any ordinance, law, or
statute as described in subsection (B)(1) above.
   (C)   Effective date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect 30
days and after its passage, approval on June 13, 1977, and publication to
appear in the newspaper of county-wide circulation and within ten days from the
date of passage.
(1977 Code, § 3:4-2) (Ord. passed 6-13-1977) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Graffiti.
      (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
130.01 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250 for the first offense
and a fine of not more than $500 for each subsequent offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day upon which the person shall
continue any such violation, or permit the violation to exist for more than 14
calendar days after a notification by the county thereof. In the case of a
minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable with
the minor for payment of all fines.
      (2)   The county’s exercise of the remedies provided in this section
shall not prevent the owner of the property from recovering, through civil suit
or otherwise, the cost of removal of graffiti or other reparation for damage
from the person or persons responsible for placing the graffiti on the owner’s
property.
(1977 Code, § 3:4-4)
   (C)   Vandalism. Any person adjudged guilty of violating any of the
provisions of §
130.02 shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense.
(1977 Code, § 3:4-3)
   (D)   Parental responsibility for vandalism and other violations by minor.
Any person adjudged guilty of violating for a failure to exercise proper
parental responsibility any of the provisions of §
130.03 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense,
and not less than $50 for each subsequent offense nor more than $500 for each
subsequent offense.
(1977 Code, § 3:4-2)
(Ord. passed 6-13-1977; Ord. passed 6-13-1977; Ord. passed 4-11-2000)
CHAPTER 131: MINORS
Section
Curfew
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Curfew offense
   
131.03   Exemptions
   
131.04   Enforcement
Social Events; Underage Persons Consuming Alcoholic Beverages or Illicit Drugs
   
131.15   Social events declared nuisances
   
131.16   Definitions
   
131.17   Hosting event or permitting consumption unlawful; exemption
   
131.18   Driving under the influence; exceptions
Truancy
   
131.30   Definitions
   
131.31   Regulations
   
131.32   Enforcement
 
   
131.99   Penalty
CURFEW
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   CURFEW HOURS.
      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday;
      (2)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
      (3)   Between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and
6:00 a.m. on the following day.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
   PARENT. A person who is:
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
   REMAIN.
      (1)   Linger or stay; or
      (2)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. 15-0370, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 131.02 CURFEW OFFENSE.
   (A)   A minor commits a curfew offense when he or she remains in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or control
of a minor commits a curfew offense when he or she knowingly permits the minor
to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during
curfew hours.
(Ord. 15-0370, passed 4-14-2015) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   It is a defense to prosecution under §
131.02 that the minor was:
   (A)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
   (B)   On an errand at the discretion of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
   (C)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (D)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (E)   Involved in an emergency;
   (F)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department of the minor's presence;
   (G)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
   (H)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
   (I)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act.
(Ord. 15-0370, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 131.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   Violations of this subchapter shall be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff
or his or her designee(s) and, at his or her discretion, may proceed either
through a notice to appear before the 19th Judicial Circuit Court or through
administrative adjudication pursuant to the Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66).
(Ord. 15-0370, passed 4-14-2015)
SOCIAL EVENTS; UNDERAGE PERSONS CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR ILLICIT DRUGS
§ 131.15 SOCIAL EVENTS DECLARED NUISANCES.
   Upon the authority granted to county boards by the General Assembly under
720 ILCS 5/47-5, social hosting events as defined below are declared as
nuisances and are hereby abated.
(1977 Code, § 3:2-2) (Ord. 10-0238, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains 0.5% or
more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone
or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
   CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle, trailer, or container designed for the
transportation of persons or property.
   HOST. To enable, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit
a social event.
   ILLICIT DRUGS. Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including
drugs prescribed by a physician which are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person for whom the drug was prescribed or are being
taken by an individual in a manner not consistent with a physician’s orders.
   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a person under the age of 21
years:
      (1)   As a natural, adoptive, or step-parent; or
      (2)   As a legal guardian.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co- partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
   PREMISES. Any residence, home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, highways, and the
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, parks, businesses, or parking lots.
   REASONABLE STEPS. Actions taken that are reasonably likely to ensure that
underage persons do not consume or possess illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages
during the social event. REASONABLE STEPS may also include requesting the aid
of law enforcement once the parent or person becomes aware that underage
persons are possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs.
   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY. The possession, consumption, and dispensation of an
alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or
religious ceremony.
   SOCIAL EVENT. A gathering of two or more individuals, at least one of whom
is an underage person, on a premises, or in a conveyance, for a social activity
or social occasion that is not a religious ceremony.
   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any individual under 21 years of age.
(1977 Code, § 3:2-2) (Ord. 10-0238, passed 4-13-2010)
§ 131.17 HOSTING EVENT OR PERMITTING CONSUMPTION UNLAWFUL; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or person to knowingly host,
either on premises owned or controlled by the parent or person, or at any
public place, or in any conveyance, a social event where the parent or person
knows, or reasonably should know, that underage persons are in possession of,
or are consuming, illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or person to otherwise knowingly
enable, permit, or authorize the consumption or possession of illicit drugs, or
alcoholic beverages by underage persons, at a social event either on any
premises of the parent or person, in any conveyance, or at any public place.
   (C)   A parent or person shall not be in violation of this subchapter if
that parent or person takes reasonable steps with respect to the possession or
consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by underage persons. Nor
shall it be a violation of this subchapter if the consumption of alcoholic
beverages occurs exclusively between an underage person and his or her parent
as otherwise permitted by the laws of this state. Nor shall it be a violation
of this subchapter if the parent or person terminates, or otherwise ends, the
social event once the parent or person becomes aware that underage persons are
in possession of, or are consuming, alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs.
(1977 Code, § 3:2-2) (Ord. 10-0238, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.18 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Violation. It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a parent or
person to permit, or not otherwise prevent, an underage person, whom the parent
or person believes or reasonably should believe to be under the influence of
illicit drugs or an alcoholic beverage, from leaving the social event with the
intent to operate a motor vehicle.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   It shall not be a violation of this subchapter, with respect to
subsection (A) above, if the parent or person confiscates the keys to the
vehicle that the underage person intends to operate, and maintains possession
of those keys until such time as the underage person is no longer under the
influence of illicit drugs or an alcoholic beverage; or until such time as
another individual, who otherwise may properly take possession of the keys, and
is not under the influence of illicit drugs or an alcoholic beverage, offers or
agrees to drive the underage person from the social event; and
      (2)   Further, it shall not be a violation of this subchapter, with
respect to subsection (A) above, if a parent or person requests the aid of law
enforcement to assist in preventing the underage person from operating a motor
vehicle before the underage person has left the social event.
(1977 Code, § 3:2-2) (Ord. 10-0238, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
131.99
TRUANCY
§ 131.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   TRUANT. A child subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent
without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or portion thereof.
   VALID CAUSE. An affirmative defense for an absence shall be an illness, the
observance of a religious holiday, a death in the immediate family, a family
emergency, and shall include such other situations beyond the control of the
student as determined by the board of education in each district, or such other
circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent for the safety or
health of the student.
(Ord. 15-0378, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 131.31 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Truancy prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of
age or younger who is required by law to attend school and who is subject to
the compulsory attendance requirements of the Illinois School Code and/or
enrolled in a public, private (including home school) or parochial school
within the unincorporated areas of Lake County, Illinois, to absent himself or
herself from attendance at school during the hours in which he or she is
enrolled without a valid cause or parental or school permission.
   (B)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal
guardian or other person to permit a child who is in his or her custody or
control to commit the offense of truancy as provided for in division (A) of
this section.
   (C)   Contributing to truancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to
perform any act of commission or omission which act or omission encourages or
contributes to the truancy of any person as provided for in division (A) of
this section.
(Ord. 15-0378, passed 4-14-2015) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.32 ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff or his or her
designee(s) and proceed either through a citation and notice to appear before
the 19th Judicial Circuit Court or through administrative adjudication pursuant
to the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66).
(Ord. 15-0378, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Curfew.
      (1)   Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any
provision of §§
131.01 through
131.04 shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and shall be
fined as set forth below. Each 24 hour period in which, or during which, a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Lake County Sheriff's Office Citation filed in Circuit Court. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement before the 19th Judicial
Circuit, the fine amount shall be as follows:
         (a)   The first violation of §§
131.01 through
131.04 shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $250.
         (b)   A second violation of §§
131.01 through
131.04 by the same person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a
fine of no less than $500.
         (c)   A third or subsequent violation of §§
131.01 through
131.04 by the same person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a
fine of no less than $750.
      (3)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Process, the minimum fine amount shall be $115 for
each violation.
   (C)   Social events. Any person who violates or assists in the violation of
any provision of §§
131.15 through
131.18 shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and shall be
fined not more than $1,000 for each violation. Each 24-hour period on which, or
during which, a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The first
violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $250. A
second violation of this section by the same parent or person, within a 12-
month period, shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $750. A third or
subsequent violation of this section by the same parent or person, within a 12-
month period, shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000.
(1977 Code, § 3:2-2)
   (D)   Truancy.
      (1)   Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any
provision of §§
131.30 through
131.32 shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and shall be
fined as set forth below. Each 24 hour period in which, or during which, a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Lake County Sheriff's Office Citation. If the ordinance violation
is cited for enforcement before the 19th Judicial Circuit, the fine amount
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Truants under ten years of age: The parent, guardian or
custodian of the truant is subject to a fine or community service, or both.
            1.   Fine for first offense: Not to exceed $50.
            2.   Fine for second and subsequent offenses: Not to exceed $100.
         (b)   Truants between the age of ten and under 17 are subject to the
following fines:
            1.   Fine for first offense: Not to exceed $50.
            2.   Fine for second offense and subsequent offenses: Not to exceed
$100.
         (c)   Persons over the age of 18 who contribute to truancy and violate
their parental responsibility (§
131.31(B)) shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and shall
be fined as set forth below. Each 24 hour period in which, or during which, a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
            1.   The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of no less than $250.
            2.   A second violation of this section by the same parent or
person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than
$500.
            3.   A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same
parent or person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a fine of no
less than $750.
         (d)   Persons over the age of 18 who contribute to truancy shall be
deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and are subject to the
following fines:
            1.   Fine for first offense: Not to exceed $50.
            2.   Fine for second offense and subsequent offenses: Not to exceed
$100.
      (3)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Process, the fines shall be as follows:
         (a)   Truants under ten years of age: The parent, guardian or
custodian of the truant is subject to a fine:
            1.   Fine for first offense: $50.
            2.   Fine for second and subsequent offenses: $100.
         (b)   Truants between the age of ten and under 17 are subject to the
following fines:
            1.   Fine for first offense: $50.
            2.   Fine for second offense and subsequent offenses: $100.
         (c)   Persons over the age of 18 who contribute to truancy by
violating their parental responsibility (§
131.31(B)) shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and shall
be fined:
            1.   The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of $115. If the citation is contested the hearing officer can assess a
maximum fine of $1,000.
            2.   A second violation of this section by the same parent or
person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a fine of $215. If the
citation is contested the hearing officer can assess a maximum fine of $1,000.
            3.   A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same
parent or person, within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a fine of
$315. If the citation is contested the hearing officer can assess a maximum
fine of $1,000.
         (d)   Persons over the age of 18 who contribute to truancy shall be
deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and are subject to the
following fines:
            1.   Fine for first offense: Not to exceed $50.
            2.   Fine for second offense and subsequent offenses: Not to exceed
$100.
(Ord. passed 12-18-1961; Ord. 10-0238, passed 4-13-2010; Ord. 15-0370, passed
4-14-2015; Ord. 15-0378, passed 4-14-2015)
CHAPTER 132: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
Section
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Regulation
   
132.03   Enforcement
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   FIREARM. Any gun, rifle, shotgun, pistol, cannon or other device which is
discharged by the igniting of gunpowder from within a firing chamber designed
for such purpose as a component of the firearm.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any area within 300 yards of at least three single- or
multi-family residential structures.
(Ord. 15-0371, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 132.02 REGULATION.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to discharge a firearm in any
residential areas of unincorporated Lake County.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to assist in the discharge of
a firearm in any residential areas of unincorporated Lake County.
   (C)   It shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter to discharge a
firearm during the lawful defense of persons or property, or in the course of
making a lawful arrest, when such force is justified under Article 7 of the
Criminal Code of 2012.
   (D)   This chapter is not intended to limit the otherwise lawful act of
hunting under the Illinois Wildlife Code (520 ILCS 5/1.1 et seq.).
(Ord. 15-0371, passed 4-14-2015; Ord. 16-0930, passed 10-11-2016) Penalty, see
§
132.99
§ 132.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   Violations of this chapter shall be enforced by the Lake County Sheriff or
his or her designee(s) and, at his or her discretion, may proceed either
through a notice to appear before the 19th Judicial Circuit Court or through
administrative adjudication pursuant to the Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66).
(Ord. 15-0371, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and
shall be fined as set forth below. Each 24 hour period in which, or during
which, a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Lake County Sheriff's Office Citation filed in Circuit Court. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement before the 19th Judicial Circuit,
the fine amount shall be as follows:
      (1)   The first violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
of no less than $250.
      (2)   A second violation of this chapter by the same person, within a 12
month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $500.
      (3)   A third or subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person,
within a 12 month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $750.
   (C)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If the
ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication ordinance, the minimum fine amount shall be $115
for each violation.
(Ord. 15-0371, passed 4-14-2015)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODES
      
151.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
      
152.   LAND DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODES
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Standard street address system
Building Codes Adopted
   
150.15   Adoption of codes
   
150.16   2024 ICC International Building Code amendments
   
150.17   2024 ICC International Residential Code amendments
   
150.18   2024 ICC International Mechanical Code amendments
   
150.19   2024 ICC International Fuel Gas Code amendments
   
150.20   2024 ICC International Swimming Pool and Spa Code amendments
   
150.21   2024 ICC International Fire Code amendments
   
150.22   2023 NFPA 70 National Electrical Code amendments
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 STANDARD STREET ADDRESS SYSTEM.
   (A)   Official address.
      (1)   Official address. Every parcel of land in unincorporated Lake
County shall have an official site address. For improved parcels, the official
address is to be posted at the access to the property in a prominent location
visible from the street.
         (a)   Standard numbering system. The official address shall follow the
Standard Street Address System unless the conditions of division (A)(1)(b),
below, apply. The addressing system is based on a uniform grid pattern with its
origin beginning at State Street and Madison Street in Chicago. The addressing
numbers increase as they go west and north from that point. The grid number
represents the number of miles west or north from the base street plus an
address number. Lake County's beginning reference point is at the southwest
corner of the county, being 20 miles north of Madison Street and 29 miles west
of State Street in Chicago. Address numbers with a north directional are
assigned even on the west side and odd on the east side of a street. Address
numbers with a west directional are assigned even on the north side and odd on
the south side of a street. Lake County does not contain any south or east
addresses under this system.
         (b)   Local standard numbering system. If an area is found to have
consistent and logical but non-conforming addresses, the addresses in use in
that area may be adopted as the standard for that area. The finding of
consistency would require that the addresses in use assign odd and even
addresses to opposite sides of a street, that addresses ascend in an orderly
manner along the street, and that the addresses are not duplicated in the
surrounding areas. Adopting the addresses in use in such an area as the county
standard would be made in consultation with the fire district providing service
to the area and the Lake County Sheriff's Office.
      (2)   Renumbering required. Renumbering will be required if an existing
unincorporated parcel has an address that is not consistent with the Standard
Street Address System or if the fire protection district, the Lake County
Sheriff's Office or the U.S. Postal Service request assignment of a new
address. The Lake County Chief County Assessment Office shall issue a new
official address using the provisions of division (A)(1), above.
   (B)   Administration.
      (1)   Assignment of address. The assignment of addresses and
determination of consistency in unincorporated areas shall be the
responsibility of the Lake County Chief County Assessment Office.
      (2)   Official address record. The Lake County property tax records
system shall be the official record of addresses for parcels in unincorporated
Lake County. The Lake County Chief County Assessment Office shall maintain and
update the official addresses in this system.
      (3)   Notice of new address. If an address is found to be inconsistent
with the provisions of division (A), above, and will be renumbered, the
property owner of record, as identified in the Lake County property tax records
system, shall be given written notice of the new address. The property owner
shall have 90 days from the date of the letter to become compliant with the
newly assigned address. Failure to do so will subject the property owner to the
enforcement provisions of this section.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Enforcement Officer. This section shall be jointly enforced by the
Lake County Planning, Building and Development Department and the Lake County
Sheriff's Office.
      (2)   Warning. The Enforcement Officer shall issue a Warning of Ordinance
Violation when the owner of the property has been given notice of a new address
and has not properly posted the new address. The Warning shall require the
violator to abate the violation(s) within no less than seven days, and shall
state that a Notice of Ordinance Violation may be issued if the Warning is not
adhered to as specified.
      (3)   Notice of Ordinance Violation. If the owner of the property has
previously been issued a Warning of Ordinance Violation and fails to abate the
violation by the date specified in the Warning the Enforcement Officer shall
have authority to issue a Notice of Ordinance Violation. If administrative
adjudication is found to be the appropriate remedy to resolve the violation,
the Notice must be served in accordance with and shall contain all information
specified and required in the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance
(§§
94.50 through
94.66). Prior to the hearing date documented on the Notice of Ordinance
Violation, the respondent may elect to cease the violation for which the Notice
of Ordinance Violation was issued, pay the fine listed on the Notice of
Ordinance Violation, and not participate in the hearing.
(Ord. 19-1111, passed 7-9-2019) Penalty, see §
150.99
BUILDING CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.15 ADOPTION OF CODES.
   (A)   Effective July 12, 2025 upon passage of the ordinance codified herein,
the ICC International Building Code, 2024 (as amended), the ICC International
Residential Code, 2024 (as amended), the ICC International Mechanical Code,
2024, (as amended), the ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2024, (as amended),
the ICC International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024, (as amended), the ICC
International Fire Code, 2024 (as amended) and the NFPA 70 National Electrical
Code, 2023, (as amended), be and are hereby adopted by reference in
unincorporated Lake County, Illinois pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-6002 through 5-
6006. Applicable amendments to these codes are attached hereto and made part
hereof.
   (B)   The Planning, Building and Development Department shall enforce the
ICC International Building Code, 2024 (as amended), the ICC International
Residential Code, 2024 (as amended), the ICC International Mechanical Code,
2024, (as amended), the ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2024, (as amended),
the ICC International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024, (as amended), the ICC
International Fire Code, 2024 (as amended) and the NFPA 70 National Electrical
Code, 2023, (as amended), within the Planning, Building and Development
Departments areas of jurisdiction.
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 23-0785, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 25-0527,
passed 5-13-2025)
§ 150.16 2024 ICC INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   General amendments.
      (1)   ICC International Energy Conservation Code. Any and all references
to the ICC International Energy Conservation Code or Chapter 13 are hereby
deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
      (2)   ICC International Plumbing Code. Any and all references to the ICC
International Plumbing Code are hereby deleted and replaced with the State of
Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
      (3)   ICC International Property Maintenance Code. Any and all references
to the ICC International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted and
replaced with “Lake County Nuisance Ordinance”.
      (4)   ICC International Private Sewage Disposal Code. Any and all
references to the ICC International Private Sewage Disposal Code are hereby
deleted and replaced with the “Lake County Board of Health Ordinance Article
V”.
      (5)   ICC International Existing Building Code. Insert Chapter 34 from
the 2012 IBC With the following amendments:
         Modify § 3401.3 to read as follows:
         3401.3 Compliance with other codes. Alterations, additions, repairs
and changes of occupancy to existing structures shall comply with the
provisions for alterations, repairs, additions and changes of occupancy in the
International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, State of Illinois
Plumbing Code, BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, International Sewage
Disposal Code as it may be amended by article 2901.1, International Mechanical
Code, International Residential Code, International Energy Conservation Code
and National Electrical Code.
      (6)   ICC International Building Code. Any and all references in the ICC
International Building Code that has the words “fire code official” shall be
changed to read “Building Official”.
   (B)   Specific amendments.
Page 20  Section     Insert the words "Lake County Planning, Building &
         101.1       Development" to replace "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]".
Page 20  Section     Exception: Re-write the section as follows:
         101.2
                     Exception: detached one- and two-family dwellings and
                     townhouses consisting of not more than two dwelling
                   units that are not more than three stories above grade
                     plane in height with a separate means of egress, and
                     their accessory structures not more than three stories
                     above grade plane in height.
Page 21  Section     Delete the words "NAME OF THE DEPARTMENT" and insert the
         103.1       words "Planning, Building & Development Department".
                     Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit
                     requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant
Page 24  Section     authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
and 25   105.2       violation of the provisions of this code or any other
                     laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall
                     not be required for the following:
                   Building:
                   Amend Item # 1. Playhouses and similar uses, provided
                     the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet.
                   Delete with no substitution items 2, 3, 4, 5, and 8.
Page 25  Section     Delete the existing section and insert a new section as
         105.5       follows:
                   Permit time limits. All permits shall become void if:
                   1. A substantial start of construction is not made
                     within six months from the date of issuance.
                   2. Substantial work is not performed during any six-
                     month period.
                     3. Permits for new structures, additions and alterations
                   greater than 1,000 square feet are not completed, and a
                     certificate of occupancy has not been issued within two
                     years of the date of issuance.
                     4. Permits for additions and alterations 1,000 square
                   feet or less in area are not completed, and a
                     certificate of occupancy has not been issued within one
                     year of the date of issuance.
                     5. Permits for commercial swimming pools are not
                   completed and a certificate of occupancy is not issued
                     within a six-month period from the date of issuance.
                   6. Permits for demolition are not completed within
                     ninety days after the date of issuance.
                     7. Permits for fences, re-siding, re-roofing, decks,
                     electrical up grade, sheds, detached garages, screen
                   porches and any minor alteration to an existing building
                     that does not exceed 1,000 square feet are not completed
                     and, if applicable, a certificate of occupancy is not
                     issued within six months from the date of issuance.
                     8. Permits for telecommunication facilities and related
                     work, including co-locates and antenna replacement, are
                   not completed and, if applicable, a certificate of
                     occupancy issued within six months from the date of
                     issuance.
                     The building official is authorized, but not obligated,
                     to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time,
                   for periods up to but not more than 180 days each. The
                     extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable
                     cause demonstrated.
Page 26  Section     Delete the words "two or more" and insert the word
         107.1       "three".
Page 26  Section     Re-write the section to read as follows:
         107.2
                   107.2.1 Information on construction documents:
                     Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn on
                     suitable material. Minimum scale shall be 1/8 inch per
                     foot. Maximum scale shall be 1/2 inch per foot.
                     Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted
                   where approved by the building official. Construction
                     documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the
                     location, nature and extent of the work proposed and
                     show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of
                     this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and
                     regulations, as determined by the building official.
                   Exception: Sections or sketches may be drawn to a larger
                     scale for clarity.
Page 26  Section     In the first sentence delete the word "a site plan" and
         107.2.6     insert the words "a minimum of three site plans"
Page 27  Section     Delete the words "as "Reviewed for Code Compliance" with
         107.3.1     no substitution.
Page 30  Section 113 Delete the entire section and replace with:
                   Section 113 Application for Appeal
                     "113.1 Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the
                     right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to
                     the Zoning Board of Appeals. An application for appeal
                     shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
                   code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
                     incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
                     not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction
                     is to be used. The board shall not have authority to
                     waive any requirements of this code.
                     113.2 Disqualification of Member: A member shall not
                   hear an appeal in which that member has any personal,
                     professional or financial interest.
                   113.3 Compensation of Members: Compensation of members
                     shall be determined by law.
                     113.4 Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with
                   the Zoning Board of Appeals within 35 days after the
                     date of the Building Official's decision thereon.
                     113.5 Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of
                     Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the
                   appellant's representative, the Building Official and
                     any person whose interests are affected shall be given
                     an opportunity to be heard.
                     113.5.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
                     adopt and make available to the public through the
                   Secretary, procedures under which a hearing will be
                     conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance
                     with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that
                     only relevant information be received.
                     113.6 Administration: The Building Official shall take
                   immediate action in accordance with the decision of the
                     Zoning Board of Appeals."
Page 30  Section 114 Add the following section:
                     114.1.1 Enforcement. The county may enforce violations
                     of this code in accordance with the Lake County
                   Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
                     94.50 through
                     94.66 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances) or as
                     spelled out in Sections 114.2 through 114.4.
         Section     Delete the words "penalties as prescribed by law" and
        114.4       insert the words "a fine of $500.00 per offense. Each
                     week shall constitute a separate offense."
Page 41  Chapter 2,  Add the following definitions:
         Section 202
                     ELECTRIC VEHICLE. An automotive-type vehicle for on-road
                     use primarily powered by an electric motor that draws
                   current from an onboard battery charged through a
                     building electrical service, electric vehicle supply
                     equipment (EVSE), or another source of electric current.
                     ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE). The apparatus
                   installed specifically for the purpose of transferring
                     energy between the premises wiring and the Electric
                     Vehicle.
                     EV-CAPABLE SPACE. A dedicated parking space with
                     electrical panel capacity and space for a branch circuit
                     that supports the EV parking space that is not less than
                   40-ampere and 208/240-volt and equipped with raceways,
                     both underground and surface mounted, to enable the
                     future installation of electric vehicle supply
                     equipment. For two adjacent EV-Capable spaces, a single
                     branch circuit is permitted.
                     EV-INSTALLED SPACE. Parking spaces that have EV supply
                   equipment that is fully installed from the electrical
                     panel to the parking space.
                     EV-READY SPACE. A designated parking space which is
                     provided with a dedicated branch circuit that is not
                     less than 40-ampere and 208/240-volt assigned for
                   electric vehicle supply equipment terminating in a
                     receptacle or junction box located in close proximity to
                     the proposed location of the EV parking space. For two
                     adjacent EV-Ready spaces, a single branch circuit is
                     permitted.
Page 79  Section     Re-write the section as follows:
         310.4.1
                     310.4.1 Care Facilities within a dwelling. Care
                     facilities for eight or fewer persons receiving care
                     that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted
                   to comply with the International Residential Code
                     provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in
                     accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of
                     the International Residential Code.
Page 87  Section     Add a sentence to the end of the paragraph that reads
         403.1
                     "The height of the building for fire department access
                   shall be measured from the average grade elevation to
                     the highest finished floor level."
Page 105 Section     Change the existing exception to number "1" and add
         411.1       another exception to read,
                     "2. A temporary use permit (not to exceed 30 days) may
                   be issued for a haunted house in an existing structure
                     provided the following criteria is approved.
                   A. A special inspection has been conducted and the
                     report is in the office.
                     B. A plot plan showing sufficient parking for the
                   anticipated customers and all structures on the
                     property.
                   C. A floor plan showing the existing and proposed layout
                     of partitions, windows and means of egress.
                     D. A list of all interior finishes and materials to be
                   used for decorations and their flame spread and smoke
                     development ratings.
                   E. Plans showing permanent, temporary and emergency
                     lighting.
                   F. Methods of assuring continuous movement of occupants
                     through the amusement such as but not limited to;
                   1) Permanently stationed supervisory personnel.
                   2) Directional arrows.
                   3) Other means.
                   G. Method of assuring fire protection such as but not
                     limited to;
                   1) An automatic sprinkler system.
                   2) Fire detection/alarm system.
                   3) Portable fire extinguishers."
Page 265 Section 903 Re-write sections 903.1 through 903.2.11 as follows;
                   903.1 General. Automatic sprinkler systems shall comply
                     with this section.
                     903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic
                     fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904
                   shall be permitted instead of automatic sprinkler
                     protection where recognized by the applicable standard
                     and approved by the fire code official.
                     903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler
                   systems in new buildings and structures shall be
                     provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1
                     through 903.2.12.
                     Exception: Spaces or areas in telecommunications
                     buildings used exclusively for telecommunications
                     equipment, associated electrical power distribution
                     equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided that
                     those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an
                   automatic smoke detection system in accordance with
                     Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of
                     the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers
                     constructed in accordance with Section 707 or not less
                     than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in
                     accordance with Section 711, or both.
                     903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
                   provided throughout buildings and portions thereof used
                     as Group A occupancies as provided in this section.
                     903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall
                     be provided throughout stories containing Group A-
                   1 occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group
                     A-1 occupancy to and including the levels of exit
                     discharge serving that occupancy where one of the
                     following conditions exists:
                    1. The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                   2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.
                   3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a
                     level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
                   4. The fire area contains a multi theater complex.
                     903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall
                     be provided throughout stories containing Group A-
                   2 occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group
                     A-2 occupancy to and including the levels of exit
                     discharge serving that occupancy where one of the
                     following conditions exists:
                   1. The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                   2. The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.
                   3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a
                     level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
                     903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall
                     be provided throughout stories containing Group A-
                   3 occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group
                     A-3 occupancy to and including the levels of exit
                     discharge serving that occupancy where one of the
                     following conditions exists:
                   1. The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                   2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.
                   3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a
                     level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
                     903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall
                     be provided throughout stories containing Group A-
                   4 occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group
                     A-4 occupancy to and including the levels of exit
                     discharge serving that occupancy where one of the
                     following conditions exists:
                   1. The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                   2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.
                   3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a
                     level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
                     903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall
                   be provided for all enclosed Group A-5 accessory use
                     areas in excess of 1,000 square feet.
                     903.2.1.5.1 Spaces under grandstands or bleachers.
                     Enclosed spaces under grandstands or bleachers shall be
Page 266            equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in
                     accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 where either of the
                     following exist:
                   1. The enclosed area is 1,000 square feet or less and is
                     not constructed in accordance with Section 1029.1.1.1.
                   2. The enclosed area exceeds 1,000 square feet.
                     903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs. Where an
                     occupied roof has an assembly occupancy with an occupant
                     load exceeding 100 for Group A-2 and 300 for other Group
                    A occupancies, all floors between the occupied roof and
                     the level of exit discharge shall be equipped with an
                     automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
                     903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
                   Exception: Open parking garages of Type I or Type II
                     construction.
                     903.2.1.7 Multiple fire areas. An automatic sprinkler
                     system shall be provided where multiple fire areas of
                   Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancies share exit or
                     exit access components and the combined occupant load of
                     theses fire areas is 300 or more.
                     903.2.2 Ambulatory care facilities. An automatic
                     sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the
                   entire floor containing an ambulatory care facility
                     where either of the following conditions exist at any
                     time:
                   1. Four or more care recipients are incapable of self-
                     preservation.
                     2. One or more care recipients that are incapable of
                     self-preservation are located at other than the level of
                     exit discharge serving such a facility. In buildings
                     where ambulatory care is provided on levels other than
                     the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler
                   system shall be installed throughout the entire floor as
                     well as all floors below where such care is provided,
                     and all floors between the level of ambulatory care and
                     the nearest level of exit discharge, the level of exit
                     discharge, and all floors below the level of exit
                     discharge.
                   Exception: Floors classified as an open parking garage
                     are not required to be sprinklered.
                     903.2.2.1 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall
                     be provided throughout buildings containing Group B
                   occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group B
                     occupancy to and including the levels of exit discharge
                     serving that occupancy where one of the following
                     conditions exists:
                   1. The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                   2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.
                   3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a
                     level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
                   903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
                     provided for Group E occupancies as follows:
                   1. Throughout all Group E fire areas greater than 5,000
                     square feet in area.
                     2. The Group E fire area is located on a floor other
                   than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies
                     required in any area below the lowest level of exit
                     discharge serving that area.
                   3. The Group E fire area has an occupant load of 300 or
                     more.
                     903.2.4 Group F. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
                   provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F
                     occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:
                   1. A Group F fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                    2. A Group F fire area is located more than three
                     stories above grade plane.
                     3. The combined area of all Group F fire areas on all
                   floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square
                     feet.
                     4. A Group F occupancy used for the manufacture of
                   upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square
                     feet.
                     903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations. An automatic sprinkler
                     system shall be provided throughout all Group F
                   occupancy fire areas that contain woodworking operations
                     in excess of 2,500 square feet in area that generate
                     finely divided combustible waste or use finely divided
                     combustible materials.
                     903.2.5 Group H. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be
                   provided in high-hazard occupancies as required in
                     Sections 903.2.5.1 through 903.2.5.3.
                   903.2.5.1 General. An automatic sprinkler system shall
                     be installed in Group H occupancies.
                     903.2.5.2 Group H-5 occupancies. An automatic sprinkler
                     system shall be installed throughout buildings
                     containing Group H-5 occupancies. The design of the
                     sprinkler system shall be not less than that required by
                   this code for the occupancy hazard classifications in
                     accordance with Table 903.2.5.2. Where the design area
                     of the sprinkler system consists of a corridor protected
                     by one row of sprinklers, the maximum number of
                     sprinklers required to be calculated is 13.
Page 267                TABLE 903.2.5.2
                     GROUP H-5 SPRINKLER DESIGN CRITERIA
                   LOCATION    OCCUPANCY HAZARD CLASSIFICATION
                   Fabrication Ordinary Hazard Group 2
                     Areas
                   Service     Ordinary Hazard Group 2
                     Corridors
                     Storage
                   rooms       Ordinary Hazard Group 2
                     without
                     dispensing
                     Storage
                   rooms with  Extra Hazard Group 2
                     dispensing
                   Corridors   Ordinary Hazard Group 2
                     903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin plastics. An automatic sprinkler
                     system shall be provided in buildings, or portions
                   thereof, where cellulose nitrate film or pyroxylin
                     plastics are manufactured, stored or handled in
                     quantities exceeding 100 pounds (45 kg)
                   903.2.6 Group I. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
                     provided throughout buildings with a Group I fire area.
                   Exceptions:
                     1. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
                   with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be permitted in Group I-1,
                     Condition 1 facilities.
                     2. In buildings where Group I-4 daycare is provided on
                     levels other than the level of exit discharge, an
                     automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
                   903.3.1.1 shall be installed on the entire floor where
                     care is provided, all floors between the level of care
                     and the level of exit discharge, and all floors below
                     the level of exit discharge other than areas classified
                     as an open parking garage.
                     903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
                   provided throughout buildings containing a Group M
                     occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:
                    1. A Group M fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                   2. A Group M fire area is located more than three
                     stories above grade plane.
                     3. The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all
                   floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square
                     feet.
                     4. A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of
                   upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000 square
                     feet.
                     903.2.7.1 High-piled storage. An automatic sprinkler
                     system shall be provided in accordance with the
                   International Fire Code in all buildings of Group M
                     where storage of merchandise is in high-piled or rack
                     storage arrays.
                     903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed
                   in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided
                     throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area.
                     903.2.8.1 Group R-3. An automatic sprinkler system
                   installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall be
                     permitted in Group R-3 occupancies.
                     903.2.8.2 Group R-4, Condition 1. An automatic sprinkler
                   system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3
                     shall be permitted in Group R-4, Condition 1
                     occupancies.
                     903.2.8.3 Group R-4, Condition 2. An automatic sprinkler
                   system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2
                     shall be permitted in Group R-4, Condition 2
                     occupancies.
                     903.2.8.4 Care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system
                   installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall be
                     permitted in care facilities with eight or fewer
                     individuals in a single-family dwelling.
                     903.2.9 Group S. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
                   provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S
                     occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:
                   1. A Group S fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                   2. A Group S fire area is located more than three
                     stories above grade plane.
                     3. The combined area of all Group S fire areas on all
                   floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square
                     feet.
                     4. A Group S fire area used for the storage of
                   commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds
                     5,000 square feet.
                     5. A Group S occupancy used for the storage of
                   upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square
                     feet.
                     Exception: One story Group S buildings not greater than
                     12,000 square feet in area that are used for cold
                   storage only and do not include any conditioned spaces.
                     This exception does not include buildings or occupancies
                     set forth in Sections 903.2.9.1 through 902.10.1.
                     903.2.9.1 Repair garages. An automatic sprinkler system
                   shall be provided throughout all buildings used as
                     repair garages in accordance with Section 406, as shown:
                     1. Buildings having two or more stories above grade
                   plane, including basements, with a fire area containing
                     a repair garage exceeding 5,000 square feet.
                     2. Buildings not more than one story above grade plane,
                    with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding
                     5,000 square feet.
                   3. Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles
                     parked in basements.
                     4. A Group S fire area used for the repair of commercial
                   motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square
                     feet.
                     903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires. Buildings and
                     structures where the area for the storage of tires
Page 268            exceeds 20,000 cubic feet (566 m3) shall be equipped
                     throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
                     accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
                     903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An
                     automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
                   buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in
                     accordance with Section 406.6 where either of the
                     following conditions exist:
                   1. Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage
                     exceeds 5,000 square feet (1,115 m2).
                   2. Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath
                     other groups.
                     903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages. An automatic
Page 268            sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings
                     used for storage of commercial motor vehicles where the
                     fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
                     903.2.10.2 Group U. An automatic sprinkler system shall
                   be provided throughout buildings containing Group U
                     occupancies where the Group U fire area exceeds 5,000
                     square feet.
                     903.2.11 Specific building areas and hazards. In all
                     occupancies, an automatic sprinkler system shall be
                   installed for building design or hazards in the
                     locations set forth in Sections 903.2.11.1 through
                     903.2.11.6.
Page 265 Section     Add a subsection to read:
         903.1
                     "903.1.2 Emergency power supply. Every automatic fire
                   suppression system that requires or is equipped with an
                     electric fire pump shall have an emergency generator to
                     provide power in the case of primary power loss.
                     Exception: Upon submittal of documentation from the Fire
                     Chief having jurisdiction of the area, stating that he
                   has reviewed all pertinent information concerning the
                     interruption of the power supply of the area and is
                     accepting the utility provider as a reliable power
                     supply for the fire pump.
Page 315 Section     Re-write the section to read:
         1008.2
                     Illumination required. The means of egress serving a
                   room or space, as well as all toilet rooms shall be
                     illuminated at all times that the room or space is
                     occupied.
Page 316 Section     Delete the entire section and insert a new section to
         1009        read:
                   Section 1009 Accessible Means of Egress
                     1009.1 Accessible Means of Egress Required. Accessible
                   means of egress shall comply with the State of Illinois
                     Accessibility Standards
Page 321 Section     Add new subsection to read:
         1010.1.5
                     "1010.1.5.1 Grade Exit Discharge Doors: Where required
                   to swing in the direction of egress travel, all required
                     grade exit doors shall be provided with a hard-surfaced
                     area underneath the door swing.
                     1010.1.5.2 Stoop surface: The exterior surface shall
                   have a slip resistant surface that has a slope not
                     greater than 1:50 in any direction.
                     1010.1.5.3 Support: Sufficient wing walls and/or
                     foundation wall is required under all stoops. Wing walls
                   shall have a minimum of one (1) number 4 reinforcing bar
                     located not more than six (6) inches beneath the top
                     edge of concrete and extending downward into the
                     foundation wall not less than two (2) feet.
                     1010.1.5.4 Stoop extension: The outer perimeter of the
                   stoop shall not project out beyond the wing wall and/or
                     foundation wall more than twelve (12) inches in any
                     direction."
Page 360 Chapter 11  Delete the entire Chapter and insert a new section to
                     read:
                   Chapter 11 Accessibility
                     1101.1 Applicability. The provisions of the State of
                   Illinois Accessibility Code shall control the design and
                     construction of facilities for accessibility to
                     physically disabled persons.
Page 448 Section     Rewrite the section to read:
         1608.1
                     "In no case shall the ground snow load be less than 30
                   pounds per square foot, but the design roof loads shall
                     not be less than that determined by Section 1607.
Page 500 Section     Change this section to read:
         1808.7.4
                     Foundation elevation. On graded sites, the top of any
                   exterior foundation shall extend a minimum of 6 inches
                     above the finished grade adjacent to the building.
                     Delete from Item #1 the words "below the frost line of
Page 502 Section     the locality" and insert the words "a minimum of forty-
         1809.5      two (42) inches measured from adjacent finished grade
                     level."
Page 621 Section     Add the following section:
         2410
                   Section 2410 Bird-Friendly Glazing
                     2410.1 Bird-friendly glass. Glass or materials that have
                     a Material Threat Factor Rating of ≤ 30 by including
                     materials that meet any of the following conditions: a)
                     any product tested and designated by the American Bird
                     Conservancy (ABC) to have a Material Threat Factor
                     Rating ≤ 30 (staff can provide access to ABC's Products
                     & Solutions Database); b) any product that follows ABC's
                     Prescriptive Rating Criteria (staff can provide access
                   to this); c) glass with exterior surface obstructed and
                     effectively covered by building-integrated structures
                     that do not have gaps larger than 12" in any dimension
                     including non-glass double-skin facades, metal screens,
                     fixed solar shading, and exterior insect or solar
                     screens; or d) continuous-surface materials, including
                     spandrel glass and polished or brushed metals, whose
                     exterior surface gloss has a reflectivity of 15 percent
                     or less as specified by the manufacturer.
                     COMMENTARY: Bird-friendly materials may be measured by
                     "Threat Factor", or the degree of risk that a material
                     poses to birds, as defined by the most current version
                    of the American Bird Conservancy's (ABC) Threat Factor
                     Index (initially established in October 2011), and as
                     indicated by the percent of times in which birds will
                     not avoid collision. ABC defines "bird-friendly"
                     materials as having a Threat Factor ≤ 30.
                     2410.2 New non-residential facade requirements. For new
                     build non-residential properties, at least eighty
                   percent of all glass on each exterior facade from the
                     ground level to one hundred feet, including but not
                     limited to glass surrounding a green roof or landscaped
                     area, shall be bird-friendly glass.
                     2410.3 New PUD facade requirements.
                     For new non-residential Planned Unit Developments
                     (PUDs), at least eighty percent of all glass on each
                     exterior facade from ground level to one hundred feet,
                   including but not limited to glass surrounding a green
                     roof or landscaped area, shall be bird-friendly glass.
                     Building design and orientation in planned unit
                     developments must incorporate consideration of nearby
                     existing bird habitats, landscaped plantings, and known
                     bird migration paths.
                     2410.4 New non-residential accessory structure facade
                     requirements. Accessory structures to new non-
                     residential buildings and non-residential PUDs,
                   including but not limited to free-standing glass walls,
                     railings, windscreens, greenhouses, and other similar
                     construction, shall have at least eighty percent of all
                     glass on each exterior facade be bird-friendly glass.
                     2410.5 Renovations and additions involving glass. Any
                     renovation or addition to a non-residential building
                     from the ground level to one hundred feet that involves
                     replacement and/or addition of glass or other
                   transparent or reflective materials, shall ensure that
                     at least eighty percent of all such materials shall be
                     bird-friendly. This shall apply to all exterior glass or
                     other transparent or reflective materials including but
                     not limited to glass surrounding a green roof or
                     landscaped area.
Page 644 Chapter 29  Delete the entire chapter and replace with:
                   Section 2901 General
                     2901.1 Scope: The provisions of the current adoption of
                     the State of Illinois Plumbing Code shall govern the
                   design, construction, erection and installation of
                     plumbing components, appliances, equipment and systems
                     used in buildings and structures covered by this code.
Page 661 Section     Add the following exception:
         3103.1
                     Exception: In the event of a natural disaster, public
                     emergency, pandemic or other similar event, the
                     Planning, Building & Development Department Director, in
                     consultation with the Building Official, is authorized
                   to allow temporary tents or other approved temporary
                     structures to be erected for periods exceeding 180 days
                     without being required to comply with the International
                     Building Code. Failure to maintain the structure in
                     compliance with all requirements of this section could
                     result in revocation of this approval.
Page 671 Chapter 31  Add the following section:
                   Section 3115 Electric Vehicle Charging Facilities
                     3115.1 Electric vehicle parking. Where parking is
                     provided, new construction shall provide EVSE-installed
                     spaces and facilitate future installation and use of
                     EVSE through the provision of EV-Ready Spaces and EV-
                   Capable Spaces provided in compliance with Sections
                     3115.1.1 through 3115.1.3, Where more than one parking
                     facility is provided on a site, EVSE-installed, EV-Ready
                     Spaces and EV-Capable Spaces shall be calculated
                     separately for each parking facility.
                     3115.1.1 New commercial and multifamily buildings. EVSE-
                     installed spaces, EV-Ready Spaces and EV Capable Spaces
                     shall be provided in accordance with Table 3115.1 for
                     Commercial buildings and Table 3115.2 for multi-family
                     buildings. Where the calculation of percent served
                     results in a fractional parking space, it shall be
                   rounded up to the next whole number. The circuit shall
                     have no other outlets. The service panel shall include
                     an over-current protective device and provide sufficient
                     capacity and space to accommodate the circuit and over-
                     current protective device and the termination point
                     shall be located in close proximity to the proposed
                     location of the EV parking spaces.
 
TABLE 3115.1
EVSE-INSTALLED, EV-READY SPACE AND EV-CAPABLE SPACE REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
Total Number of Minimum number or % Minimum number or % Minimum Percentage of
Parking Spaces  of EVSE Installed   of EV-Ready Spacesb EV Capable Spaces
                Spacesa
TABLE 3115.1
EVSE-INSTALLED, EV-READY SPACE AND EV-CAPABLE SPACE REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
Total Number of Minimum number or %   Minimum number or % Minimum Percentage of
Parking Spaces  of EVSE Installed     of EV-Ready Spacesb EV Capable Spaces
                Spacesa
1 - 10          Minimum one dual port 2 Spaces             
                EV charging station
11 - 15         Minimum one dual port 2 Spaces             
                EV charging station
16 - 19         Minimum one dual port 2 Spaces             
                EV charging station
21 - 25         Minimum one dual port 2 Spaces             
                EV charging station
                2% of total parking   5% of total parking
26+             spaces or a minimum   spaces or a minimum 10% of total parking
                of one dual port EV   of 2 spaces         spaces
                charging station
 
 
    (a)   Where EVSE-Installed Spaces installed exceed the required values in
  Table 3115.1 the additional spaces shall be deducted from the EV-Ready
    Spaces requirement.
    (b)   Where EV-Ready Spaces installed exceed the required values in Table
  3115.1 the additional spaces shall be deducted from the EV-Capable Spaces
    requirement.
 
TABLE 3115.2
EVSE-INSTALLED, EV-READY SPACE AND EV-CAPABLE SPACE REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW
MULTI-FAMILY BUILDINGS
Total Number of Minimum number or % Minimum number or % Minimum Percentage of
Parking Spaces  of EVSE Installed   of EV-Ready Spacesb EV Capable Spaces
                Spacesa
TABLE 3115.2
EVSE-INSTALLED, EV-READY SPACE AND EV-CAPABLE SPACE REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW MULTI-
FAMILY BUILDINGS
Total Number of Minimum number or %   Minimum number or % Minimum Percentage of
Parking Spaces  of EVSE Installed     of EV-Ready Spacesb EV Capable Spaces
                Spacesa
                Minimum one single
1 - 10          port EV charging      2 Spaces             
                station
                Minimum one single
11 - 15         port EV charging      2 Spaces             
                station
16 - 19         Minimum one dual port 2 Spaces             
                EV charging station
21 - 25         Minimum one dual port 2 Spaces             
                EV charging station
                2% of total parking   5% of total parking
26+             spaces or a minimum   spaces or a minimum 10% of total parking
                of one dual port EV   of 2 spaces         spaces
                charging station
 
 
  (a)   Where EVSE-Installed Spaces exceed the required values in Table 3115.2
    the additional spaces shall be deducted from the EV-Ready Spaces requirement.
    (b)   Where EV-Ready Spaces installed exceed the required values in Table
  3115.2 the additional spaces shall be deducted from the EV-Capable Spaces
    requirement.
    3115.1.2 IDENTIFICATION. Construction documents shall indicate the raceway
    termination point and proposed location of future EV spaces and EVSEs.
    Construction documents shall also provide information on amperage of future
    EVSE, raceway methods, wiring schematics and electrical load calculations to
    verify that the electrical panel service capacity and electrical system,
  including any on-site distribution transformers, comply with the requirements
    of this code. Vehicle spaces equipped with EVSE shall be identified by signage.
    A permanent and visible "EV-Capable" or "EV-Ready" label shall be posted in a
    conspicuous place at the service panel to identify each panel space reserved to
    support EV-Capable or EV-Ready Spaces, respectively and at the termination
    point of the raceway or circuit termination point
  3115.1.3 Accessibility. Electric vehicle charging stations shall be installed
    in accordance with Section 228 of the Illinois Accessibility Code.
 
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 23-0785, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 24-0731,
passed 6-11-2024; Ord. 25-0527, passed 5-13-2025)
§ 150.17 2024 ICC INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   General amendments.
      (1)   ICC Electrical Code. Any and all references to the ICC Electrical
Code are hereby deleted and replaced with NFPA 70, National Electrical Code
2023.
      (2)   ICC International Energy Conservation Code. In addition to the
requirements of Chapter 11, all work that requires a building permit must also
comply with the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
      (3)   ICC International Plumbing Code. Any and all references to the ICC
International Plumbing Code are hereby deleted and replaced with the State of
Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
      (4)   ICC International Property Maintenance Code. Any and all references
to the ICC International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted and
replaced with the "Lake County Nuisance Ordinance".
      (5)   ICC International Private Sewage Disposal Code. Any and all
references to the ICC International Private Sewage Disposal Code are hereby
deleted and replaced with the "Lake County Board of Health Ordinance Article
V".
   (B)   Specific amendments.
Page Section      Insert the words "Lake County Planning, Building & Development" to replace "
26   R101.1       [NAME OF JURISDICTION]".
Page Section      Re-write the section to read as follows:
26   101.2 Scope
                  The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration,
                  movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy,
                  location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and
                townhouses consisting of not more than two dwelling units that are not more
                  than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of
                  egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade
                  plane in height.
                  Re-write the exception 3 and 4 to read as follows:
Page Section      3. A care facility with eight or fewer persons receiving custodial care within
26   101.2 Scope  a dwelling unit.
                  4. A care facility with eight or fewer persons receiving medical care within a
                  dwelling unit.
Page Section      Delete the title "NAME OF THE DEPARTMENT" and insert the words "LAKE COUNTY
27   R103.1       PLANNING, BUILDING & DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT".
Page Section      Amend item 1, delete with no substitution item #2, 3, and 10. Add #11 to read
29   R105.2       as follows:
                11. Structures determined by the Building Official to be eligible for the
                  Registration Program.
                Item #1 "Playhouses and similar structures, provided the floor area does not
                  exceed 120 square feet"
                Item #2 "Fences not over 7 feet high."
                Item #3 "Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the
                  bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge."
                  Item #10 "Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are not more than
                16 inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling, are not
                  part of a pool barrier, and do not serve the exit door required by section
                  R311.4."
Page Section      Delete the entire section and insert the following new section:
31   R105.5
                R105.5 Permit time limits. All permits shall become void if:
                1. A substantial start of construction is not made within six months from the
                  date of issuance.
                2. Substantial work is not performed during any six-month period.
                  3. Permits for one or two-family dwellings and additions and/or alterations
                that exceed 400 square feet in area are not completed and a certificate of
                  occupancy is not issued within two years from the date of issuance.
                  4. Permits for additions and/or alterations 400 square feet or less in area
                are not completed and a certificate of occupancy is not issued within one year
                  from the date of issuance.
                  5. Permits for accessory buildings greater than 400 square feet in area are
                not completed and a certificate of occupancy is not issued within one year
                  from the date of issuance.
                  6. Permits for above ground or in ground swimming pools are not completed and
                a certificate of occupancy is not issued within a six-month period from the
                  date of issuance.
                7. Permits for demolition are not completed within 90 days after the date of
                  issuance.
                  8. Permits for fences, re-siding, re-roofing, decks, electrical up grade,
                  sheds, detached garages, screen porches and any minor alteration to an
                existing building that does not exceed 400 square feet are not completed and
                  if applicable, a certificate of occupancy is not issued within six months from
                  the date of issuance.
                  The building official is authorized, but not obligated, to grant, in writing,
                one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The
                  extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
     Section
Page 105.7        Delete all text and replace with:
31   Placement of
     Permit
                  "The building permit card shall be kept on the site of the work in an
                accessible location and protected from adverse weather until the completion of
                  the project."
Page Section      Re-write the section to read as follows:
31   106.1.1
                106.1.1 Information on construction documents.
                  Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn on suitable material.
                  Minimum scale shall be 1/8 inch per foot. Maximum scale shall be ½ inch per
                  foot. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted where approved
                by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient
                  clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and
                  show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and
                  relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the
                  building official.
                Exception: Sections or sketches may be drawn to a larger scale for clarity.
     Section
     106.1.4
Page Information  Delete all text and replace with “Refer to §§ 151.145 through 151.154 of the
31   for          Lake County Code of Ordinances.”
     Construction
     in Flood
     Hazard Areas
Page Section      Change the title of this section from Foundation Inspection to Footing
33   R109.1.1     Inspection and change all references to foundation inspection to footing
                  inspection.
Page Section      Delete items 7 through 9.
33   R110.2
Page Section R112
34   Board of     Delete all text and replace with:
     Appeals
                  R112.1 Application for Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a
                  decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
                application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
                  code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
                  interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent
                  form of construction is to be used.
                R112.2 Disqualification of Member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
                  that member has any personal, professional or financial interest.
                R112.3 Compensation of Members. Compensation of members shall be determined by
                  law.
                  R112.4 Notice of Meeting. Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of
                Appeals within 35 days after the date of the Building Official's decision
                  thereon.
                  R112.5 Open Hearing. All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to
                the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Building
                  Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
                  opportunity to be heard.
                  R112.5.1 Procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available
                to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which a hearing will be
                  conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of
                  evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
                R112.6 Administration. The Building Official shall take immediate action in
                  accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals."
Page Section R113 Add the following section:
34
                  113.1.1 Enforcement. The county may enforce violations of this code in
                  accordance with the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
                94.50 through
                  94.66 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances) or as spelled out in Section
                  114.2.
Page Section R202 Add the following definitions:
42   Definitions
                  Electric Vehicle. An automotive-type vehicle for on-road use primarily powered
                by an electric motor that draws current from an onboard battery charged
                  through a building electrical service, electric vehicle supply equipment
                  (EVSE), or another source of electric current.
                  EV-Capable Space. A dedicated parking space with electrical panel capacity and
                  space for a branch circuit dedicated to the EV parking space that is not less
                than 40 ampere and 208/240-volt and equipped with raceways, both underground
                  and surface mounted, to enable the future installation of electric vehicle
                  supply equipment. For two adjacent EV-Capable spaces, a single dedicated
                  branch circuit is permitted.
                  Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE). The apparatus installed specifically
                for the purpose of transferring energy between the premises wiring and the
                  Electric Vehicle.
Page Table R301.2 Complete this table as follows:
59
 
 
          Wind Design          Seismic  Subject to Damage From         Winter
Ground    Speed  Topographical Design              Frost Line          Design
Snow Load (mph)  Effect        Category Weathering Depth      Termite  Temp

30        115    No            A        Severe     42"        Moderate 2
                                                              to Heavy
 
 
Ice Barrier           Flood Hazards         Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp
Underlayment Required
                      See Article 8 of the
Yes                   Lake County Unified   2000               50°F
                      Development Ordinance
 
Page  Section R302.5.1                   Re-write the section to read as follows:
84
                                         R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into
                                       a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings
                                         between the garage and residence shall be equipped with 60-minute fire-
                                         rated doors, equipped with a self-closing or automatic-closing device.
                                         Exception: In dwellings protected by a residential automatic fire
                                         suppression system, openings from a private garage directly into a room
                                         used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between
                                       the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less
                                         than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel
                                         doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm thick, or 20-minute fire-rated
                                         doors, equipped with a self-closing or automatic-closing device.
Page  Table R302.6                       All references to 1/2 inch gypsum board should be changed to 5/8-inch
85                                       Type X gypsum board.
                                       Delete the last line in the table.
                                       Add the following Exception:
                                         Exception: One and two family dwellings that are protected by an
                                       automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be allowed to
                                         substitute ½ inch gypsum board in place of 5/8 inch Type X gypsum board.
                                         Delete this section and replace with the following sentence:
Page  Section R306.1.3                   Refer to §§
93    “Flood Resistant Construction” 151.145 through
                                         151.154 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances.
Page  Section R313.1                     Change the section to read as follows:
100
                                         Minimum height. Habitable space, hallways, bathrooms, toilet rooms,
                                       laundry rooms and portions of basements containing these spaces shall
                                         have a ceiling height of not less than 7'6".
Page  Section R313.1                     Add an additional exception numbered 5 to read as follows:
100
                                         5. Ceilings in finished basements can have a minimum height less than
                                       7'6" provided that no permanently installed fixtures or finished ceiling
                                         will extend below 7 feet.
Page  Section R318.2                     Re-write the section as follows:
103
                                         R318.2 Egress door. Not less than two egress doors shall be provided for
                                         each dwelling unit. The required egress door shall be side-hinged and
                                         shall provide a clear width of not less than 36 inches (813 mm) where
                                         measured between the face of the door and the stop, with the door open 90
                                       degrees (1.57 rad). The clear height of the door opening shall be not
                                         less than 78 inches (1981 mm) in height measured from the top of the
                                         threshold to the bottom of the stop. Other doors shall not be required to
                                         comply with these minimum dimensions. Egress doors shall be readily
                                         openable from inside the dwelling without the use of a key or special
                                         knowledge or effort.
                                       Exception 1: For dwellings provided with a residential automatic fire
                                         suppression system only one egress door will be required.
                                       Exception 2: A sliding door can serve as a secondary means of egress.
Page  Section R322                       Re-write the text of the following sections to read as follows:
108   ACCESSIBILITY
                                         Where there are four or more dwelling units or sleeping units in a single
     Section R322.1                     structure, the provisions of the State of Illinois Accessibility Code
                                         shall apply.
                                         In live/work units, the nonresidential portion shall be accessible in
                                         accordance with the provisions of the State of Illinois Accessibility
     Section R322.2                     Code. In a building where there are four or more live/work units, the
                                         residential portion of the live/work unit shall comply with the
                                         provisions of the State of Illinois Accessibility Code.
                                         Where care facilities are permitted to be constructed in accordance with
     Section R322.3                     Section R101.2, the portions of the dwelling used to operate a business
                                         providing care shall be accessible in accordance with the provisions of
                                         the State of Illinois Accessibility Code.
Page  Section R324 GLAZING               Add the following subsection:
112
                                       R324.7–Bird-friendly glazing.
                                       R324.7.1 Bird-friendly glass.
                                         Glass or materials that have a Material Threat Factor Rating of ≤ 30 by
                                         including materials that meet any of the following conditions: a) any
                                         product tested and designated by the American Bird Conservancy (ABC) to
                                         have a Material Threat Factor Rating ≤ 30 (staff can provide access to
                                         ABC's Products & Solutions Database); b) any product that follows ABC's
                                         Prescriptive Rating Criteria (staff can provide access to this); c) glass
                                       with exterior surface obstructed and effectively covered by building-
                                         integrated structures that do not have gaps larger than 12" in any
                                         dimension including non-glass double-skin facades, metal screens, fixed
                                         solar shading, and exterior insect or solar screens; or d) continuous-
                                         surface materials, including spandrel glass and polished or brushed
                                         metals, whose exterior surface gloss has a reflectivity of 15 percent or
                                         less as specified by the manufacturer.
                                         COMMENTARY: Bird-friendly materials may be measured by "Threat Factor",
                                         or the degree of risk that a material poses to birds, as defined by the
                                       most current version of the American Bird Conservancy's (ABC) Threat
                                         Factor Index (initially established in October 2011), and as indicated by
                                         the percent of times in which birds will not avoid collision. ABC defines
                                         "bird-friendly" materials as having a Threat Factor ≤ 30.
                                       R324.7.2 New residential façade requirements.
                                         New residential dwellings must be designed and built in accordance with
                                         the following, at minimum: At least 80% of all glass on each exterior
                                       facade from the ground level to 100 feet, including but not limited to
                                         glass surrounding a green roof or landscaped area, shall be bird-friendly
                                         glass.
                                       R324.7.3 New conservation subdivision requirements.
                                         Residential dwellings must be designed and built in accordance with the
                                         following, at minimum: At least 80% of all glass on each exterior facade
                                       from the ground level to 100 feet, including but not limited to glass
                                         surrounding a green roof or landscaped area, shall be bird-friendly
                                         glass.
                                         Accessory structures to new conservation residential dwellings, including
                                       but not limited to free-standing glass walls, railings, windscreens,
                                         greenhouses, and other similar construction, shall comply with this 80%
                                         bird-friendly glass threshold.
Pages
123,  Tables R403.1(1), R403.1(2) and
124   R403.1(3)                          Delete the current tables and insert the following table:
and
125
 
Table R403.1 minimum width of concrete, precast or masonry footings
(inches)
Number of stories and type Thickness of footing  Projection on each side of
of construction            (inches)              foundation wall (inches)
   One story (without basement)
Frame                      8                     4
Masonry veneer on frame    8                     4
Masonry                    8                     4
   One story (with basement)
Frame                      8                     4
Masonry veneer on frame    8                     4
Masonry                    8                     4
   Over one story (with or without a basement)
Frame                      8                     4
Masonry veneer on frame    8                     4
Masonry                    12                    6
 
                                         EXCEPTION: At the discretion of the
                                         Building Official, Tables R403.1(1),
                                         R403.1(2) and R403.1(3) can be used if
                                       a soil report and foundation design,
                                         both of which are prepared by a design
                                         professional registered in the State
                                         of Illinois are submitted as an
                                         alternate to the above table.
Page 131  Section R403.1.4.1             Change exception 1 to read as follows:
                                         1. Protection of free-standing
                                         accessory structures with an area of
                                       1,000 square feet or less, of light-
                                         frame construction and with an eave
                                         height of 10 feet or less shall not be
                                         required.
Page 165  Section R405.1                 Rewrite this section as follows and
                                         delete the exception:
                                         Concrete or masonry foundations.
                                         Drains shall be provided around all
                                         concrete or masonry foundations that
                                         retain earth and enclose crawl spaces,
                                         habitable or usable spaces located
                                         below grade. The foundation drain
                                         shall consist of drainage tiles or
                                         perforated pipe placed on a minimum of
                                         2 inches of washed gravel or crushed
                                         rock with a minimum aggregate size of
                                         one-half inch in diameter and covered
                                         with not less than 12 inches of the
                                       same material. Foundation drains must
                                         be covered with a filter membrane with
                                         a minimum width of 18 inches.
                                         Foundation drains must connect to a
                                         sump pit located inside the basement
                                         or crawl space of the dwelling. The
                                         drains must discharge by gravity or
                                         mechanical means into an approved
                                         drainage system. Foundation drains
                                         that do not discharge into an approved
                                         storm sewer or drainage swale must
                                         terminate a minimum of 20 feet from
                                         all property lines.
Page 168  Section R408.6                 Rewrite this section as follows:
                                         Finished grade. The finished grade of
                                         under floor surfaces must be located a
                                       minimum of 24 inches and a maximum of
                                         48 inches below the bottom of the
                                         floor framing.
Page 168  Section R408.7                 Delete this section with no
                                         substitution.
Page 220  Section R602.3.2               Delete the exception.
Page 472  Section R903                   Add the following section:
                                         R903.5 Gutters and downspouts. When a
                                         dwelling is provided with a basement
                                         or has habitable rooms below grade,
                                         gutters and downspouts shall be
                                       installed, unless omission is
                                         specifically permitted by the Building
                                         Official. All exterior doors shall be
                                         protected from roof runoff by a
                                         continuous gutter and downspouts or an
                                         approved type diverter.
Page 500  Section R1101.5 Information on Add the following item:
          construction documents:
                                       10. Electric Vehicle charging details
                                         and locations.
Page 540:                               Add the following section:
                                         Section 1101.15 Electric Vehicle
                                         Charging. Where parking is provided,
                                       new construction shall provide
                                         electric vehicle spaces in compliance
                                         with Sections N1101.15.1 through
                                         N1101.15.2.
                                         N1101.15.1 New single family and two-
                                         family dwelling units. Single family
                                       and two-family dwelling units shall
                                         provide not less than one EV-Capable
                                         space per dwelling unit.
                                         N1105.15.2 Identification.
                                         Construction documents shall indicate
                                         the raceway termination point and
                                         proposed location of future EV spaces
                                         and EVSE. Construction documents shall
                                         also provide information on amperage
                                         of future EVSE, raceway methods,
                                         wiring schematics and electrical load
                                         calculations to verify that the
                                         electrical panel service capacity and
                                       electrical system, including any on
                                         site distribution transformers, meet
                                         the requirements of this code. A
                                         permanent and visible "EV Capable" or
                                         " EV Ready" label shall be posted in a
                                         conspicuous place at the service panel
                                         to identify each panel space reserved
                                         to support EV Capable or EV Ready
                                         spaces, respectively and at the
                                         termination point of each raceway or
                                         circuit termination point.
 
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 23-0785, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 25-0278,
passed 5-13-2025; Ord. 25-0527, passed 5-13-2025)
§ 150.18 2024 ICC INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   General amendments.
      (1)   ICC Electrical Code. Any and all references to the ICC Electrical
Code are hereby deleted and replaced with NFPA 70 National Electrical Code
2023.
      (2)   ICC International Existing Building Code. Any and all references to
the ICC International Existing Building Code are hereby deleted with no
substitution.
      (3)   ICC International Energy Conservation Code. Any and all references
to the ICC International Energy Conservation Code are hereby deleted and
replaced with the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
      (4)   ICC International Plumbing Code. Any and all references to the ICC
International Plumbing Code are hereby deleted and replaced with the State of
Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
      (5)   Code Official. Any and all references to the Code Official are
hereby deleted and replaced with "Building Official".
   (B)   Specific amendments.
Page Section     Insert the words "Lake County Planning, Building & Development" to replace "
11   101.1       [NAME OF JURISDICTION]".
Page Section
16   105.4.4     Delete the last two sentences.
     Extensions
     Section
Page 108.2       Delete the words "by the applicable governing authority". Insert the words
17   Schedule of "in accordance with the effective fee schedule as adopted by Lake County".
     permit
     fees.
Page Section 112
19   Means of    Delete the entire section and replace with;
     Appeal
                 112.1 Application for Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a
                 decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
               application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
                 code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
                 interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent
                 form of construction is to be used.
               112.2 Disqualification of Member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
                 that member has any personal, professional or financial interest.
               112.3 Compensation of Members. Compensation of members shall be determined by
                 law.
                 112.4 Notice of Meeting. Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of
               Appeals within 35 days after the date of the Building Official's decision
                 thereon.
                 112.5 Open Hearing. All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to
               the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Building
                 Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
                 opportunity to be heard.
                 112.5.1 Procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available
               to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which a hearing will be
                 conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of
                 evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
               112.6 Administration. The Building Official shall take immediate action in
                 accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
                 Delete the entire subsection and replace with;
                 114.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code
                 or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
                 erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved
                 construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
     Section     certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
Page 114.4       petty offense punishable by a fine of not more than $500. Each week that a
19   Violation   violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
     penalties   separate offense.
                 114.4.1 Enforcement. The county may enforce violations of this code in
                 accordance with the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance, (§§
                 94.50 through
                 94.66 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances) or in accordance with Sections
                 108.2 through 108.7.3 of this code.
                 Add new subsection:
                 115.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that mechanical
                 work is being performed contrary to the provisions of this code or in a
                 dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice
                 shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to
Page Section     the owner’s authorized agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice
20   115.5       shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
                 emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written
                 notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on
                 the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
                 as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
                 condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100 dollars or more
                 than $500 dollars.
     Appendix B,
Page Recommended Delete with no substitution.
165  Permit Fee
     Schedule
 
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 23-0785, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 25-0527,
passed 5-13-2025)
§ 150.19 2024 ICC INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   General amendments.
      (1)   ICC Electrical Code. Any and all references to the ICC Electrical
Code are hereby deleted and replaced with NFPA 70 National Electrical Code
2023.
      (2)   ICC International Existing Building Code. Any and all references to
the ICC International Existing Building Code are hereby deleted with no
substitution.
      (3)   ICC International Energy Conservation Code. Any and all references
to the ICC International Energy Conservation Code are hereby deleted and
replaced with the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
      (4)   ICC International Plumbing Code. Any and all references to the ICC
International Plumbing Code are hereby deleted and replaced with the State of
Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
      (5)   Code Official. Any and all references to the Code Official are
hereby deleted and replaced with "Building Official".
   (B)   Specific amendments.
Page Section     Insert the words "Lake County Planning, Building and Development" to replace
11   101.1       "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]".
Page 105.5.4     Delete the last sentence.
16   Extensions.
     Section
Page 108.2       Delete the words "by the applicable governing authority". Insert the words
17   Schedule of "the effective fee schedule as adopted by Lake County".
     permit
     fees.
Page Section 112
19   Means of    Delete the entire section and replace with:
     Appeals
                 112.1 Application for Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a
                 decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
               application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of
                 this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
                 interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an
                 equivalent form of construction is to be used.
               112.2 Disqualification of Member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
                 that member has any personal, professional or financial interest.
               112.3 Compensation of Members. Compensation of members shall be determined
                 by law.
                 112.4 Notice of Meeting. Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of
               Appeals within 35 days after the date of the Building Official's decision
                 thereon.
                 112.5 Open Hearing. All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open
               to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Building
                 Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
                 opportunity to be heard.
                 112.5.1 Procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make
                 available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which a
               hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with
                 strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be
                 received.
               112.6 Administration. The Building Official shall take immediate action in
                 accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals."
Page Section     Add the following section:
19   113.1
                 113.1.1 Enforcement. The county may enforce violations of this code in
                 accordance with the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
               94.50 through
                 94.66 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances) or in accordance with Sections
                 108.2 through 108.7.3 of this code.
     Section
Page 113.4       Rewrite the section as follows:
19   Violation
     Penalties
                 113.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
                 code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
                 shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the
               approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
                 permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
                 guilty of a petty offense punishable by a fine of not more than $500. Each
                 week that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
                 deemed a separate offense.
Page Section     Re-write the section to read as follows:
134  504.2.10
               504.2.10: Corrugated vent connector size. Corrugated vent connectors are not
                 permitted.
 
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 23-0785, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 25-0527,
passed 5-13-2025)
§ 150.20 2024 ICC INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   General amendments.
      (1)   Any and all references in the ICC International Swimming Pool and
Spa Code to the "Code Official" shall be changed to "Building Official".
      (2)   ICC International Plumbing Code. Any and all references to the ICC
International Plumbing Code are hereby deleted and replaced with the State of
Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
   (B)   Specific amendments.
Page Section   Insert the words "Lake County Planning, Building & Development Department" to
10   101.1     replace "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]".
Page Section   Delete the words "NAME OF DEPARTMENT" and insert the words "Lake County
11   103.1     Planning, Building & Development Department".
               Change the first sentence to read as follows: "Every permit issued shall
               become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within
Page Section   180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is
14   105.4.3   suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is
               commenced, or if the work authorized by such permit is not completed within
               one year of the date of permit issuance."
Page Section   Delete last sentence of this section with no substitution.
14   105.4.4
Page Section   Insert the following as needed: "Planning, Building and Development
15   109.2     Department Land Development Fee Schedule".
               Delete the entire section and insert the following: "The Building Official
Page Section   shall authorize the refunding of fees in accordance with the current adoption
15   109.6     of the Department Policy and Procedure Relating to Fee Refunds and
               Reductions."
Page Section   Add the following section:
17   113.4.1
               113.4.1 Enforcement: The county may enforce violations of this code in
               accordance with the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance, (§§
             94.50 through
               94.66 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances) or in accordance with Sections
               107.2 through 107.73 of this code.
     Section
Page 113.4     Change this section to read as follows:
17   Violation
     penalties
               Any person who shall violate any provision of this code or shall fail to
               comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install,
              alter or repair an aquatic vessel in violation of the approved construction
               documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
               certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a
               fine of $500 per offense. Each week shall constitute a separate offense.
Page Section   Delete the entire section and replace with:
16   112
               112.1 Application for Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a
               decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
             application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
               code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
               interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent
               form of construction is to be used.
             112.2 Disqualification of Member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
               that member has any personal, professional or financial interest.
             112.3 Compensation of Members. Compensation of members shall be determined by
               law.
               112.4 Notice of Meeting. Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of
             Appeals within 35 days after the date of the Building Official's decision
               thereon.
               112.5 Open Hearing. All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to
             the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Building
               Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
               opportunity to be heard.
               112.5.1 Procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available
             to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which a hearing will be
               conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of
               evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
             112.6 Administration. The Building Official shall take immediate action in
               accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals."
Page Section   Change Section 304.1 to read as follows:
24   304
               General. "Refer to §§
             151.145 through
               151.154 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances.
Page Section   Delete Sections 304.2 through 304.2.2
24   304
Page Section   Change the first paragraph to read as follows:
26   305.4
               Where a wall of a dwelling or structure serves as part of the barrier, doors
             that provide direct access to the aquatic vessel through the wall shall be
               equipped with one or more of the following:
Page Section   Change number one to read as follows:
26   305.4
               1. Operable windows without screens installed and having a sill height of
               less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) above the indoor finished floor and doors
             shall have an alarm that produces an audible warning when the window, door or
               their screens are opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled as a water
               hazard entrance alarm in accordance with UL 2017.
 
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 23-0785, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 25-0527,
passed 5-13-2025)
§ 150.21 2024 ICC INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   General amendments.
      (1)   Any and all references to the fire code official shall be changed
to "Building Official".
      (2)   Any and all references to the International Property Maintenance
code shall be changed to "The Lake County Nuisance Ordinance".
   (B)   Specific amendments.
Page Section      Insert "Lake County Planning, Building, & Development" in place of [Name of
24   101.1 Title  Jurisdiction].
Page Section      Delete Section 103 with no substitution.
25   103.1
     Section
Page 105.1.2      Delete #1 and change #2 to #1.
28   Types of
     permits.
Page Section      Delete third sentence without substitution.
29   105.3.1
Page Section 112
39   Means of     Delete the entire section and insert the following:
     Appeals
                  112.1 Application for Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a
                  decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
                application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
                  code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
                  interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent
                  form of construction is to be used.
                112.2 Disqualification of Member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
                  that member has any personal, professional or financial interest.
                112.3 Compensation of Members. Compensation of members shall be determined by
                  law.
                  112.4 Notice of Meeting. Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of
                Appeals within 35 days after the date of the Building Official's decision
                  thereon.
                  112.5 Open Hearing. All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to
                the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Building
                  Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
                  opportunity to be heard.
                  112.5.1 Procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available
                to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which a hearing will be
                  conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of
                  evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
                112.6 Administration. The Building Official shall take immediate action in
                  accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals."
Page             Add the following section:
39
                  113.1.1 Enforcement: The county may enforce violations of this code in
                  accordance with the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance, (§§
                94.50 through
                  94.66 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances) or in accordance with Sections
                  110.2 through 110.4 of this code.
     Section
Page 113.4        Rewrite the section as follows:
40   Violation
     penalties
                  113.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code
                  or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
                  erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved
                construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
                  certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
                  petty offense punishable by a fine of not more than $500. Each week that a
                  violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
                  separate offense.
     Section 307
     Open
     Burning,
Page recreational Rewrite the section as follows:
84   fires and
     portable
     outdoor
     fireplaces
                OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES
                  307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be
                kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in
                  accordance with Sections 307.1.1 through 307.5.
                  307.1.1 Open burning: Open burning shall only be conducted in accordance with
                §
                  94.05(I) of the Lake County Public Nuisance Ordinance.
                  307.2 Authorization. Where required by state or local law or regulations,
                open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval from the state or
                  local air and water quality management authority, provided that all
                  conditions specified in the authorization are followed.
                  307.3 Extinguishment authority. Where open burning creates or adds to a
                hazardous situation, or a required permit for open burning has not been
                  obtained, the fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment of
                  the open burning operation.
                  307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall be not less than 50 feet
                (15,240 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the
                  fire from spreading to within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any structure.
                Exceptions:
                1. Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet (4,572 mm)
                  from a structure.
                  2. The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet (7,620 mm)
                where the pile size is 3 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and 2 feet (610
                  mm) or less in height.
                  307.4.1 Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet (15,240 mm)
                of a structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained in a
                  barbecue pit. Conditions that could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet
                  (15,240 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
                  307.4.2 Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within
                25 feet (7,620 mm) of a structure or combustible material. Conditions that
                  could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet (7,620 mm) of a structure shall
                  be eliminated prior to ignition.
                  307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be
                used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be
                  operated within 15 feet (3,048 mm) of a structure or combustible material.
                Exception: Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one and two-family dwellings.
                  307.5 Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of
                  portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is
                 extinguished. Not fewer than one portable fire extinguisher complying with
                  Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-
                  extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or
                  water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
 
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 23-0785, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 25-0527,
passed 5-13-2025)
§ 150.22 2023 NFPA 70 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE AMENDMENTS.
Page 70-26 Section 70-26 Add two new sections:
Page Section 70-
70-  26           Add two new sections:
26
                90.10 MEANS OF APPEAL
                  (a) Application for appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a
                  decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
                application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
                  code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted,
                  the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of
                  construction is to be used.
                (b) Disqualification of member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that
                  member has any personal, professional or financial interest.
                (c) Compensation of members: Compensation of members shall be determined by
                  law.
                (d) Notice of meeting: An appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals
                  within 35 days after the date of the Building Official's decision thereon.
                  (e) Open hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the
                public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Building Official
                  and any person whose interest are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
                  heard.
                  (f) 121.6.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make
                available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which a hearing
                  will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict
                  rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information is received.
                (g) Section 121.7 Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate
                  action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals."
                90.11 Enforcement
                  The county may at their discretion, enforce violations of this code in
                accordance with the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
                  94.50 through
                  94.66 of the Lake County Code of Ordinances).
Page Article
70-  210.8(A)     Rewrite 210.8(A)(4) as:
81
                  4) Crawl spaces–at or below grade level: Receptacles supplying power to sump
                pumps, battery backup sump pumps and ejector pumps must be equipped with an
                  alarm that indicates a tripped condition of the GFCI protection device
                Rewrite 210.8(A)(5) as:
                  5) Basements: Receptacles supplying power to sump pumps, battery backup sump
                 pumps and ejector pumps must be equipped with an alarm that indicates a tripped
                  condition of the GFCI protection device
Page Section
70-  210.8(B)     Rewrite 210.8(B)(11) as:
81
                  11) Crawl spaces–at or below grade level: Receptacles supplying power to sump
                pumps, battery backup sump pumps and ejector pumps must be equipped with an
                  alarm that indicates a tripped condition of the GFCI protection device
                Rewrite 210.8(B)(12) as:
                  12) Unfinished areas of basements: Receptacles supplying power to sump pumps,
                battery backup sump pumps and ejector pumps must be equipped with an alarm that
                  indicates a tripped condition of the GFCI protection device.
Page Article
70-  230.28(A)    Re-write the section to read as follows:
109
                (A) Strength. Service masts used for the support of overhead service drop
                  conductors need to meet current utility company requirements
     Article
     230.43
Page Wiring       Delete the section in its entirety. Rewrite to say, "Unless special permission
70-  Methods for  is granted by authority having jurisdiction, only the following wiring methods
111  1,000 volts  shall be used for service entrance conductors:"
     Nominal, or
     Less
                1) Rigid metal conduit (RMC).
                2) Intermediate metal conduit (IMC).
                3) Electrical metallic tubing (EMT).
     Article
Page 300.5(A)
70-  Minimum      Add language to the end of Section 300.5(A) to read:
169  Cover
     Requirements
                  "A minimum of twelve (12) inches of horizontal separation is required between
                all underground electrical wiring methods, gas, and/or plumbing located in the
                  same trench, including swimming pool circulation system piping."
Page Article
70-  320.12 Uses  Add a new number (6) to read:
220  Not
     Permitted
                (6) "In any occupancy other than one and two family dwellings.
Page
70-              Revise 334.10 Uses Permitted to read as follows:
227
                  Type NM and Type NMC cables shall be permitted to be used in the following
                only:
                  (1) One & two family dwellings, their attached and detached garages, and their
                  storage buildings.
 
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 23-0785, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 25-0527,
passed 5-13-2025)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating §
150.01 shall be subject to the penalty as prescribed in §
10.99.
   (C)   The penalty for violation of any of the provisions of the ICC
International Building Code, 2024 (as amended), the ICC International
Residential Code, 2024 (as amended), the ICC International Mechanical Code,
2024, (as amended), the ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2024, (as amended),
the ICC International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024, (as amended), the ICC
International Fire Code, 2024 (as amended) and the NFPA 70 National Electrical
Code, 2023, (as amended), shall be a fine not to exceed $500 per offense and
that each week that the violation exists shall be a separate offense. Nothing
herein, however, shall preclude enforcement proceedings by means other than a
fine, including injunction proceedings.
(Ord. 14-0316, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 19-1111, passed 7-9-2019; Ord. 23-0785,
passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 25-0527, passed 5-13-2025)
CHAPTER 151: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
Introductory Provisions
   
151.001   Title
   
151.002   Authority
   
151.003   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
151.004   Minimum requirements
   
151.005   Purpose and intent
   
151.006   Flood warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.007   National Flood Insurance Program
   
151.008   Commentary
   
151.009   Word usage and construction of language
   
151.010   Conflicting provisions
   
151.011   Transitional provisions
Review and Decision-Making Bodies
   
151.025   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
   
151.026   Reserved
   
151.027   Zoning Board of Appeals
   
151.028   Hearing Officer
   
151.029   Plat Officer
   
151.030   Multi-Disciplinary Team (MDT)
   
151.031   Board of Vacations
   
151.032   Planning, Building and Development Director
Development Review Procedures
   
151.045   General
   
151.046   Text amendments
   
151.047   Zoning map amendments (rezonings)
   
151.048   Site capacity calculations/site plan review
   
151.049   Subdivision
   
151.050   Conditional use permits
   
151.051   Planned unit developments
   
151.052   Site development permits
   
151.053   Design review
   
151.054   Certificates of occupancy
   
151.055   Sign plans and sign permits
   
151.056   Zoning variances
   
151.057   Written interpretations
   
151.058   Appeals of administrative decisions
Site Capacity, Site Plan Review, and Natural Resource Protection
   
151.070   Site capacity calculations/site plan review procedures
   
151.071   Natural resource protection standards
   
151.072   Open space requirements
Zoning Districts
   
151.085   Generally
   
151.086   AG, Agricultural District
   
151.087   RE, Rural Estate District
   
151.088   E, Estate and R-1 Residential Districts
   
151.089   R-2, R-3, and R-4 Residential Districts
   
151.090   R-4A, R-5, and R-6 Residential Districts
   
151.091   RR, Resort Residential
   
151.092   GO, General Office
   
151.093   LC, Limited Commercial
   
151.094   RC, Recreational Commercial
   
151.095   GC, General Commercial
   
151.096   LI, Limited Industrial
   
151.097   II, Intensive Industrial
   
151.098   OS, Open Space
   
151.099   GW, Gateway
Use Regulations
   
151.110   Use permit
   
151.111   Use table
   
151.112   Use standards
   
151.113   Accessory uses
   
151.114   Temporary uses
Density and Dimensional Standards
   
151.125   Density and dimensional standards tables
   
151.126   Conventional residential development
   
151.127   Conservation residential development
   
151.128   Nonresidential development
   
151.129   Affordable housing
   
151.130   Conservation residential structure type
   
151.131   Measurements and exceptions
   
151.132   Planned unit developments (PUDs)
Site Development Regulations
   
151.145   Site development permit
   
151.146   Performance standards for all development
   
151.147   Regulatory floodplain, regulatory floodway, flood table land, and
flood-prone areas
   
151.148   Uses and development in the regulatory floodplain
   
151.149   Performance standards for regulatory floodplain development
   
151.150   Performance standards for regulatory floodway development
   
151.151   Performance standards for bridges, culvert crossings, and roadway
approaches
   
151.152   Performance standards for regulatory floodplains without regulatory
floodways
   
151.153   Performance standards for flood table land development
   
151.154   Performance standards for flood-prone area development
General Development Standards
   
151.165   Off-street parking
   
151.166   Off-street loading
   
151.167   Landscaping
   
151.168   Outdoor lighting
   
151.169   Traffic and access
   
151.170   Sewer and water facilities
   
151.171   Architectural standards
   
151.172   Intersection visibility
   
151.173   Signs
Subdivisions
   
151.185   General
   
151.186   Subdivision types
   
151.187   Panhandle subdivision
   
151.188   Phased subdivisions
   
151.189   Lots and outlots
   
151.190   Dedications, easements, and reservations
   
151.191   Subdivision procedures
   
151.192   Modifications and appeals
   
151.193   Application requirements and document standards
   
151.194   Streets
   
151.195   Water supply and distribution facilities
   
151.196   Sanitary sewage disposal facilities
   
151.197   Stormwater management facilities
   
151.198   Dams and impoundment structures
   
151.199   Subdivision landscaping
   
151.200   Pedestrian walkways and trails
   
151.201   Monuments
   
151.202   Construction of improvements
   
151.203   Assurances
   
151.204   Vacations
School and Park Contributions
   
151.220   Schools
   
151.221   Park and recreation areas
Nonconformities
   
151.230   General
   
151.231   Nonconforming uses
   
151.232   Nonconforming structures
   
151.233   Nonconforming lots
   
151.234   Nonconforming signs
   
151.235   Nonconforming landscaping
   
151.236   Amortization
Violations, Penalties and Enforcement
   
151.250   Responsibility for enforcement
   
151.251   Violations
   
151.252   Continuing violations
   
151.253   Remedies and enforcement powers
   
151.254   Continuation of previous enforcement actions
   
151.255   Remedies cumulative
   
151.256   Persons subject to penalties
   
151.257   Enforcement procedures
   
151.258   Wind energy facilities, accessory
   
151.259   Solar energy systems, accessory
   
151.260   Solar energy systems, commercial
   
151.261   Wind energy facilities, commercial
   
151.262   Major fill/grade operations
Definitions
   
151.270   Use categories
   
151.271   Terms defined
Special Area Regulations
   
151.285   General
Appendices
   
Appendix A: Plant Materials List
   
Appendix B: Street Classification Maps
   
Appendix C: General Notes
   
Appendix D: Surface Water Drainage Statement
   
Appendix E: Certificates and Approvals
   
Appendix F: Assignment of Specific Use Types to Use Categories
   
Appendix G: Partial List of Agencies from Which Permits May be Required
   
Appendix H: IDOT/DNR Dam Safety Permitting Guidelines
   
Appendix I: Public Bodies of Water in Lake County
   
Appendix J: Detention Volume Versus Curve Number
   
Appendix K: Rainfall Tables
   
Appendix L: Watershed-Specific Release Rates
   
Appendix M: FEMA Flood Insurance Study Maps and Profiles
   
Appendix N: High-Quality Aquatic Resources
   
Appendix O: Typical Cross-Sections for Local Streets
   
Appendix P: School Contribution Documents
   
Appendix Q: Wind Energy Facilities
   
Appendix R: Runoff Volume Reduction
   
Appendix S: UDO Mitigation Requirements and Guidelines for Isolated Waters of
Lake County Impacts
   
Appendix T: Solar Energy Systems
   
Appendix U: Application Requirements for Fill/Grade Operations
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be officially known and cited as the “Unified Development
Ordinance of Lake County, Illinois”. References herein to “this chapter” shall
be interpreted as referring to the “Unified Development Ordinance”.
(Ord., § 1.1, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.002 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the statutory authority conferred by 55
ILCS 5/5-12001, 55 ILCS 5/5-1041, 55 ILCS 5/5-1062, 605 ILCS 5/6-325, and 615
ILCS 5/4.9 et seq.
(Ord., § 1.2, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.003 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply to all development, public and private, within
unincorporated Lake County. All structures and land uses constructed or
commenced hereafter and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in, and
relocations of existing structures and uses occurring hereafter shall be
subject to this chapter, all statutes of this state, the Building Codes of this
county, and all other applicable county ordinances, except as specifically
provided in this chapter.
(Ord., § 1.3, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.004 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The standards of this chapter are minimum requirements. The issuance of any
permit, certificate, or approval in accordance with the standards and
requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the recipient of the permit,
certificate, or approval from the responsibility for complying with all other
applicable requirements of any other county, state, or federal agency having
jurisdiction over the structures or land uses for which the permit,
certificate, or approval was issued.
(Ord., § 1.4, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.005 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This chapter is intended to protect the health, safety, and general welfare
of existing and future residents of the unincorporated area of Lake County by:
   (A)   Implementing the Regional Framework Plan;
   (B)   Classifying the unincorporated area of the county into zoning
districts;
   (C)   Regulating and restricting the location and use of buildings,
structures, and land for agriculture, natural resource conservation,
recreation, trade, industry, residences, and other uses;
   (D)   Regulating the intensity of uses and structures through density,
intensity, dimensional, and open space standards;
   (E)   Protecting landowners from any adverse impacts associated with
development that occurs in unincorporated Lake County;
   (F)   Implementing land use and open space policies that will preserve
agricultural uses of land, including local food production, and the rural, open
character of the unincorporated area of the county;
   (G)   Controlling development in areas of sensitive natural resources, in
order to reduce or eliminate adverse environmental impacts;
   (H)   Protecting the integrity of watersheds;
   (I)   Promoting sustainable development;
   (J)   Promoting conservation development;
   (K)   Managing growth within the unincorporated area of Lake County by
concentrating development in areas where adequate sewage and water facilities,
roads, and schools now exist or can be provided, and limiting development in
areas where these facilities are not adequate;
   (L)   Protecting the tax base by managing growth within unincorporated Lake
County;
   (M)   Promoting land use patterns that increase efficiency in service
provision and prudent use of fiscal resources and local government
expenditures;
   (N)   Providing standards for all types of dwelling units to ensure access
to decent, sound, sanitary and affordable housing for renters and buyers in
accordance with the goals of the Federal Housing Act of 1949, among which is
the provision of adequate zoning to meet a fair share of the region’s housing
needs;
   (O)   Encouraging provision of affordable housing opportunities near
employment centers and major transportation facilities;
   (P)   Ensuring the continued usefulness of all elements of the highway
system for their planned function by increasing the safety and free flow of
traffic by limiting numbers of intersections and driveways on major roads,
while requiring greater connectivity of local streets;
   (Q)   Ensuring protection from fire, flood, and other dangers;
   (R)   Providing adequate privacy, light, and air; and
   (S)   Gradually eliminating uses, structures, and situations that do not
comply with this chapter.
(Ord., § 1.5, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.006 FLOOD WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Nonetheless, greater floods may occur on occasion and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that areas outside floodplain areas or
that land uses permitted within those areas will always be totally free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create any liability on the
part of or a cause of action against the County Board or any officer or
employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood
damages that may result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord., § 1.6, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.007 NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM.
   This chapter is intended to repeal the original county ordinance or
resolution that was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution approved by the
County Board to establish initial eligibility for the program.
(Ord., § 1.7, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.008 COMMENTARY.
   Whenever a provision of this chapter requires additional explanation to
clarify its intent, a “Commentary” is included. They have no regulatory effect,
but rather are intended solely as a guide for administrative officials and the
public to use in understanding and interpreting the ordinance.
(Ord., § 1.8, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.009 WORD USAGE AND CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Meanings and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions
contained in this chapter shall be construed according to the purpose and
intent set out in §
151.005. See also written interpretations, §
151.057.
   (B)   Headings, illustrations, and text. In case of any difference of
meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any heading,
drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control.
   (C)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of
items or examples that use terms such as “including”, “such as”, or similar
language are intended to provide examples, not to be exhaustive lists of all
possibilities.
   (D)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day
is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the county, that day shall be
excluded.
   (E)   References to other regulations, publications and documents. Whenever
reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document,
that reference shall be construed as referring to the most recent edition of
the resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document or to the relevant
successor document, unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (F)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the county to perform an
act or duty, that provision shall be construed as authorizing the department
head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have
authority.
   (G)   Technical and non-technical terms. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning.
(See also §§
151.270 and
151.271.)
   (H)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies, and
agencies to which references are made are those of the county, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (I)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words “shall”, “will”, and
“must” are mandatory. The words “may” and “should” are advisory and
discretionary terms.
   (J)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: “and” indicates that all
connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply; and “or” indicates
that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may
apply.
   (K)   Tenses and plurals. Words used in one tense (past, present, or future)
include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
   (L)   Numerical calculations. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, for
standards involving the use of whole numbers, all calculations shall be rounded
to the nearest whole number.
(Ord., § 1.9, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.010 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the
more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law.
   (B)   Conflict with other county regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions
found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the county, the more
restrictive provision will control. No text amendment, zoning variance, or
condition of approval placed on a conditional use permit or other form of
development approval under this chapter shall have the effect of nullifying,
abrogating, or diminishing the provisions of any other county ordinance.
   (C)   Conflict with private easements, agreements, covenants, or
restrictions. This chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul, or otherwise
interfere with any private easement, agreement, covenant, restriction, or other
private legal relationship. The county is responsible for enforcing this
chapter; it does not enforce private agreements, easements, covenants, or
restrictions except those specifically required for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord., § 1.10, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.011 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Violations continue. Any violation of the previous zoning,
subdivision, mobile home park, recreational vehicle park, or sign regulations
of the county shall continue to be a violation under this chapter and shall be
subject to penalties and enforcement under §§
151.250 through
151.258, unless the use, development, construction, or other activity is
consistent with the express terms of this chapter, in which case enforcement
action shall cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations
that occurred before April 11, 2000.
   (B)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Any use that was legally established before April 11, 2000 without
a conditional use permit and which, after April 11, 2000 is located within a
zoning district that requires a conditional use permit for the subject use,
shall be issued a conditional use permit without following the procedures of §
151.050. The Planning, Building and Development Director shall have the
authority to impose reasonable conditions on the use relating to standards
prescribed by this and other applicable ordinances. The conditions shall be
subject to the appeal provisions of §
151.058. Any use that was legally established prior to the conditional use
permit requirement of this chapter for the subject use in the zoning district
in question shall similarly be issued a conditional use permit without
following the procedures of §
151.050. Expansions and modifications of the uses shall be subject to §
151.050. Even if a conditional use permit is issued pursuant to this section,
those uses or structures that do not comply with applicable standards of this
chapter, including the use standards of §
151.112, shall be deemed nonconforming and be subject to the regulations of §§
151.230 through
151.236.
 
COMMENTARY:
In these cases, the Planning, Building and Development Director retains the
limited authority to impose conditions related solely to the regulations in
effect at the time the use was established.
 
      (2)   Any use that was legally established before April 11, 2000 with a
conditional use permit and which after April 11, 2000 is located within a
zoning district that requires a conditional use permit for the subject use, may
continue to be operated under the terms of the original conditional use permit.
The use shall be subject to all applicable standards of this chapter, including
the use standards of §
151.112 and the nonconformity regulations of §§
151.230 through
151.236. Expansions and modifications of the uses shall be subject to §
151.050.
      (3)   Any use that was legally established before April 11, 2000 with a
conditional use permit and which after April 11, 2000 is located within a
zoning district that does not require a conditional use permit for the subject
use, shall continue to be subject to all applicable standards of this chapter,
including the use standards of §
151.112 and the nonconformity regulations of §§
151.230 through
151.236.
   (C)   Temporary administrative deferrals.
      (1)   Upon the County Board’s adoption of a resolution to conduct
hearings relating to any amendments to the text or maps of this chapter, the
Planning, Building and Development Director, upon the consent of the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee, shall be empowered to place a temporary
administrative deferral on applications that are materially affected by the
proposed amendments, if adopted.
      (2)   This temporary administrative deferral shall be in place for a
reasonable period of time not to exceed a maximum of 120 days.
      (3)   A temporary administrative deferral shall automatically cease upon
the expiration of 120 days or upon final action by the County Board relating to
the proposed amendment, whichever occurs first. Upon receipt of an application,
the Planning, Building and Development Director shall inform the applicant in
writing of the temporary administrative deferral and shall inform the applicant
that the application shall be processed in accordance with the outcome of the
proposed amendment.
      (4)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be similarly
empowered to place a temporary administrative deferral on applications that are
materially affected by any pending amendments to other county ordinances,
subject to the same notice requirements specified above.
(Ord., §
1.11, passed 10-13-2009)
REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
§ 151.025 PLANNING, BUILDING AND ZONING COMMITTEE.
   The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall have all of the powers and
duties specifically assigned in this chapter, including the following:
   (A)   Overseeing the administration and enforcement of this chapter;
   (B)   Reviewing proposed text amendments, zoning map amendments (rezonings),
and conditional use permit applications and recommending that the County Board
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the applications, in accordance with
§§
151.046,
151.047, and
151.050, respectively;
   (C)   Reviewing proposed PUD preliminary plan applications and recommending
that the County Board approve, approve with conditions or deny the applications
in accordance with §
151.051;
   (D)   Reviewing proposed PUD final plan applications and acting to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the applications in accordance with §
151.051;
   (E)   Reviewing proposed vacation requests and recommending that the County
Board approve, approve with conditions, or deny the applications in accordance
with §
151.204;
   (F)   Conducting informational meetings on proposed subdivisions in
accordance with §
151.191(B);
   (G)   Reviewing proposed preliminary and final plat applications and acting
to approve, approve with conditions or deny the applications in accordance with
§
151.191(E)(5) and (F)(7);
   (H)   Hearing appeals of the Planning, Building and Development Director’s
decision on minor subdivision modification requests and acting to approve,
approve with conditions or deny the appeals in accordance with §
151.192(D)(2);
   (I)   Reviewing proposed major subdivision modification requests and acting
to approve, approve with conditions or deny the requests in accordance with §
151.192(C)(3);
   (J)   Hearing appeals of the Planning, Building and Development Director’s
decisions on subdivision assurance reduction, extension and release matters in
accordance with §
151.203(F)(1); and
   (K)   Acting on school and park contribution matters, as set out in §§
151.220 and
151.221.
(Ord., § 2.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.026 RESERVED.
§ 151.027 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals acts in a quasi-judicial, decision-making
capacity (appeals of administrative decisions, zoning variances, and delegated
conditional use permits) and an advisory capacity (zoning amendments and non-
delegated conditional use permits) under this chapter.
   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties
specifically assigned in this chapter, including the following general duties
and responsibilities:
      (1)   Establish rules of procedure, and any other rules as it deems
necessary, not in conflict with Illinois state law;
      (2)   Compel the attendance of witnesses at hearings and administer
oaths;
      (3)   File minutes of its proceedings and any written recommendations
from any county department, State’s Attorney, or other official bodies; show
the vote of each member on every question or, if a member is absent or fails to
vote, indicate that fact; and keep records of its examinations and other
official actions;
      (4)   File immediately in the office of the Zoning Board of Appeals all
rules and regulations and amendments or repeals thereof, and every order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals. These
shall become public records;
      (5)   Hear and decide appeals from any decisions of the Planning,
Building and Development Director or any other administrative official made in
the performance of his or her duties under the provisions of this chapter;
      (6)   Hear and decide all petitions for major zoning variances, delegated
conditional use permits, and any minor zoning variances referred to it by the
Hearing Officer;
      (7)   Hear all applications for non-delegated conditional use permits,
ordinance text amendments, and zoning map amendments and make a report and
recommendation to the Lake County Board;
      (8)   Study and report to the County Board on zoning map amendments and
ordinance text amendments; and
      (9)   Other recommendations to the County Board on matters of regional
significance, including transportation, stormwater management, and
environmental protection.
(Ord., § 2.3, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.028 HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The position of Hearing Officer is hereby established to serve in a
decision-making capacity in the minor zoning variance process. The Chair of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as the Hearing Officer. In the absence of
the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall serve as the Hearing Officer.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer shall have all of the powers and duties
specifically assigned in this chapter, including the following general duties
and responsibilities:
      (1)   Establish rules of procedure and other rules as deemed necessary,
not in conflict with state law;
      (2)   Compel the attendance of witnesses at hearings on minor zoning
variances and administer oaths;
      (3)   File minutes of all proceedings and any written recommendations
from any county department, State’s Attorney, or other official bodies and keep
records of examinations and other official actions;
      (4)   File immediately in the office of the Zoning Board of Appeals all
rules and regulations and amendments or repeals thereof, and every order,
requirement, decision, or determination. These shall become public records; and
      (5)   Hear and decide applications for minor zoning variances, as
provided in §
151.056(C); provided, however, that the Hearing Officer may refer any minor
zoning variance application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for hearing and
decision and shall do so whenever there is reason to question the Hearing
Officer’s ability to conduct an unbiased hearing or render an impartial
decision.
(Ord., § 2.4, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.029 PLAT OFFICER.
   (A)   The Chair of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall serve
as the Plat Officer. In the Plat Officer’s absence, the Vice-Chair of the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall be considered the acting Plat
Officer and may act for, and on behalf of, the Plat Officer.
   (B)   The Plat Officer shall have all of the powers and duties specifically
assigned in this chapter, including the following general duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   Sign all final plats of subdivision approved by the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee; and
      (2)   Act on any other matter for which this chapter requires action by
the Plat Officer.
(Ord., § 2.5, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.030 MULTI-DISCIPLINARY TEAM (MDT).
   (A)   Composition and general responsibility. The Multi-Disciplinary Team
shall be comprised of members of the Planning, Building and Development
Department, the Lake County Division of Transportation, the Lake County Health
Department, and the Lake County Public Works Department. The Multi-Disciplinary
Team shall have all of the powers and duties specifically assigned in this
chapter, including all of the following general duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   Process plats of subdivision as set forth in §
151.186;
      (2)   Oversee all activities related to the completion of subdivision
improvements as set forth in §§
151.185 through
151.204;
      (3)   Consider all requests for modifications from the standards of this
chapter as set forth in §
151.192; and
      (4)   Act on any other matter for which this chapter requires action by
the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
   (B)   Specific responsibilities. The responsibilities of the Multi-
Disciplinary Team or successor agencies are as follows.
      (1)   Planning, Building and Development Department.
         (a)   The Planning, Building and Development Department shall have the
duties and responsibilities of ensuring that all development proposals comply
with the standards of this chapter, including the natural resource protection
standards of §
151.071. In fulfilling these responsibilities, the Planning, Building and
Development Department shall promote solutions that will achieve the most
desirable site design.
         (b)   The Planning, Building and Development Department shall be
responsible for obtaining and disseminating all required documents to the
Multi-Disciplinary Team and to all reviewing agencies, and for soliciting all
necessary comments and recommendations.
         (c)   The Planning, Building and Development Department’s review shall
determine that all development proposals conform with established land use
policies and that the best design concepts and principles are employed in the
site design. The Planning, Building and Development Department shall have the
responsibility for determining the suitability of the overall design concept.
         (d)   The Planning, Building and Development Department’s zoning
review shall include but shall not be limited to lot area and width
requirements, site capacity and open space requirements and site development
regulations contained in this chapter.
         (e)   The Planning, Building and Development Department staff shall
conduct periodic inspections of the site improvements relating to their area of
responsibility.
      (2)   Division of Transportation.
         (a)   The Lake County Division of Transportation shall have the duties
and responsibilities of reviewing all development proposals, and making
determinations and recommendations concerning design standards and engineering
specifications for street and related drainage construction as herein set
forth. In accordance with 55 ILCS 5/5-1041 and 605 ILCS 5/6-325, the County
Engineer shall have the right to establish reasonable requirements with respect
to street drainage and surfacing which shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements in the interest of the health, safety, and convenience of the
public of the county. The Division’s review shall include but is not limited to
proper control of access to local, collector, and arterial streets and the
provision of proper access between sites. In fulfilling these responsibilities,
the Lake County Division of Transportation shall promote consistent driver
expectations, resulting in maximum operational efficiencies and safety, and
shall protect the public investment in publicly maintained roadways.
         (b)   Lake County Division of Transportation staff shall conduct
periodic inspections of those site improvements relating to their area of
responsibility.
      (3)   Lake County Health Department. The Lake County Health Department
shall have the duties and responsibilities of reviewing all developmental
proposals, and for making determinations and recommendations as to the proper
type of well and individual sewage disposal system to be required in each
development. In addition, the Lake County Health Department shall make
determinations and recommendations in matters concerning public health and
environmental protection, as may be required during the development approval
process. In fulfilling these responsibilities, the Lake County Health
Department shall promote solutions that will achieve the most suitable site
design.
      (4)   Lake County Public Works Department.
         (a)   The Lake County Public Works Department shall have the duties
and responsibilities of reviewing all development proposals concerning sanitary
sewer and/or water systems. The Lake County Public Works Department shall make
determinations and recommendations concerning design standards and engineering
specifications including sizing, location, and points of connection. The Lake
County Public Works Department shall advise on the ownership, operation, and
possible incorporation of proposed sanitary sewer and/or water systems into the
county system. In fulfilling these responsibilities, the Lake County Public
Works Department shall promote solutions that will achieve the most suitable
site design.
         (b)   The Lake County Public Works Department staff shall conduct
periodic inspections of site improvements relating to their area of
responsibility.
(Ord., § 2.6, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012)
§ 151.031 BOARD OF VACATIONS.
   (A)   Composition. The Board of Vacations shall be comprised of two members
from the Planning, Building and Development Department and one member from the
Lake County Division of Transportation. A representative of the State’s
Attorney’s Office and an additional member of the Planning, Building and
Development Department shall be ex officio members.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   The Board of Vacations shall be responsible for conducting public
hearings and for making recommendations relative to all requests for the
vacation of plat or streets as set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   The State’s Attorney’s Office acts as a legal advisor to the Board
of Vacations. A designated representative from the Planning, Building and
Development Department shall act as the Vacation Officer responsible for
administration of all provisions of this section.
(Ord., § 2.7, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.032 PLANNING, BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall have all of the powers
and duties specifically assigned in this chapter, including the following
administration and enforcement duties.
   (A)   Administration.
      (1)   Be responsible for the administration of all provisions of this
chapter for which administrative responsibilities are not otherwise assigned;
      (2)   Make interpretations of the provisions of this chapter, when called
upon to do so, in accordance with §
151.058;
      (3)   Review all applications made pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   Coordinate the actions of the Multi-Disciplinary Team in fulfilling
its duties and responsibilities;
      (5)   Prepare reports and submit recommendations to the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee for all matters for which this chapter requires
review and approval by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee;
      (6)   Receive and review all site plans required by §
151.070;
      (7)   Review all proposed ordinance text amendments, zoning map
amendments, conditional use permit, planned unit development and variance
applications, and prepare reports for the Zoning Board of Appeals and the
County Board;
      (8)   Classify zoning variance applications per §
151.056(B);
      (9)   Act as Chair of the Board of Vacations in the vacation of plats and
public rights-of-way, in accordance with this chapter;
      (10)   Issue all temporary use permits and make and maintain records
thereof;
      (11)   Issue all conditional use permits granted under the provisions of
§
151.050, and make and maintain records thereof;
      (12)   Determine from public records sufficient information concerning
nonconformities to properly perform duties assigned under this chapter;
      (13)   Amend the text of this chapter and the Official Zoning Map to
reflect any amendments approved by the County Board and maintaining up-to-date
originals and copies of these documents. The Planning, Building and Development
Director shall assure that sufficient written description is provided to give a
precise understanding of amendments;
      (14)   Conduct annual reviews of the text of this chapter and propose
amendments deemed necessary to implement and ensure consistency with the
Framework Plan and other policy objectives of the county;
      (15)   Ensure that required reports and consultations with local, state,
and federal agencies have been completed, including natural resource
information (NRI) reports, when applicable;
      (16)   Report to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee when
expressly required by the provisions of this chapter. In these cases, the
Planning, Building and Development Director shall report on the action to the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee within 15 days of taking action or at
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee, whichever occurs first; and
      (17)   Issue all site development permits and make and maintain records
thereof. In this capacity, the Planning, Building and Development Director
shall have the following additional duties and responsibilities. Certain of
these duties and responsibilities are required by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources for the purpose of maintaining county’s eligibility for participation
in the National Flood Insurance Program and delegation of state permit
authority. These duties and responsibilities relate only to the
intergovernmental relationship between county and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources and they do not and are not intended to create any third party
beneficial rights in or for applicants, property owners or others:
         (a)   Determine for each development if it is in a Special Flood
Hazard Area using the criteria specified in §
151.147, before the issuance of a site development permit;
         (b)   Ensure that an Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office
of Water Resources dam safety permit is obtained or a letter stating that no
dam safety permit is required if the development includes a dam before the
issuance of a site development permit. Additionally, if the Planning, Building
and Development Director finds a dam which is believed to be in an unsafe
condition, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall immediately
notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources Dam Safety Section in Springfield;
         (c)   Adopted basin plans and floodplain studies may be the basis for
more specific regulations. These additional or more specific regulations will
apply only in the specific study area of the basin plan or floodplain study and
supersede those of this chapter only upon amendment to the Watershed
Development Ordinance and formal adoption of the basin plan or floodplain study
by SMC.
         (d)   Review proposed easements, deed restrictions and other
restrictive covenants, required by this chapter to ensure proper use and
maintenance of proposed stormwater management systems. Administer the
acceptance, reduction, and release of performance and maintenance assurances
that may be required by this chapter to ensure proper installation and
maintenance of proposed stormwater management systems;
         (e)   Oversee the review, by a registered professional engineer, of
the plans, calculations or analyses submitted by other registered professional
engineers, as required by this chapter as a condition of application for a site
development permit;
         (f)   Ensure that the applicant has obtained and provided any and all
required federal, state, and local permits for all development in the
regulatory floodplain, before the issuance of a site development permit;
         (g)   Submit to the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission, the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources, and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency the data required for proposed revisions to
the base flood elevation of a regulatory floodplain study or a relocation of a
regulatory floodway boundary, before the issuance of a site development permit.
Additionally, the Planning, Building and Development Director also shall submit
reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program;
         (h)   Maintain records of every site development permit application,
permit, hydrologic and hydraulic data and enforcement action and allow periodic
inspections of the records by the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission,
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources, Office of Water Resources;
         (i)   Maintain an elevation certificate and flood-proofing certificate
file to certify the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement), of all
buildings constructed in the regulatory floodplain;
         (j)   Maintain for public inspection and provide copies upon request
of base flood data and maps, Conditional Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map
Revision elevation of flood-proofing certificates, other site development
permit related materials, available “as-built” elevation and flood-proofing
records for all building constructed subject to the provisions of §§
151.145 through
151.154;
         (k)   Transfer to the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission, at
agreed upon intervals, at no later than the five-year period described above,
the portions of stormwater records specified by the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission;
         (l)   Notify adjacent upstream and downstream communities, the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission, and the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources, Office of Water Resources in writing 30 days prior to the issuance
of any permit for the alteration or relocation of a channel or linear water
body in the regulatory floodplain; and
         (m)   Shall provide the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission
an annual report summarizing the FIL50 fees received, project expenditures and
status, categorized by watershed.
   (B)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Issue permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. Permits for structures or uses requiring a zoning variance shall
be issued only subsequent to the Zoning Board of Appeals (or Hearing Officer)
approval of an appropriate zoning variance application. Permits requiring
approval by the County Board shall be issued only after receipt of a certified
copy of approval from the Lake County Clerk;
      (2)   Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof;
      (3)   Conduct inspections as prescribed by this chapter and any other
inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the various provisions
of this chapter;
      (4)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with §§
151.250 through
151.258, including stopping, by written order, work being done contrary to
issued permits or to this chapter. The written order, posted on the premises
involved, shall not be removed except by order of the Planning, Building and
Development Director. Removal without this order shall constitute a violation
of this chapter;
      (5)   Institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
filling, dumping, maintenance, or use; restrain, correct, or abate the
violation, so as to prevent the occupancy or use of any building, structure, or
land; to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the
premises; and
      (6)   Suspend or revoke, in writing, any permit or approval issued
contrary to this chapter or based on a false statement or misrepresentation in
the application.
(Ord., § 2.8, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 22-1060, passed 8-9-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 151.045 GENERAL.
   The provisions of this §
151.045 apply to all development applications and procedures under this
subchapter unless otherwise stated.
   (A)   Authority to file applications. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all
applications under this subchapter shall be initiated by all the fee owners of
the subject property. The fee owners may designate an authorized agent to
represent them.
   (B)   Ownership disclosure. The ownership disclosure requirements of this
subsection (B) shall apply to all applications for zoning map amendments,
subdivisions, conditional use permits, zoning variances, vacations, and appeals
of administrative decisions if the application pertains to specific real
property.
      (1)   If the fee owner has entered into a contract for the sale of the
subject property, the contract purchaser shall be a co-petitioner to the
petition or application.
      (2)   If the subject property is governed by a land trust agreement, the
trustee of the land trust shall be a petitioner or co-petitioner. When the
petitioner or co-petitioner is a land trust or trustee of a land trust, the
application shall identify each beneficiary of the land trust by name and
address and define each beneficiary’s interest therein. All applications shall
be verified by the applicant, petitioner, or co-petitioner in his or her
capacity as trustee.
      (3)   When the petitioner or co-petitioner is a corporation, the petition
or application shall include the correct names and addresses of all
stockholders or shareholders owning any interest in excess of 20% of all
outstanding stock of the corporation.
      (4)   When the petitioner or co-petitioner is a business entity doing
business under an assumed name, the petition or application shall include the
names and addresses of all true and actual owners of the business or entity.
      (5)   When the petitioner or co-petitioner is a partnership, joint
venture, syndicate, or an unincorporated voluntary association, the application
shall include the names and addresses of all partners, joint venturers,
syndicate members, or members of the unincorporated voluntary association.
   (C)   Form of application. Applications required under this subchapter shall
be submitted in a format and in numbers as required by the official responsible
for accepting the application. Application submittal requirements and format
information shall be available to the public in the Planning, Building and
Development Department.
   (D)   Filing fees. Applications shall be accompanied by the fee amount that
has been established by the County Board for the respective type of
application. Fees shall not be required for applications initiated by the
County Board.
   (E)   Application completeness. An application shall be considered complete
if it is submitted in the required format, includes all mandatory information
and is accompanied by the established fee. Any application that is determined
to be incomplete shall, within three days of its submittal, be returned to the
applicant along with an explanation of the application’s deficiencies. No
further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are
corrected. Once the deficiencies are corrected, the application may be
resubmitted without the payment of additional fees.
   (F)   Application check-in meetings. When the procedures of this chapter
expressly require that applications be submitted during a “check-in meeting”,
applicants shall be responsible for scheduling and attending the meetings. When
check-in meetings are required, an application shall not be accepted until a
check-in has been conducted and any errors or omissions noted at the check-in
have been addressed by the applicant.
   (G)   Notices.
      (1)   Content. Neighbor, written, and newspaper notices shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   Indicate the date, time, and place of the public hearing or date
of action that is the subject of the notice;
         (b)   Describe the property involved in the application by street
address and, if required, by legal description or Property Index Number (PIN);
         (c)   Describe the nature, scope, and purpose of the application or
proposal; and
         (d)   Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
      (2)   Types.
         (a)   Neighbor notice. When the provisions of this chapter require
that neighbor notice be provided, the official responsible for accepting the
application shall mail notice to all property owners of record who will be
affected by the development or activity that is the subject of the application.
At a minimum, notice shall be mailed to all record owners of property adjacent
to the subject property, excluding rights-of-way. Ownership information shall
be obtained from Lake County Map Services. Failure to provide neighbor notice
shall not invalidate any action taken.
         (b)   Written notice.  
            1.   When neighbor notice is required, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall also provide written notice to the following
reviewing agencies and individuals, as deemed appropriate by the Planning,
Building and Development Director in light of the subject matter:
               a.   Cable television company;
               b.    County Board district member;
               c.    Electric company;
               d.   Fire Department/ protection district;
               e.   Gas company;
               f.   Illinois Department of Natural Resources;
               g.   Illinois Department of Transportation;
               h.    J.U.L.I.E.;
               i.   Lake County Forest Preserve District;
               j.   Lake County Map Services;
               k.   Local postmaster;
               l.    Mayor/President of all municipalities within a one and
one-half-mile radius of the subject property;
               m.    METRA and PACE;
               n.   Planning, Building, Zoning and Environment Committee
members;
               o.    Regional Superintendent of Schools;
               p.   Soil and Water Conservation District;
               q.    Sanitary District;
               r.    Lake County Stormwater Management Commission;
               s.    Superintendent, grade school district;
               t.    Superintendent, high school district;
               u.    Telephone company;
               v.    Township Assessor;
               w.    Township Highway Commissioner;
               x.    Township Supervisor; and
               y.   Water District.
            2.   Failure to provide notice to reviewing agencies or interested
parties shall not invalidate any action taken.
         (c)   Newspaper notice. When the provisions of this chapter require
that notice be published in the newspaper, the official responsible for
accepting the application shall ensure that notice is published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the township in which the subject property is
located. In the case of ordinance text amendments or when there is no newspaper
of general circulation in the township, the notice shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county.
         (d)   Posted notice.
            1.   When the provisions of this chapter require that notice be
posted, the official responsible for accepting the application shall post a
sign on the subject property in a manner clearly visible to neighboring
residents and passers-by from each adjacent street. Failure to correctly post
notice shall not invalidate any action taken.
            2.   Content. Each sign must be a minimum of 24 inches by 24 inches
in size and must contain the following information:
               a.   The fact that a public hearing is to be held regarding the
subject property with direction to interested members of the public to call the
Lake County Planning, Building, and Development Department for further
information regarding time, date, location, and substance of the public
hearing; and
               b.   The telephone number of the Lake County Planning, Building,
and Development Department.
      (3)   Timing. Unless otherwise specifically provided in state statutes or
this chapter, neighbor, newspaper, and posted notice of public hearings shall
be mailed, published, or placed at least ten days before the public hearing,
meeting, or date of action that is the subject of the notice.
      (4)   Constructive notice. Minor defects in a notice shall not impair the
notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt
has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Failure of a party
to receive notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action. In all cases,
however, the requirements for the timing of the notice and for specifying the
date, time, and place of a hearing and the location of the subject property
shall be strictly construed. If questions arise regarding the adequacy of
notice, the body conducting the hearing or meeting shall make a formal finding
regarding whether there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements
of this chapter.
   (H)   Action by decision-making bodies. Unless otherwise expressly stated,
decision-making bodies shall be authorized to approve, approve with conditions,
or deny applications and permit requests based on compliance with the
applicable review and approval criteria. Decision-making bodies shall also be
authorized to refer an application back to the review body or to defer action
while additional information is being obtained.
   (I)   Conditions of approval. In approving development applications,
decision-making bodies shall be authorized to impose conditions upon the
premises benefitted by the approval as allowed by law and as may be necessary
to reduce or minimize any potential adverse impact upon other property in the
area, or to carry out the general purpose and intent of this chapter, so long
as the condition relates to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed
use and is roughly proportional to its impact.
   (J)   Inaction by review and decision-making bodies. When a review or
decision-making body fails to take action on an application within the time
required, the inaction shall be interpreted as a recommendation of denial or
denial of the application, respectively, unless the applicant agrees to an
extension of the timeframe, prior to the deadline for action.
   (K)   Approval criteria; burden of persuasion. In all cases, the applicant
shall have the burden of establishing that an application complies with
applicable approval criteria.
   (L)   Public hearings.
      (1)   Location. Unless otherwise specifically required, public hearings
required in this subchapter shall be held in the township in which the subject
property is located or in the Lake County Central Permit Facility or other
county building. If the owner of the subject property so requests, the hearing
shall be held in the township in which the subject property is located. In
considering amendments to the text of this chapter, the hearing shall be held
in the Lake County Central Permit Facility or other suitable county building.
      (2)   Continuation. A public hearing for which proper notice was given
may be continued to a later date without again complying with the notice
requirements of this chapter, provided that the continuance is set for a date
and time certain and the date and time is announced at the public hearing.
(Ord., § 3.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 25-1050, passed 9-
9-2025)
§ 151.046 TEXT AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Application filing.
      (1)   Who may file. Any person may file an application for an ordinance
text amendment.
      (2)   Application submittal. Applications for amendments to the text of
this chapter shall be submitted to the Planning, Building and Development
Department on forms available from the Planning, Building and Development
Department. When a text amendment is initiated by the County Board, a
resolution approved by the County Board shall be considered an application.
   (B)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper notice and notice to reviewing
agencies and interested parties shall be provided for all public hearings in
accordance with the requirements of §
151.045(G).
   (C)   Staff review and recommendation. Planning, Building and Development
Department staff shall review each proposed text amendment in light of the text
amendment approval criteria of subsection (G) below and provide a report to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (D)   Zoning Board of Appeals review and recommendation. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the proposed text amendment and make a
recommendation to the County Board, based on the text amendment approval
criteria of §
151.046(G). In the case of amendments to the text of §§
151.185 through
151.204 (subdivisions), §§
151.220 and
151.221 (school and park contributions), or the procedures of §
151.204 (vacations), the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall hold the
public hearing and make the recommendation to the County Board instead of the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (E)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee review and recommendation.
After receiving the recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall review the application and make a
recommendation to the County Board based on the text amendment approval
criteria of subsection (G) below.
   (F)   County Board review and action. After receiving required
recommendations, the County Board shall review the application and act to
approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed amendment based on the
text amendment approval criteria of subsection (G) below.
   (G)   Text amendment approval criteria. Text amendments to this chapter may
be approved only upon an affirmative finding that all of the following approval
criteria have been met:
      (1)   The proposed amendment corrects an error or inconsistency or meets
the challenge of a changing condition;
      (2)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the purpose and intent of
this chapter (§
151.005); and
      (3)   The proposed amendment will not adversely affect the health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the public.
   (H)   Protest petitions. If a valid protest petition is filed on a proposed
amendment to the text of any provision of this chapter other than those
provisions of §§
151.185 through
151.204 (subdivisions), §§
151.220 and
151.221 (school and park contributions) or the vacation procedures of this
chapter, the amendment shall require an affirmative vote of at least 75% of all
the members of the County Board. Protest petitions shall be filed with the
County Clerk by 1:00 p.m. on the day before the County Board acts on the
proposed text amendment.
 
COMMENTARY:
Protest petitions are governed by state statutes [55 ILCS 5/5-12014(b)].
 
(Ord., § 3.2, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.047 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS (REZONINGS).
   (A)   Application filing.
      (1)   Who may file. Zoning map amendments may be initiated by the County
Board, by application of all the fee owners of the subject property, or by the
owners’ authorized agent. When the County Board initiates action under this
chapter, it does so without prejudice towards the outcome.
      (2)   Application submittal.
         (a)   Applications for amendments to the official zoning map shall be
submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms
available from the Planning, Building and Development Department. Rezoning
applications may be processed concurrently with applications for site capacity/
site plan review and subdivision preapplication conferences.
         (b)   When a zoning map amendment is initiated by the County Board, a
resolution approved by the County Board shall be considered an application.
   (B)   Public hearing notice. Neighbor, newspaper and posted notice of the
Zoning Board of Appeals’ public hearing shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of §
151.045(G).
   (C)   Staff review and recommendation. Planning, Building and Development
Department staff shall review each proposed zoning map amendment in light of
the map amendment approval criteria of subsection (G) below and provide a
report to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (D)   Zoning Board of Appeals’ review and recommendation. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment and recommend
approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application based on the
map amendment approval criteria of subsection (G) below.
   (E)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee review and recommendation.
After receiving the recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall review the application and make a
recommendation to the County Board based on the map amendment approval criteria
of subsection (G) below.
   (F)   County Board review and action. After receiving the required
recommendations, the County Board shall review the application and act to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed amendment based on the
map amendment approval criteria of subsection (G) below.
   (G)   Map amendment approval criteria.
      (1)   In making its recommendation, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider, and make findings of fact in relation to, the following criteria.
      (2)   The recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be based on
the preponderance of the evidence related to the following factors and no one
factor shall be controlling:
         (a)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the stated purpose and
intent of §
151.005;
         (b)   The proposed amendment corrects an error or inconsistency or
meets the challenge of some changing condition in the area;
         (c)   The proposed amendment will allow development that is compatible
with existing uses and zoning of nearby property;
         (d)   The county and other service providers will be able to provide
adequate public facilities and services to the property, while maintaining
adequate levels of service to existing development;
         (e)   The proposed amendment will not result in significant adverse
impacts on other property in the vicinity of the subject tract or on the
environment, including air, water, noise, stormwater management, wildlife, and
natural resources; and
         (f)   The subject property is suitable for proposed zoning
classification.
 
COMMENTARY:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3005.jpg]
 
   (H)   Protest petitions. If a valid protest petition is filed, the amendment
shall require an affirmative vote of at least 75% of all the members of the
County Board. Protest petitions shall be filed with the Lake County Clerk by 1:
00 p.m. on the day before the County Board acts on the proposed zoning map
amendment.
 
COMMENTARY:
Protest petitions are governed by state statutes [55 ILCS 5/5-12014(b)].
 
(Ord., § 3.3, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.048 SITE CAPACITY CALCULATIONS/SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   Site capacity calculation/site plan review procedures are located in §
151.070.
(Ord., § 3.4, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.049 SUBDIVISION.
   Subdivision review procedures are located in §
151.186.
(Ord., § 3.5, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.050 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Classification of conditional use permits.
      (1)   Delegated conditional use permits. Delegated conditional use
permits are those conditional use permits for which the County Board has
delegated final decision-making authority to the Zoning Board of Appeals, as
provided in §§
151.111 and
151.114(D).
      (2)   Non-delegated conditional use permits. Non-delegated conditional
use permits are those conditional use permits for which the County Board has
retained the final decision-making authority, as provided in §
151.111.
   (B)   Application filing. Applications for conditional use permits shall be
submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms
available from the Planning, Building and Development Department.
   (C)   Public hearing notice. Neighbor, newspaper and posted notice of the
Zoning Board of Appeals’ public hearing shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of §
151.045(G).
   (D)   Staff review and recommendation. Planning, Building and Development
Department staff shall review each conditional use permit application in light
of the approval criteria of subsection (F) below and provide a report to the
Zoning Board of Appeals. In addition, the Planning, Building and Development
Director may request a formal site plan review prior to the Zoning Board of
Appeals hearing.
 
COMMENTARY:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3437.jpg]
 
   (E)   Review and action.
      (1)   Delegated conditional use permits. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall hold a public hearing on a delegated conditional use permit request and
approve, approve with conditions or deny the request based on the conditional
use approval criteria of subsection (F) below.
      (2)   Non-delegated conditional use permits.
         (a)   Zoning Board of Appeals’ review and recommendation. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the non-delegated conditional
use permit request and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial
of the application based on the conditional use approval criteria of subsection
(F) below.
         (b)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee review and
recommendation. After receiving the recommendation of the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall review the
application and make a recommendation to the County Board based on the
conditional use approval criteria of subsection (F) below.
         (c)   County Board review and action. After receiving the required
recommendations, the County Board shall review the application and act to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on the
conditional use approval criteria of subsection (F).
 
COMMENTARY:
Public hearings for commercial solar energy systems and commercial wind energy
systems must be held not more than 45 days after the filing of the application
for the facility. Counties must make siting and permitting decisions not more
than 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing.
 
   (F)   Conditional use approval criteria. Conditional use permits may be
approved only if all of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The use in its proposed location will be consistent with the stated
purpose and intent of §
151.005;
      (2)   The proposed use in its proposed location complies with all
applicable standards of this chapter, including any applicable use standards of
§
151.112; and
      (3)   The proposed use in its proposed location will not have a
substantial adverse impact on any of the following, either as they exist at the
time of application or as they may be developed in the future due to
implementation of the Regional Framework Plan:
         (a)   Adjacent property;
         (b)   The character of the neighborhood;
         (c)   Natural resources;
         (d)   Infrastructure;
         (e)   Public sites; or
         (f)   Any other matters affecting the public health, safety, or
general welfare.
 
COMMENTARY:
Conditional use permit applications for commercial solar energy systems and
commercial wind energy systems shall be approved if found to be in compliance
with the requirements of §
151.112(XX) and (DDD).
 
   (G)   Findings of fact; written transcripts.
      (1)   All decisions on conditional use permits shall be supported by
findings of fact specifying the reasons for the decision.
      (2)   A written transcript of the hearing shall be prepared for all
conditional use permits.
   (H)   Lapse of approval.
      (1)   Unless otherwise expressly stated in the conditional use permit, or
by concurrent action by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee, if an
approved conditional use has not been established within two years of the date
of approval or if the use that is the subject of the conditional use permit is
abandoned for a period of more than one year, the conditional use permit shall
lapse and be of no further effect.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the term established shall mean the
issuance of a permit or permits for the principal use that is the subject of
the conditional use permit.
      (3)   For phased development, the term established shall mean the
issuance of a permit or permits for the first phase of development. The
timeframes referenced above or as established at the time of conditional use
permit approval may be extended by the Director for up to two years.
      (4)   Extensions beyond two years shall may be approved by the Zoning
Board of Appeals for delegated conditional use permits and the Planning.
Building and Zoning Committee for non-delegated conditional use permits, if all
extension requests shall be filed with the Planning, Building and Development
Director prior to expiration of the conditional use permit.
   (I)   Amendments to approved conditional use permits. The establishment of
accessory uses and structures that do not exceed 25% of the existing floor area
ratio or 30% of the existing impervious surface ratio shall be authorized by
the Planning, Building and Development Director, except in those cases that, in
the opinion of the Planning, Building and Development Director, may have a
potential significant impact on the surrounding properties. If the above
percentages are exceeded, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be authorized to
allow the establishment of accessory uses and structures for delegated
conditional use permits and the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall
be authorized to allow the establishment of all other accessory uses and
structures for non-delegated conditional use permits. Any other proposed
change, amendment, variation, or alteration may be approved only pursuant to
the standards and procedures established by this section for the approval. The
Planning, Building and Development Director shall record and maintain a record
of all authorized changes in approved conditional use permits.
(Ord., § 3.6, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed - -; Ord.
23-0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024)
§ 151.051 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Overview. Planned unit developments (PUDs) shall be processed,
reviewed and approved in three steps: (1) early assistant meeting; (2) PUD
preliminary plan/plat (processed concurrently with the required conditional use
permit and any required zoning map amendment); and (3) PUD final plan/plat. A
conditional use permit and any zoning change approved for a planned unit
development shall not become effective until the final PUD plat/plan is
approved in accordance with the procedures of this section and recorded in the
office of the Lake County Recorder. The standards that apply to PUDs are set
out in §
151.132. Notwithstanding the fact that approved planned unit developments are
issued a conditional use permit, the procedures of this section shall govern in
the review and approval of planned unit developments.
   (B)   Early Assistance Meeting. The Early Assistance Meeting step of the
planned unit development process is intended to familiarize the applicant with
applicable procedures, submittal requirements, development standards, and other
pertinent matters before the applicant finalizes the development proposal or
otherwise spends large sums of money in laying out the proposed development.
      (1)   Application filing. Applications for Early Assistance Meeting shall
be submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms
available from the Planning, Building and Development Department.
 
COMMENTARY:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3011.jpg]
 
      (2)   Distribution of application; scheduling of Early Assistance
Meeting. Upon receipt of a complete application for an Early Assistance Meeting
, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall distribute copies of
the application to the Multi-Disciplinary Team members and other affected
reviewing agencies and place the matter on the agenda of the Multi-Disciplinary
Team following the review period. The Planning, Building and Development
Director shall notify the Multi-Disciplinary Team and the applicant of the
date, time, and place of the scheduled Early Assistance Meeting.
      (3)   Review of application. Within ten days of the receipt of a complete
application for an Early Assistance Meeting, Multi-Disciplinary Team members
shall review the application and provide written comments to the Planning,
Building and Development Director. The Planning, Building and Development
Director shall compile all comments received by the end of the review period
for presentation to the applicant at the Early Assistance Meeting.
      (4)   Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting. Multi-Disciplinary Team comments
on the application shall be presented to the applicant at the scheduled Early
Assistance Meeting. Each member of the Multi-Disciplinary Team shall be given
an opportunity to present their findings and recommendations on the
application. Following the Early Assistance meeting, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall provide a written report to the applicant containing
the written comments of the Multi-Disciplinary Team and instructions for
proceeding with the planned unit development process.
   (C)   PUD preliminary plan/plat. Upon completion of the Early Assistance
Meeting stage of the PUD process, applicants shall prepare and submit a
preliminary plan/plat for the proposed development. The PUD preliminary plan/
plat shall be processed concurrently with any required zoning map amendment.
All PUD preliminary plans shall require review and recommendation by the Zoning
Board of Appeals and the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. The County
Board shall have final decision-making authority on PUD preliminary plans. The
County Board’s approval of the preliminary plan constitutes approval of the
conceptual use and layout of the proposed PUD.
      (1)   Public hearing notice. Neighbor, newspaper, and posted notice of
the Zoning Board of Appeals’ public hearing on PUD preliminary plans shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of §
151.045(G).
      (2)   Staff review and recommendation. Planning, Building and Development
Department staff shall review each PUD preliminary plan/plat application in
light of the PUD preliminary plan/plat criteria of subsection (C)(8) below and
provide a report to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (3)   Zoning Board of Appeals’ review and recommendation. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the PUD preliminary plan/ plat
and recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application
based on the PUD preliminary plan/plat approval criteria of subsection (C)(7)
below.
      (4)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee review and recommendation.
After receiving the recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall review the application and make a
recommendation to the County Board based on the approval criteria of subsection
(C)(7) below.
      (5)   County Board review and action. After receiving the required
recommendations, the County Board shall review the application and act to
approve, approve with conditions or deny the application based on the approval
criteria of subsection (C)(7) below. Any zoning map amendments required shall
be considered concurrently with the PUD preliminary plan. Approval of a PUD
preliminary plan shall constitute approval of a conditional use permit which,
together with any zoning change accompanying the conditional use permit, shall
not become effective until any final PUD plan/plat for the development is
approved in accordance with the procedures of §
151.186 and recorded in the office of the Lake County Recorder.
      (6)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee review and action on
preliminary plat (if PUD involves subdivision of land). Subsequent to the
approval of the preliminary plan by the County Board, and upon completion of
review of the preliminary plat and preliminary engineering by the Multi-
Disciplinary Team, the Planning Building and Development Director shall present
the proposed preliminary plat to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
for its consideration. After considering the matter, the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee shall act to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove
the proposed preliminary plat. PUD preliminary plats shall be reviewed and
approved in accordance with the preliminary plat procedures of §
151.191(E). The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall have final
decision-making authority on preliminary PUD plats.
      (7)   PUD preliminary plan/plat approval criteria. Recommendations and
decisions on PUD preliminary plans shall be based on consideration of whether:
         (a)   The proposed development in its proposed location is consistent
with the Regional Framework Plan;
         (b)   The proposed development in its proposed location complies with
the PUD standards of §
151.132; and
         (c)   The proposed development in its proposed location will not
result in a substantial adverse effect on any of the following, either as they
exist at the time of application or as they may in the future be developed as a
result of implementation of the Regional Framework Plan:
            1.   Adjacent property;
            2.   Natural resources;
            3.   Infrastructure;
            4.   Public sites; or
            5.   Any other matters affecting the public health, safety, or
general welfare.
      (8)   Effect of approval. Once a PUD preliminary plan/plat is approved,
applicants shall proceed to the final plat stage of the development process for
review and approval in accordance with the final plat procedures of §
151.191(F). If no plat is required for the proposed development, a final PUD
plan shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the final plat
procedures. The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall have final
decision-making authority on final PUD plans and plats.
      (9)   Lapse of approval. A PUD preliminary plan/plat shall lapse and be
of no further effect if a final plat or final PUD plan has not been approved
within 24 months of the date of PUD preliminary plan/plat approval. A PUD
preliminary plan/plat may be extended in accordance with the provisions of §
151.191(E)(6).
   (D)   Modification of approved PUD preliminary plans/plats. A preliminary
PUD plan/plat that has received final approval from the County Board may be
modified only in accordance with procedures and standards of this subsection
(D).
      (1)   Definitions.
         (a)   A major modification to an approved preliminary PUD plan/plat is
modification that meets any of the following thresholds:
            1.   Increases the number of dwelling units (when compared to the
approved preliminary PUD plan/plat);
            2.   Increases the floor area devoted to nonresidential uses by
more than the following amounts:
 
Site Area                              Maximum Additional Floor Area
5 acres                                500 square feet
Each additional full acre over 5 acres 100 square feet
 
            3.   Increases nonresidential floor area by more than 5,000 square
feet (compared to the approved preliminary PUD plan/plat);
            4.   Increases the impervious surface devoted to nonresidential
uses by more than the following amounts:
 
Site Area                              Maximum Additional Impervious Area
5 acres                                1,000 square feet
Each additional full acre over 5 acres 425 square feet
 
            5.   Increases impervious surface area by more than 20,000 square
feet (compared to the approved preliminary PUD plan/plat);
            6.   Reduces the amount of open space required by the approved
preliminary PUD plan/plat;
            7.   Increases the height of any building by more than 10% or ten
feet, whichever is less;
            8.   Reduces the amount of landscaping by more than 5%; or
            9.   Otherwise represents a change to the overall character of the
previously approved PUD plan.
         (b)   A minor modification to an approved preliminary PUD plan/plat is
any modification that is not a major modification.
      (2)   Minor modification procedure. Minor modifications shall require
review and approval in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The Multi-Disciplinary Team shall make a recommendation to the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee; and
         (b)   Based upon recommendations from the Multi-Disciplinary Team, the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall make a final decision. Neighbor,
newspaper, and posted notice of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee’s
meeting shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of §
151.045(G).
      (3)   Major modification procedure. All major modifications shall require
re-review and approval of PUD preliminary plan/plat in accordance with the
procedures of subsection (C) of this section.
      (4)   Record. All approved major and minor modifications shall be
recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the preliminary PUD plan/plat
before they have any effect.
   (E)   PUD final plans/plats. PUD final plats shall be reviewed and approved
in accordance with the final plat procedures of §
151.186. If no plat is required for the proposed development, a final PUD plan
shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the final plat procedures
of §
151.186. The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall have final decision-
making authority on final PUD plans and plats.
 
COMMENTARY:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3013.jpg]
 
   (F)   Modification of approved PUD final plans/plats. A final PUD plan/plat
that has received final approval from the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee may be modified only in accordance with procedures and standards of
this subsection (F).
      (1)   Definitions.
         (a)   A major modification to an approved final PUD plan/plat is
modification that meets any of the following thresholds:
            1.   Increases the number of dwelling units (when compared to the
approved final PUD plan/plat);
            2.   Increases the floor area devoted to nonresidential uses by
more than the following amounts:
 
Site Area Maximum Additional Floor Area
5 acres   500 square feet
Each additional full acre over 5 acres100 square feet
 
            3.   Increases nonresidential floor area by more than 5,000 square
feet (compared to the approved final PUD plan/plat);
            4.   Increases the impervious surface devoted to nonresidential
uses by more than the following amounts:
 
Site Area                              Maximum Additional Impervious Area
5 acres                                1,000 square feet
Each additional full acre over 5 acres 425 square feet
 
            5.   Increases impervious surface area by more than 20,000 square
feet (compared to the approved final PUD plan/plat);
            6.   Reduces the amount of open space required by the approved
final PUD plan/plat;
            7.   Increases the height of any building by more than 10% or ten
feet, whichever is less;
            8.   Reduces the amount of landscaping by more than 5%; or
            9.   Otherwise represents a change to the overall character of the
previously approved PUD plan.
         (b)   A minor modification to an approved final PUD plan/plat is any
modification that is not a major modification.
 
COMMENTARY:
Minor modifications include such activities as adding accessory structures and
adding additions to existing primary structures, provided that they do not meet
the threshold for classification as a major modification.
 
      (2)   Minor modification procedure. Minor modifications shall require
review and approval in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The Multi-Disciplinary Team shall make a recommendation to the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee; and
         (b)   Based upon recommendations from the Multi-Disciplinary Team, the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall make a final decision. Neighbor,
newspaper and posted notice of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee’s
meeting shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of §
151.045(G).
      (3)   Major modification procedure. All major modifications shall require
re-review and approval of a PUD final plan/plat in accordance with the
procedures of subsection (E) above.
      (4)   Record. All approved major and minor modifications shall be
recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final PUD plan/plat before
they have any effect.
(Ord., § 3.7, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.052 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Site development permit review procedures are located in §
151.145, with the site development regulations.
(Ord., § 3.8, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.053 DESIGN REVIEW.
   Design review is the procedure used for determining nonresidential
developments’ compliance with the general development standards of §§
151.165 through
151.173, including the architectural standards of §
151.171. Design review is not conducted as a separate, stand-alone procedure,
but rather is carried out as part of the review of a subdivision.
   (A)   Applicability. All subdivisions and conditional use permit
applications for nonresidential uses shall be subject to design review.
   (B)   Procedure. Design review shall be conducted as part of the review of
the applicable nonresidential subdivision or conditional use permit
application. All applicable subdivision or conditional use permit review
procedures shall apply, including any appeal procedures. In their review of
developments that are subject to design review, review and decision-making
bodies shall consider, in addition to the approval criteria that apply to the
subdivision or conditional use permit, whether the application complies with
the general development standards of §§
151.165 through
151.173, including the architectural standards of §
151.171.
(Ord., § 3.9, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.054 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No land or building shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for
any use whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Planning, Building and Development Director, indicating that the building or
use complies with all requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon completion of any building or other structure in accordance with
applicable building permit requirements and prior to occupancy, a certificate
of occupancy is required for the use originally designated.
   (C)   The building or other structure and its use shall be subject to all
relevant requirements of this chapter.
(Ord., § 3.10, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.055 SIGN PLANS AND SIGN PERMITS.
   This section sets out the procedures for review and approval of sign plans
and sign permits for signs requiring permits under §
151.173.
   (A)   Sign plans.
      (1)   Applicability. Sign plan approval shall be required for any site
containing or proposed to contain more than one sign. No sign permit shall be
issued for a site that is subject to sign plan requirements until a sign plan
has been approved. Temporary signs shall be exempt from sign plan requirements.
      (2)   Application filing. Sign plan applications shall be submitted to
the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms available from the
Planning, Building and Development Department.
      (3)   Staff review and action. The Planning, Building and Development
Director shall review each proposed sign plan application in accordance with
the sign plan review criteria set forth in §
151.055(A)(4) and act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the sign
plan.
      (4)   Sign plan approval criteria. A sign plan may be approved only if
the Planning, Building and Development Director determines that all of the
following approval criteria have been met:
         (a)   The sign plan complies with all applicable standards of this
chapter, including the sign regulations of §
151.173;
         (b)   The sign plan is consistent with any approved or concurrently
proposed PUD, subdivision, or site plan for the site, including the parking and
landscaping provisions of the plan; and
         (c)   All aspects of the sign plan are consistent with any conditions
imposed on the site under any applicable approvals.
      (5)   Simultaneous review. An applicant for approval of a planned unit
development (§
151.051), conditional use permit (§
151.050), site plan, or subdivision plat may submit an application for approval
of a sign plan concurrently with the application for approval of the plan or
permit and the two shall be reviewed and acted on simultaneously.
   (B)   Individual sign permits.
      (1)   Applicability. Signs identified with a “P” in
Table 151.173(G) shall be erected, installed, or created only in accordance
with a duly issued and valid sign permit.
      (2)   Application filing. Sign permit applications shall be submitted to
the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms available from the
Planning, Building and Development Department.
      (3)   Staff review and action. The Planning, Building and Development
Director shall review each proposed sign permit application for the purpose of
determining whether the proposed sign complies with all applicable sign
regulations of §
151.173 and the sign plan, if applicable. Based on that review, the Planning,
Building and Development Director shall:
         (a)   Issue the sign permit, if the sign complies in every respect
with the standards of §
151.173 and the sign plan, if applicable; or
         (b)   Deny the sign permit if the sign fails in any way to comply with
the standards of §
151.173 or the applicable sign plan.
      (4)   Lapse of approval/inspections.
         (a)   If an approved sign has not been erected or put in place within
six months of the issuance of the sign permit, the sign permit shall lapse and
be of no further effect.
         (b)   The applicant shall request that the county inspect the sign at
the end of the six-month period following issuance of the sign permit.
         (c)   If, upon inspection, the construction is substantially
incomplete, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall give the
property owner or tenant notice that the sign permit has lapsed.
         (d)   If, upon inspection, the construction is found to be
substantially complete but not in full compliance with §
151.173 or other applicable codes, the Planning, Building and Development
Director shall give the property owner or tenant notice of the deficiencies and
shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the
deficiencies to be corrected.
         (e)   If the deficiencies are not corrected by that date, the sign
permit shall lapse and the sign shall be removed immediately.
         (f)   The failure to remove a sign for which a permit has lapsed shall
be unlawful.
(Ord., § 3.11, passed 10-13-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.056 ZONING VARIANCES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section provides a procedure for gaining approval
of variances from the standards of this chapter, except those of §
151.056, §§
151.185 through
151.204, §§
151.220 and
151.221, or §
151.233(D)(1) and (2), in order to relieve hardships and achieve parity among
properties similarly located and classified.
   (B)   Classification of zoning variances.
      (1)   Administrative variance.
         (a)   A request to modify by 10% or less any numeric standard of this
chapter, except those related to maximum allowed densities and any standard of
§§
151.070 through
151.072 and
151.145 through
151.154, may be heard and decided by the Director of Planning, Building and
Development as an administrative variance, in which case no public hearing is
required.
         (b)   However, before the variance may be granted, a notice of the
intent to grant the variance shall be sent by certified mail to all adjoining
landowners as well as those located directly across any street from the subject
property.
         (c)   If any landowner files a written request for public hearing with
the Director within 15 calendar days of receipt of the notice, the variance
shall then be processed as a minor variance.
         (d)   The decision on an administrative variation shall be based on
the approval criteria of subsection (C)(4) below and findings of fact shall be
made in accordance with subsection (C)(5) below.
 
COMMENTARY:
Waivers from the vacation standards of §
151.204, subdivision and land dedication standards of §§
151.185 through
151.204, §§
151.220 and
151.221, development standards for nonconforming recorded lots of §
151.233(D)(1) and plats of consolidation standards of §
151.233(D)(2) shall be processed in accordance with the procedures of §
151.192(A).
 
      (2)   Minor zoning variance. A modification of 20% or less of any numeric
standard (except those of §§
151.070 through
151.072 and §§
151.145 through
151.154) and except those that are administrative variance or are related to
maximum allowed densities or building height shall be classified and may be
processed as minor zoning variances.
      (3)   Major zoning variance. Any request for a variance from the
standards of this chapter that does not qualify as an administrative variance
or a minor zoning variance shall be processed and classified as a major zoning
variance.
   (C)   Zoning variance procedure.
      (1)   Application filing. Applications for zoning variances shall be
submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms
available from the Planning, Building and Development Department.
      (2)   Public hearing notice. Neighbor, newspaper and posted notice of the
public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of §
151.045(G).
      (3)   Review and action.
         (a)   Minor zoning variances. The Hearing Officer shall hold a public
hearing on minor zoning variance requests and act to approve, approve with
conditions or deny the minor zoning variance based on the approval criteria of
subsection (C)(4) below.
         (b)   Major zoning variances.
            1.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on
major zoning variance requests and act to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the major zoning variance based on the major zoning variance approval
criteria of subsection (C)(4) below.
            2.   At least four affirmative votes shall be required to approve a
major zoning variance.
      (4)   Approval criteria. Zoning variances may be approved only upon a
finding that all of the following criteria have been met. Use variations are
specifically prohibited:
         (a)   Exceptional conditions peculiar to the applicant’s property;
         (b)   Practical difficulties or particular hardships in carrying out
the strict letter of the regulation; and
         (c)   Harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning
regulations.
      (5)   Findings of fact; written transcripts.
         (a)   All decisions on zoning variances shall be supported by findings
of fact specifying the reasons for the decision.
         (b)   A written transcript of the hearing shall be prepared for all
major zoning variances.
 
COMMENTARY:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3015.jpg]
 
   (D)   Special zoning variance regulations for floodplain property.
      (1)   Notifications and acknowledgments.
         (a)   Upon receipt of an application for any variance affecting
floodplain lands or affecting any floodplain regulation of this chapter,
Planning, Building and Development Department staff shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
            1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
flood base elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance; and
            2.   The construction below the flood base elevation increases
risks to life and property.
         (b)   Notice of the proposed variance and public hearing shall be
provided to the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission’s Chief Engineer
at least 15 days prior to the public hearing.
         (c)   The applicant shall be required to acknowledge in writing that
he or she assumes all risks and liabilities connected with the activities. A
copy of the notification and the applicant’s acknowledgment shall be maintained
by the Planning, Building and Development Department.
      (2)   Supplementary findings of fact. In addition to any other findings
of fact required for zoning variances, in deciding on variances affecting
floodplain lands or any floodplain regulations, findings of fact shall be made
by the Zoning Board of Appeals on each of the following matters based on the
evidence presented.
         (a)   A finding that the granting of a variance would not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary
public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the
public, nor conflict with existing local laws or ordinances and that all
buildings will be protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the
base flood event;
         (b)   A finding that the development activity can not be located
outside the floodplain; and
         (c)   A finding that the development activity is not in a regulatory
floodway.
(Ord., § 3.12, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.057 WRITTEN INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)   Application filing. Applications for written interpretations of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department
on forms available from the Planning, Building and Development Department.
   (B)   Planning, Building and Development Director’s review and decision.
Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application for a written
interpretation, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall:
      (1)   Review and evaluate the application in light of the text of this
chapter, the official zoning maps, the Regional Framework Plan and any other
relevant documents, including, if applicable, the similar use interpretation
standards of §
151.270(B);
      (2)   Consult with other staff; and
      (3)   Render a written interpretation.
   (C)   Form. The interpretation shall be provided to the applicant in writing
and shall be filed in the official record of interpretations.
   (D)   Official record of interpretations. An official record of
interpretations shall be maintained and made available for public inspection in
the Planning, Building and Development Department office during normal business
hours.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of the Planning, Building and Development Director’s
written interpretation may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the procedures of §
151.058.
(Ord., § 3.13, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.058 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be authorized to hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
administration or enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Right to appeal. Appeals of Administrative Decisions may be filed by
any person aggrieved by a decision of an administrative official in the
administration or enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   Application filing. Applications for Appeals of Administrative
Decisions shall be submitted to the Planning, Building and Development
Department on forms available from the Planning, Building and Development
Department. Appeals of Administrative Decisions shall be filed within 35
calendar days of the date of the decision being appealed.
   (D)   Effect of filing. The filing of a complete application for appeal
stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the
official whose decision is being appealed certifies to the Zoning Board of
Appeals, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the
certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property. In that
case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, or by a court of record.
   (E)   Record of administrative decision. The official whose decision is
being appealed shall transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken.
   (F)   Notice. Newspaper notice of the Zoning Board of Appeals’ public
hearing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of §
151.045(G). Neighbor notice shall be provided on matters affecting specific
properties.
   (G)   Zoning Board of Appeals’ review and action. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the Appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall grant to the administrative official’s decision a presumption of
correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of error on the appellant. In
exercising the appeal power, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the
powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken, and the Zoning Board of
Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the decision being
appealed. If the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that it is necessary to
obtain additional evidence in order to resolve the matter, it shall remand the
appeal to the official from whom the appeal is taken, with directions to obtain
evidence and to reconsider the decision in light of the evidence. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall take action on an appeal within a reasonable period of
time after application submittal, but in no case more than 30 days after its
receipt of the written hearing transcript. A concurring vote of four members of
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official.
   (H)   Approval criteria; findings of fact. An appeal shall be sustained only
if the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the administrative official erred.
Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be accompanied by a written
finding of fact specifying the reason for the decision. Those written findings
shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord., § 3.14, passed 10-13-2009)
SITE CAPACITY, SITE PLAN REVIEW, AND NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION
§ 151.070 SITE CAPACITY CALCULATIONS/SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   This section sets out the procedures for site capacity calculations and site
plan review. No site development permit or building permit shall be issued for
a development that is subject to the site capacity calculation and site plan
review procedures of this section until the Planning, Building and Development
Director has approved the application.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   All of the following shall be subject to the site capacity
calculation and site plan review procedures of this section unless otherwise
expressly exempted:
         (a)   Any conservation development;
         (b)   Any mobile home park and any recreational vehicle park;
         (c)   Any conventional residential development consisting of three or
more dwelling units or lots;
         (d)   Any nonresidential development on any parcel that is 40,000
square feet in area or larger; and
         (e)   Any site development activity on any parcel with an area of
200,000 square feet or more, except when the parcel is being developed with no
more than two single family dwellings.
      (2)   All of the following shall be subject to the site plan review
procedures of this section regardless of the size of the subject parcel, unless
otherwise expressly exempted:
         (a)   Service stations;
         (b)   Any nonresidential use with drive-through service;
         (c)   Convenience stores;
         (d)   Car washes;
         (e)   Motor vehicle display, sales, rental, or service;
         (f)   Shopping centers;
         (g)   Taverns;
         (h)   Marinas;
         (i)   Commercial, accessory large-scale, and accessory medium-scale
solar energy systems; and
         (j)   Commercial wind energy systems.
   (B)   Exemptions.  
      (1)   Approval of site capacity calculations may be obtained
(concurrently) at the time of subdivision, rezoning, variance, conditional use
permit, or planned unit development approval. Separate site capacity
calculation applications shall not be required.
      (2)   Site plan review approval may be obtained (concurrently) at the
time of rezoning, variance, conditional use permit approval, or planned unit
development approval. Separate site plan review applications shall not be
required.
      (3)   Developments that are subject to the subdivision platting
procedures and that have completed required site capacity calculations shall
not be subject to site plan review unless expressly noted on the subdivision
plat.
      (4)   Site capacity calculations and site plan review shall not be
required for signs, temporary uses, uses qualifying for an agricultural
exemption or any other type of exemption.
      (5)   Site capacity calculations and site plan review shall not be
required for nonresidential accessory uses or structures or for additions to
principal nonresidential uses provided that: the accessory use/structure or
addition to the principal use does not exceed 1,000 square feet of floor area
or 2,000 square feet of impervious surface area; or the Planning, Building and
Development Director determines that no protected natural resource protection
areas will be adversely affected. Site capacity calculations and site plan
review shall not be required, regardless of size, for gazebos and screened or
open porches.
      (6)   Site capacity calculations and site plan review shall not be
required for interior or exterior building alterations that do not increase the
size of the building or amount of impervious coverage.
   (C)   Review and approval procedure.
      (1)   Relationship to development review procedures of §§
151.045 through
151.058. The general procedural requirements and standards of §
151.045 shall apply to the site capacity and site plan review procedures of
this section.
      (2)   Application filing. Site capacity calculation/site plan
applications, which shall include natural resource protection and open space
plans, shall be submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department
on forms available from the Planning, Building and Development Department. The
application shall be submitted only after a check-in meeting. Site capacity
calculation/site plan applications may be processed concurrently with other
applications.
      (3)   Application submittal requirements and standards. The Planning,
Building and Development Director shall determine the type and extent of
information necessary to provide for an adequate site capacity/site plan review
and may require the submission of specific information. This information may
include but is not limited to one or more of the following items:
         (a)   A completed application for site capacity and site plan review
approval (application form available from the Planning, Building and
Development Director);
         (b)   A map or plat of survey of the subject property, which may
include one or more of the following items:
            1.   A legal description of the property;
            2.   The boundaries of the property;
            3.   The total area of the property;
            4.   Topographic contours at one-foot intervals;
            5.   The location, width, and name of all existing or previously
platted street, railroad, and utility easements and rights-of-way; and
            6.   The location of existing sewers, drainage tiles, water mains,
culverts, and other underground facilities within the tract, indicating pipe
sizes, grades, manholes, and location.
         (c)   A site plan of the proposed development showing the following
information:
            1.   The types of uses proposed. Residential developments shall be
identified by type of development (i.e., conventional or conservation) and by
type of dwelling unit (e.g., single family, multiplex, and the like);
            2.   The location, size, height, and arrangement of all existing
and proposed buildings and structures;
            3.   The location, dimension, and surface material of all existing
and proposed pedestrian entrances, exits, and walkways;
            4.   The location, size, and surface material of all proposed
vehicular access points and driveways; and the location, size, surface
material, arrangement, and capacity of all areas to be used for off-street
parking and off-street loading;
            5.   The location, size, height, illumination, and orientation of
all signs and lighting;
            6.   The location, size, and type of all existing and proposed
rights-of-way, easements and landscaping;
            7.   Zoning and land use of adjacent properties; and
            8.   If the application relates to property scheduled for phased
development, the proposed layout of the total projected development shall be
indicated and each phase’s projected scope and time period indicated to the
extent possible.
         (d)   A natural resource plan (see
Figure 151.070(C)).
Figure 151.070(C): Natural Resource Plan (example)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3017.jpg]
         (e)   An open space plan;
         (f)   A landscape plan;
         (g)   Any covenants, conditions, or other restrictions related to the
parcel or use thereof;
         (h)   Evidence that adequate sewer and water facilities exist or can
be provided to serve the proposed use;
 
COMMENTARY:
For developments utilizing individual sewage disposal systems and/or private
wells, evidence that adequate sewer and water facilities exist or can be
provided to serve the proposed use may be provided in the form of a letter or
permit from the Lake County Health Department approving the proposed
facilities. For developments utilizing public or community sewer and/or water
facilities, evidence that adequate sewer and water facilities exist or can be
provided to serve the proposed use may be provided in the form of a letter or
permit from the agency controlling the facilities (e.g., the Lake County
Department of Public Works) stating that sufficient capacity exists to serve
the proposed use and that the proposed connection points and preliminary design
of the improvements have been approved, and that the applicant is in the
process of completing that agency’s permitting and approval process.
 
         (i)   For properties without an approved access location, evidence
that an access permit can be obtained for the proposed use from the highway
authority having jurisdiction. For properties with a previously approved access
location, evidence from the highway authority having jurisdiction that the
existing access point is sufficient to serve the proposed use; if the existing
access is insufficient, evidence that a new access permit can be obtained for
the proposed use from the highway authority having jurisdiction.
 
COMMENTARY:
Evidence that an access permit can be obtained may be provided in the form of a
letter from the highway authority having jurisdiction stating that the access
location and preliminary design has been approved and that the applicant is in
the process of completing that jurisdiction’s permitting and approval process.
 
      (4)   Distribution of application. Upon receipt of a complete site
capacity calculation/site plan application, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall distribute copies of the application to Multi-
Disciplinary Team members and other affected agencies for their review and
comment. A copy of the application shall also be provided to the County Board
member in whose district the property is located.
 
COMMENTARY:
Reviews conducted as part of site capacity calculation/site plan review process
do not take the place of other required reviews, such as those conducted at
time of site development permit.
 
      (5)   Notice.
         (a)   Neighbor notice shall be provided in accordance with §
151.045(G) for proposals that consist of any of the following:
            1.   Residential developments containing more than 24 multi-
dwelling units (apartments) on a single parcel;
            2.   Nonresidential developments containing more than 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area; or
            3.   Additions to nonresidential developments that have the effect
of increasing the gross floor area on the subject parcel by more than 50%.
         (b)   No public information meeting or neighbor notice shall be
required if a public hearing has already been held on the same matter.
      (6)   Review and action. Within ten days of the receipt of a complete
site capacity calculation/site plan application, Multi-Disciplinary Team
members shall review the site capacity calculation/site plan application and
provide comments to the Planning, Building and Development Director. Upon
receipt of Multi-Disciplinary Team comments, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall schedule the site plan proposal for discussion at
the Multi-Disciplinary Team. Comments shall include a determination by the
appropriate highway authority relating to access to a public road. The
applicant shall be notified of the date, time, and location of the meeting.
When proposals require neighbor notice, neighbors may attend the Multi-
Disciplinary Team meeting. Following the staff discussion with the applicant,
neighbors may provide comments to the Multi-Disciplinary Team. Following the
Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting, the Planning, Building and Development
Director shall compile all comments received, and act to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application based on its compliance with the site
capacity calculation/site plan application submittal requirements and the
applicable standards of this chapter. In the event of denial, the Planning,
Building and Development Director shall provide the applicant with a written
description of the reasons for denial and the procedure for continuing the site
capacity calculation/site plan review process.
      (7)   Lapse of approval. The site capacity/site plan approval shall lapse
and be of no further effect if a site development permit or building permit has
not been obtained within one year from the date of approval. If changes are
made to the site plan after the site capacity is approved, the site capacity
and site plan shall be reexamined.
   (D)   Site capacity calculations.
      (1)   Calculation of base site area. The first step of the site capacity
calculation process involves the calculation of “base site area”, in accordance
with the following methodology:
Calculation of Base Site Area
Calculation of Base Site Area
Step Determine gross area of site based on an on-site survey.                         —
1
Step Subtract land area of existing roads and land within existing utility and        —
2    drainage easements and existing access easements.
     Subtract land that is not contiguous.                                            —
     A.   A separate parcel that has access to a road and is of sufficient size to
     support independent development but that does not abut, adjoin, or share common
     boundaries with the rest of the development or is rendered physically
     inaccessible to the main parcel by the presence of a railroad, existing land     —
     use, major stream, or other natural or man-made barrier, such that common or
Step integrated use of the two parcels is not physically possible. (Site capacity for
3    these parcels shall be calculated separately.)
     B.   A separate parcel that does not have access to a road or is not of
     sufficient size to support independent development and that does not abut,
     adjoin, or share common boundaries with the rest of the development or is
     rendered physically inaccessible to the main parcel by the presence of a         —
     railroad, existing land use, major stream, or other natural or man-made barrier,
     such that common or integrated use of the two parcels is not physically
     possible, thus rendering the land unavailable for development purposes.
Step Subtract land that was reserved for resource purposes in a previously approved   —
4    subdivision plat (e.g., floodplain or recreation area)
     Subtract land used or proposed for residential uses, whenever a mix of
Step nonresidential and residential uses are proposed. (In the case of the site       —
5    capacity calculation for the proposed residential use, subtract the land
     proposed for nonresidential use.)
        Equals “Base Site Area”
 
      (2)   Calculating Net Site Area. After determining “base site area”,
calculate “net site area” in accordance with the following methodology:
 
Calculation of Net Site Area
Step 1 Determine base site area (see §                                       —
       151.070(D)(1))
       Subtract regulatory floodplains [and flood-prone areas with 100+ acres
Step 2 of tributary drainage area (see §                                     —
       151.071(B))]
Step 3 Subtract wetlands (1/4 Ac. +) (see §                                  —
       151.071(C))
Step 4 Subtract nonlinear water bodies (see §                                —
       151.071(E))
Step 5 Subtract linear water bodies (see §                                   —
       151.071(G))
          Equals “Net Site Area”
 
      (3)   Site capacity calculation (residential). Residential site capacity
shall be calculated in accordance with the following methodology:
         (a)   Maximum number of dwelling units allowed. The first step of the
residential site capacity calculation process involves calculating the maximum
number of dwelling units permitted on the parcel. The following steps are
required to make this calculation:
 
Calculation of Maximum Dwelling Unit Count
Step 1 Take Net Site Area (see §
       151.070(D)(2))
Step 2 Multiply by zoning district maximum density (see §                   x
       151.125)
       Equals Maximum Allowed Dwelling Units (round to nearest whole number) =
 
         (b)   Open space requirements. The second step of the residential site
capacity calculation process involves calculating the amount of “
            1.   Resource-protected land area. The provisions of this
subchapter identify several natural resources that must be protected, in whole
or in part. The area occupied by these identified resources are referred to as
“Resource-Protected Lands.” The total Resource-Protected Land area of a site
shall be calculated in accordance with the following methodology:
Calculation of Resource-Protected Land Area
 Resource Type [1] Land Area of Resource   Protection Ratio  Resource-Protected
                   (Acres)                                   Land Area
Calculation of Resource-Protected Land Area
                                                         Land                    Resource-
  Resource Type [1]                                      Area of    Protection   Protected
                                                         Resource   Ratio        Land Area
                                                         (Acres)
  Regulatory floodplains [and flood-prone areas with
1 100+ acres of tributary drainage area (see §          ( _[3]   x 1.00)      = —
  151.071(B)) [2]]
2 Wetlands (1/4 Ac. +) (see §                           ( _[3]   x 1.00)      = —
  151.071(C))
3 Nonlinear water bodies (see §                         ( _[3]   x 1.00)      = —
  151.071(E))
4 Linear water bodies (see §                            ( _      x 1.00)      = —
  151.071(G))
  Wetland and water body buffers [wetland, linear water
  body and nonlinear water body buffers (see §§        ( _        0.80)      = —
  151.071(D), (F), and (H))]
6 Mature woodlands/groves (see §                        ( _      x 0.70[4])   = —
  151.071(I))
7 Young woodlands (see §                                ( _      x 0.50[4])   = —
  151.071(I))
   Equals total Resource-Protected Land area
[1] If two or more resources overlap, only the resource with the higher protected ratio
shall be calculated.
[2] Uses/developments allowed within floodplains are not required to include floodplains
in calculations.
[3] Land Area of Resource may be reduced pursuant to §
151.146(M)(9) and §
151.148(B).
[4] Woodland resources may be reduced pursuant to §
151.071(I)(6)(e), replacement of woodland credit.
 
            2.   Recreation land area. All residential developments located in
R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, and R6 Zoning Districts are required to provide recreation
land area to meet the county’s minimum recreation area requirements of 19.5
acres per 1,000 residents, in accordance with the following methodology.
 
Calculation of Recreation Land Area (Residential)
Step 1 Take maximum number of dwelling units proposed             —
Step 2 Multiply by 0.055 (based on county average household size) x    
       Equals total recreation land area required (acres)         0
* No recreation land area is required if the calculation yields a
requirements of less than 0.5 acre.
 
            3.   Total open space area.
               a.   Conventional development. Calculating the open space
required in a conventional development involves adding the Resource-Protected
Land area calculated under subsection (D)(3)(b)1. above and the recreation land
area calculated under subsection (D)(3)(b)2. above.
 
Calculating Required Open Space (Conventional Development)
Step 1 Take total Resource-Protected Land area (from §
       151.070(D)(3)(b)1., above)
Step 2 Add total “Recreation Land Area” (from §                  +
       151.070(D)(3)(b)2., above)
       Equals Minimum Conventional Development Open Space requirement =
 
               b.   Conservation development. The amount of open space required
to be set aside in a conservation development is equal to the zoning district
minimum open space requirement (see §
151.125) or the sum of the Resource-Protected Land area calculated under
subsection (D)(3)(b)1. above and the recreation area calculated under
subsection (D)(3)(b)2. above, whichever results in the greater area.
Calculating Required Open Space
Calculating Required Open Space
Step 1 Take total Resource-Protected Land area (from subsection (D)(3)(b)1.,
       above)
Step 2 Add total Recreation Land Area (from subsection (D)(3)(b)2., above)   +
???    Equals Capacity-Based Open Space Requirement                          =
Step 3 Take Base Site Area (subsection (D)(1))
Step 4 Multiply by zoning district (minimum) open space ratio (see §        x
       151.125)
???    Equals District-Based Open Space requirement                          =
Step 5 Take higher of Capacity-Based or District-Based Open Space            =
       Requirement; equals minimum Open Space Requirement
 
      (4)   Site capacity calculation (nonresidential). Site capacity for
nonresidential development shall be calculated in accordance with the following
methodology:
         (a)   Maximum floor area allowed. The first step of the nonresidential
site capacity calculation process involves calculating the maximum amount of
floor area permitted on the parcel, in accordance with the underlying zoning
district regulations. The following steps are required:
 
Calculation of Maximum Floor Area
Step 1 Take Net Site Area (see subsection (D)(2) above)
Step 2 Multiply by zoning district maximum floor area factor (see §  x
       151.125)
          Equals “Maximum Floor Area”
 
         (b)   Maximum impervious area allowed.
            1.   The second step of the nonresidential site capacity
calculation process involves calculating the maximum amount of impervious area
permitted on the parcel, in accordance with the underlying zoning district
regulations.
            2.   The following steps are required:
 
Calculation of Maximum Impervious Area
Step Take Net Site Area (see subsection (D)(2))
1
Step Multiply by zoning district maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) (see §  x
2    151.125)
        Equals “Maximum Impervious Surface”
 
         (c)   Open space requirements. The final step of the nonresidential
site capacity calculation process involves calculating the amount of “open
space” that must be preserved and set aside. In the case of nonresidential
development, only Resource-Protected Lands must be set aside. The provisions of
this subchapter identify several natural resources that must be protected, in
whole or in part. The areas occupied by these identified resources are referred
to as “Resource-Protected Lands”. The total Resource-Protected Land area of a
site shall be calculated in accordance with the following methodology:
Calculation of Resource-Protected Land Area
Resource Type[1] Land Area of Resource   Protection Ratio  Resource-Protected
                 (Acres)                                   Land Area
Calculation of Resource-Protected Land Area
                                                                       Land                    Resource-
Resource Type[1]                                                       Area of    Protection   Protected
                                                                       Resource   Ratio        Land Area
                                                                       (Acres)
  Regulatory floodplains [and flood-prone areas with 100+ acres of
1 tributary drainage area (see §                                      ( _[3]   x 1.00)      0
  151.071(B))[2]]
2 Wetlands (1/4 Ac. +) (see §                                         ( _[3]   x 1.00)      =
  151.071(C))
3 Nonlinear water bodies (see §                                       ( _[3]   x 1.00)      =
  151.071(E)
4 Linear water bodies (see §                                          ( _      x 1.00)      =
  151.071(G)
5 Wetland, linear water body and nonlinear water body buffers (see §  ( _      x 0.80)      0
  151.071(D), (F), and (H))
6 Mature woodlands/groves (see §                                      ( _      x 0.70[4])   =
  151.071(I))
7 Young woodlands (see §                                              ( _      x 0.50[4])   =
  151.071(I))
   Equals total “Resource-Protected Land Area”
[1] If two or more resources overlap, only the resource with the higher protected ratio shall be
calculated.
[2] Uses/developments allowed within floodplains are not required to include floodplains in
calculations.
[3] Land area of resource may be reduced pursuant to §§
151.146(M)(1) and
151.148(B).
[4] Woodland resources may be reduced pursuant to §
151.071(I)(6)(e), replacement of woodland credit.
 
(Ord., § 4.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2012;
Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 151.071 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Applicability.
         (a)   Floodplains, wetlands, linear and nonlinear water bodies. All
development shall comply with the natural resource protection standards for
regulatory floodplains (subsection (B) below), wetlands (subsection (C)), and
nonlinear and linear water bodies (subsections (E) and (G)) regardless of
whether they are subject to the site capacity calculation and site plan
procedures of §
151.070.
         (b)   Buffers, woodlands, and significant trees. All development that
is subject to the site capacity calculation and site plan procedures of §
151.070 shall comply with the natural resource protection standards for water
body buffers (subsections (D), (F), and (H) of this section) woodlands, and
significant trees (§
151.071(I)).
      (2)   Open space. The natural resource protection areas requiring
protection in accordance with subsections (B) through (I) below shall be
designated “open space for natural resource protection” and shall be
permanently maintained as open space. Those areas lying within existing
nonlinear water bodies and those wetlands that are determined by the Army Corps
of Engineers or the Planning, Building and Development Director to be non-
mitigatable shall not be counted toward meeting minimum open space
requirements.
 
COMMENTARY:
Unified Development Ordinance,
Appendix N entitled “High-Quality Aquatic Resources” provides guidance in
determining non-mitigatable wetlands.
 
      (3)   Responsibility for protection. The land owner shall be responsible
for protection of all required natural resource protection areas.
      (4)   Overlapping resource protection areas. When two or more natural
resource protection areas overlap, the stricter standards shall control. Only
the natural resource that has the higher protection ratio shall be counted.
(See
Figure 151.071(A).)
Figure 151.071(A): Overlapping Resources
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3019.jpg]
      (5)   Natural resource protection plan. Where applicable, a plan labeled
“Natural Resource Protection Plan” shall be submitted and shall be prepared as
an overlay of the grading and drainage plan. The natural resource protection
plan shall include the following information:
         (a)   The location and extent of all natural resource protection areas
and location, type and nature of all temporary and permanent measures and
practices to be utilized to protect natural resource protection areas from
development activities, as required by this chapter; and
         (b)   A table indicating the gross area (predevelopment area) of each
identified natural resource, the net area (post-development area) of each
identified natural resource and the percentage protection of each identified
natural resource.
   (B)   Regulatory floodplains.
      (1)   Calculation of natural resource area. The location and extent of
floodplain boundaries shall be determined in accordance with the standards of §
151.147(B)(1). Flood-prone areas with 100 acres or more tributary drainage area
shall be considered regulatory floodplains for purposes of this section.
      (2)   Protection ratio. All regulatory floodplain areas (100%) shall be
protected and maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise expressly
provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Protected areas. Top-dressing and shallow-filling uses and other
uses that are expressly permitted by §
151.148 shall be permitted within regulatory floodplains only when they comply
with all applicable floodplain development performance standards of §
151.149. Deep-filling and other uses allowed by the underlying zoning district
shall be allowed in regulatory floodplains only if reviewed and approved in
accordance with the regulatory floodplain development standards of §
151.148(B).
      (4)   Resource protection measures. All required protection measures for
regulatory floodplains located on the development site shall be installed prior
to the commencement of any site development activity and shall remain in place
and in working, functional order until all site development activities have
ceased and the surrounding area has been permanently stabilized.
         (a)   Construction fences. Construction fencing (fluorescent
polyethylene laminar safety netting or approved equivalent) with a minimum
height of three feet shall be installed around the outer limits of all
regulatory floodplain areas. The fencing shall be entrenched, secured to
ground-mounted metal or wood posts spaced a maximum of ten feet apart and
maintained to prevent clearing, grading, and development activities from
encroaching into regulatory floodplain areas.
         (b)   Soil erosion/sediment control. Soil erosion/sediment control
measures shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance §
151.146(J) and practices described in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency/Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Illinois Urban Manual.
 
COMMENTARY:
For additional guidance with soil erosion/ sediment control matters, applicants
are encouraged to refer to the Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission.
 
         (c)   Restricted activities within protected areas. The storage of
trash and the dumping of liquids shall be prohibited within protected areas.
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by the provisions of this chapter, all
grading and filling shall be prohibited within protected areas. The Planning,
Building and Development Director shall be authorized to prohibit other
activities within protected areas (such as construction material/equipment
storage and vehicle parking) as a condition of site development permit/site
plan approval if the Planning, Building and Development Director determines
that other reasonably feasible storage alternatives exist on the subject site.
         (d)   Designation, use, maintenance, and ownership of protected areas.
Protected regulatory floodplain areas shall be designated, owned, and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of §
151.072. Only those passive uses permitted by §
151.072(C)(1) shall be allowed within protected regulatory floodplain areas.
   (C)   Wetlands.
      (1)   Calculation of natural resource area. Wetland areas include any
area that meets the definition of a “wetland” as defined in §
151.271. If the Planning, Building and Development Director determines that
site conditions warrant, a wetland delineation shall be required. Furthermore,
if wetlands are determined to be present, provisions of §
151.146(M) shall apply. Wetland delineations shall be conducted in accordance
with the methodology adopted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission, and the USDA Natural Resource
Conservation Service.
      (2)   Protection ratio. All wetlands (100%) with a surface area of one-
fourth acre or more, situated wholly or partially on-site, shall be protected
and maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise expressly provided in
this chapter. This provision applies to all wetland areas that are a part of
one-fourth acre or larger wetland areas, regardless of the size of the wetland
area located on the development site.
      (3)   Protected areas. Mitigation shall be allowed in accordance with §
151.146(M), provided there is no net loss of protected wetlands and the
mitigation occurs in the county. Existing isolated protected wetlands on or
adjacent to a development site shall not be excavated, unless the activity is
part of an approved U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or watershed development
permit. Development or disturbance of a cumulative total of more than one acre
of wetlands shall be allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with
the wetland development standards of §
151.146(M).
      (4)   Resource protection measures. All required protection measures for
wetlands located on the development site shall be installed prior to the
commencement of any site development activity and shall remain in place and in
working, functional order until all site development activities have ceased and
the surrounding area has been permanently stabilized. All required resource
protection measures for wetlands shall be installed around the outer limits of
all wetland buffers, unless any development activity is proposed within the
buffers, in which case the resource protection measures shall be installed
around the outer limits of the wetland.
 
COMMENTARY:
The Lake County Wetland Inventory maps and the aerial photographs available on
the Lake County web page or in the Department of Planning, Building and
Development may be referenced to determine if the wetland present on the
property extends beyond the limits of the property boundary.
 
         (a)   Construction fences. Construction fencing (fluorescent
polyethylene laminar safety netting or approved equivalent) with a minimum
height of three feet shall be installed around the outer limits of all wetland
areas. The fencing shall be entrenched, secured to ground-mounted metal or wood
posts spaced a maximum of ten feet apart and maintained to prevent clearing,
grading, and development activities from encroaching into wetland areas.
         (b)   Soil erosion/sediment control. Soil erosion/sediment control
measures shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with §
151.146(J) and practices described in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency/Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Illinois Urban Manual.
 
COMMENTARY:
For additional guidance with soil erosion/sediment control matters, applicants
are encouraged to refer to the Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission.
 
         (c)   Restricted activities within protected areas. The storage of
trash and the dumping of liquids shall be prohibited within protected areas.
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this chapter, all grading and filling
shall be prohibited within protected areas. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to prohibit other activities within
protected areas (such as construction material/equipment storage and vehicle
parking) as a condition of site development permit/site plan approval if the
Planning, Building and Development Director determines that other reasonably
feasible storage alternatives exist on the subject site.
         (d)   Designation, use, maintenance, and ownership of protected areas.
Protected wetland areas shall be designated, owned, and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.072. Only those passive uses permitted by §
151.072(C)(1) shall be allowed within protected wetland areas.
   (D)   Wetland buffers.
      (1)   Calculation of natural resource area. A wetland buffer shall extend
from the edge of the delineated wetland. A property may contain a wetland
buffer that originates from wetlands on adjacent property. The natural resource
protection area shall be calculated in the following manner.
         (a)   For wetlands with a total surface area of one-third acre or
greater but less than one acre, a minimum wetland buffer width of 30 feet shall
be required.
         (b)   For wetlands with a total surface area of one acre or greater,
but less than two and one-half acres, a minimum wetland buffer width of 40 feet
shall be required.
         (c)   For wetlands with a total surface area of two and one-half acres
or greater, a minimum wetland buffer width of 50 feet shall be required.
         (d)   High-quality aquatic resources shall have a minimum wetland
buffer width of 100 feet.
      (2)   Protection ratio. A minimum of 80% of all wetland buffer areas
shall be protected and maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise
expressly provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Buffer averaging.  The wetland buffer width for a development site
may be reduced to a minimum of one-half of the wetland buffer width required,
upon approval of the Planning, Building and Development Director, provided that
the total wetland buffer area required is achieved adjacent to the wetland
being buffered. The consultation process of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service may override the ability to average
wetland buffer areas upon approval of the Planning, Building and Development
Director.
      (4)   Protected areas.
         (a)   Areas having state or federal threatened and endangered species
present or for Illinois Natural Area Inventory sites, wetland buffer widths may
be modified upon approval of the Planning, Building and Development Director,
to meet the terms and conditions specified during consultation with the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
pursuant to state and federal laws and regulations. However, any additional
wetland buffer required pursuant to this provision shall not affect the site
capacity calculation. The Planning, Building and Development Director shall
support efforts to protect threatened and endangered species whenever the
efforts are consistent with the stated purposes of this chapter.
         (b)   Areas located within 100 feet from the edge of the delineated
wetlands with slopes exceeding 12% grade shall also be protected and maintained
as permanent open space unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter.
The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized to allow
improvements such as retaining walls to prevent soil erosion and protect public
safety within protected steep slope areas. Any additional wetland buffer
required pursuant to this provision shall not affect the site capacity
calculation.
         (c)   All existing native vegetation within protected wetland buffer
areas shall be left undisturbed. Protected wetland buffer areas may be regraded
if the Planning, Building and Development Director determines that the
regrading is necessary to stabilize the area, prevent soil erosion or otherwise
protect or enhance the protected wetland buffer area. The protected wetland
buffer area may also be regraded to allow storm-water basins. Access through
protected wetland buffer areas shall be provided, when necessary, for
maintenance purposes. The protected wetland buffer areas shall be restabilized
and re-vegetated with native vegetation immediately after any disturbance or
modification. All runoff will be directed to enter protected wetland buffer
areas as unconcentrated flow or will be treated to remove all silt and sediment
prior to entering the adjacent wetland. In those very limited and unique
circumstances when no other reasonable alternative exists, the Planning,
Building and Development Director shall be authorized to allow direct runoff
into the adjacent wetland with the design and implementation of acceptable best
management practices (BMPs). The Planning, Building and Development Director
shall report that action to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee within
15 days of the decision or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
 
COMMENTARY:
Stormwater basins may be allowed within the protected wetland buffer areas
pursuant to §
151.146 of this chapter. These basins, when properly designed, act as sediment
basins and improve the quality of water entering the adjacent wetland. For
guidance in designing stormwater facilities that meet this intent, refer to the
following sources: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency/Natural Resources
Conservation Services, Technical Reference Manual (Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission), Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater
Facilities in Northeastern Illinois (USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service in cooperation with U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers), Urban Stormwater Best Management Practices for Northeastern
Illinois Course Notebook (Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission), Reducing
the Impact of Urban Run-Off: Advantages of Alternative Site Design Approaches
(Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission for Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency).
 
      (5)   Non-protected areas. Wetland buffer areas that are not protected
(the remaining 20%) may be developed with structures and impervious surfaces
including trails and paths.
      (6)   Resource protection measures. All required protection measures for
wetland buffers located on the development site shall be installed prior to the
commencement of any site development activity and shall remain in place and in
working, functional order until all site development activities have ceased or
the surrounding area has been stabilized.
         (a)   Construction fences.
            1.   Construction fencing (fluorescent polyethylene laminar safety
netting or approved equivalent) with a minimum height of three feet shall be
installed around the outer limits of all wetland buffer areas.
            2.   The fencing shall be secured to ground-mounted metal or wood
posts spaced a maximum of ten feet apart and maintained to prevent clearing,
grading, and development activities from encroaching into wetland buffer areas.
         (b)   Soil erosion/sediment control. Soil erosion/sediment control
measures shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with §
151.146(J) and practices described in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency/Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Illinois Urban Manual.
         (c)   Restricted activities within protected areas. The storage of
trash and the dumping of liquids shall be prohibited within protected areas.
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this chapter, all grading and filling
shall be prohibited within protected areas. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to prohibit other activities within
protected areas (such as construction material/equipment storage and vehicle
parking) as a condition of site development permit/site plan approval if the
Planning, Building and Development Director determines that other reasonably
feasible storage alternatives exist on the subject site according to BMPs.
 
COMMENTARY:
For additional guidance with soil erosion/ sediment control matters, applicants
are encouraged to refer to the Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission.
 
         (d)   Designation, use, maintenance, and ownership of protected areas.
Protected wetland buffer areas shall be designated, owned, and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.072. Only those passive uses permitted by §
151.072(C)(1) shall be allowed within protected wetland buffer areas.
   (E)   Nonlinear water bodies.
      (1)   Calculation of natural resource area. The extent of a nonlinear
water body (not delineated as wetlands) shall be determined based on the
ordinary high water mark.
      (2)   Protection ratio. The entire area of nonlinear water bodies (100%)
shall be protected and maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise
expressly provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Protected areas. The Planning, Building and Development Director
shall be authorized to allow only minimal development or disturbance of
nonlinear water bodies, provided that the development or disturbance complies
with the regulatory floodplain development standards of §
151.148(B) and all applicable U.S. Army Corps of Engineers standards.
      (4)   Resource protection measures. All required protection measures for
nonlinear water bodies located on the development site shall be installed prior
to the commencement of any site development activity and shall remain in place
and in working, functional order until all site development activities have
ceased and the surrounding area has been permanently stabilized. All required
resource protection measures for nonlinear water bodies shall be installed
around the outer limits of all buffer areas, unless any development activity is
proposed within the buffer area, in which case the resource protection measures
shall be installed around the outer limits of a nonlinear water body.
         (a)   Construction fences. Construction fencing (fluorescent
polyethylene laminar safety netting or approved equivalent) with a minimum
height of three feet shall be installed around the outer limits of all
nonlinear water bodies. The fencing shall be entrenched, secured to ground-
mounted metal or wood posts spaced a maximum of ten feet apart and maintained
to prevent clearing, grading, and development activities from encroaching into
nonlinear water bodies.
         (b)   Soil erosion/sediment control. Soil erosion/sediment control
measures shall be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with §
151.146(J) and practices described in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency/Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Illinois Urban Manual.
 
COMMENTARY:
For additional guidance with soil erosion/ sediment control matters, applicants
are encouraged to refer to the Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission.
 
         (c)   Restricted activities within protected areas.  The storage of
trash and the dumping of liquids shall be prohibited within protected areas.
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this chapter, all grading and filling
shall be prohibited within protected areas. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to prohibit other activities within
protected areas (such as construction material/equipment storage and vehicle
parking) as a condition of site development permit/site plan approval if the
Planning, Building and Development Director determines that other reasonably
feasible storage alternatives exist on the subject site. The Planning, Building
and Development Director shall report the action to the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee within 15 days of the decision or at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
         (d)   Designation, use, maintenance, and ownership of protected areas.
Protected nonlinear water bodies areas shall be designated, owned, and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of §
151.072. Only those passive uses permitted by §
151.072(C)(1) shall be allowed within protected nonlinear water body areas.
   (F)   Nonlinear water body buffers.
      (1)   Calculation of natural resource area. Nonlinear water body buffers
(that are not delineated as wetlands) shall extend from the ordinary high water
mark. A property may contain a buffer that originates from a water body on an
adjacent property. The natural resource protection area for nonlinear water
body buffers shall be calculated in the following manner.
         (a)   For nonlinear water bodies with a total surface area of one-
third acre or greater but less than one acre, a minimum buffer width of 30 feet
shall be required.
         (b)   For nonlinear water bodies with a total surface area of one acre
or greater but less than two and one-half, a minimum buffer width of 40 feet
shall be required.
         (c)   For nonlinear water bodies with a total surface area of two and
one-half acres or greater, a minimum buffer width of 50 feet shall be required.
      (2)   Protection ratio. A minimum of 80% of all nonlinear water body
buffer areas shall be protected and maintained as permanent open space unless
otherwise expressly provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Buffer averaging. The nonlinear water body buffer width for a
development site may be reduced to a minimum of one-half of the buffer width
otherwise required, upon approval of the Planning, Building and Development
Director, provided that the total buffer area required is achieved adjacent to
the resource being buffered. The consultation process of the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service may override
the ability to average buffer areas upon approval of the Planning, Building and
Development Director.
      (4)   Protected areas.
         (a)   Areas having state or federal threatened and endangered species
present or for Illinois Natural Area Inventory sites, nonlinear water body
buffer widths may be modified upon approval of the Planning, Building and
Development Director, to meet the terms and conditions specified during
consultation with the Illinois Department of Natural Resources or U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service pursuant to state and federal laws and regulations. However,
any additional nonlinear water body buffer required pursuant to this provision
shall not affect the site capacity calculation.
         (b)   Areas located within 100 feet from the ordinary high water mark
of a nonlinear water body with slopes exceeding 12% grade shall also be
protected and maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise expressly
provided in this chapter. The Planning, Building and Development Director shall
be authorized to allow improvements such as retaining walls to prevent soil
erosion and protect public safety within protected steep slope areas. Any
additional nonlinear water body buffer required pursuant to this provision,
shall not affect the site capacity calculation.
         (c)   All existing native vegetation within protected nonlinear water
body buffer areas shall be left undisturbed. Protected nonlinear water body
buffer areas may be re-graded if the Planning, Building and Development
Director determines that the regrading is necessary to stabilize the area,
prevent soil erosion, or otherwise protect or enhance the protected nonlinear
water body buffer areas. The protected nonlinear water body buffer areas may
also be regraded to allow stormwater basins. Access through protected nonlinear
water body buffer areas shall be provided, when necessary, for maintenance
purposes. The protected nonlinear water body buffer areas shall be re-
stabilized and re-vegetated with native vegetation immediately after any
disturbance or modification. All runoff will be directed to enter protected
nonlinear water body buffer areas as unconcentrated flow or will be treated to
remove all silt and sediment prior to entering the adjacent water body. Only in
those very limited and unique circumstances where no other reasonable
alternative exists, the Planning, Building and Development Director may allow a
direct runoff into the adjacent water body with the design and implementation
of acceptable best management practices (BMPs). The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall report that action to the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee within 15 days of the decision or at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
 
COMMENTARY:
Stormwater basins are allowed within protected nonlinear water body buffer
areas. These basins, when properly designed, act as sediment basins and improve
the quality of water entering the adjacent water body. For guidance in
designing stormwater facilities that meet this intent, please refer to the
following sources: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency/Natural Resources
Conservation Services Illinois Urban Manual, Technical Reference Manual
developed by the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission, Native Plant
Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illinois prepared
by USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service in cooperation with U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Urban Stormwater Best
Management Practices for Northeastern Illinois Course Notebook prepared by the
Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission, Reducing the Impact of Urban Run-
Off: Advantages of Alternative Site Design Approaches, prepared by Northeastern
Illinois Planning Commission for Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
 
      (5)   Non-protected areas. Nonlinear water body buffer areas that are not
protected (the remaining 20%) may be developed with structures and impervious
surfaces including trails and paths. This provision is intended to allow boat
ramps, walkways, and other similar features.
      (6)   Resource protection measures. All required protection measures for
nonlinear water body buffer areas located on the development site shall be
installed prior to the commencement of any site development activity and shall
remain in place and in working, functional order until all site development
activities have ceased or the surrounding area has been stabilized.
         (a)   Construction fences. Construction fencing (fluorescent
polyethylene laminar safety netting or approved equivalent) with a minimum
height of three feet shall be installed around the outer limits of all
nonlinear water body buffer areas. The fencing shall be secured to ground-
mounted metal or wood posts spaced a maximum of ten feet apart and maintained
to prevent clearing, grading, and development activities from encroaching into
nonlinear water body buffer areas.
         (b)   Soil erosion/sediment control. Soil erosion/sediment control
measures shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance §
151.146(J) and practices described in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency/Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Illinois Urban Manual.
 
COMMENTARY:
For additional guidance with soil erosion/ sediment control matters, applicants
are encouraged to refer to the Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission.
 
         (c)   Restricted activities within protected areas. The storage of
trash and the dumping of liquids shall be prohibited within protected areas.
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this chapter, all grading and filling
shall be prohibited within protected areas. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to prohibit other activities within
protected areas (such as construction material/equipment storage and vehicle
parking) as a condition of site development permit/site plan approval if the
Planning, Building and Development Director determines that other reasonably
feasible storage alternatives exist on the subject site. The Planning, Building
and Development Director shall report that action to the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee within 15 days of the decision or at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
         (d)   Designation, use, maintenance, and ownership of protected areas.
Protected nonlinear water body buffer areas shall be designated, owned, and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of §
151.072. Only those passive uses permitted by §
151.072(C)(1) shall be allowed within protected nonlinear water body buffer
areas.
   (G)   Linear water bodies.
      (1)   Calculation of natural resource area.  The extent of a linear water
body (not delineated as wetlands) shall be determined based on the ordinary
high water mark.
      (2)   Protection ratio. The entire area (100%) of linear water bodies
shall be protected and maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise
expressly provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Protected areas. Protected linear water bodies may be modified for
stormwater conveyance or detention purposes only in accordance with the site
development regulations of §§
151.145 through
151.154 and all other applicable regulations of this chapter. Protected linear
water bodies may be modified for restoration purposes, provided that a
restoration plan has been prepared, submitted, and approved by all of the
appropriate federal, state, and county regulatory agencies (IDNR/OWR, ACOE,
LCSMC) and is consistent with the site development regulations of §§
151.145 through
151.154. Restoration of protected linear water bodies may include but is not
limited to regrading and re-vegetating banks with native plant species,
placement of appropriate in-stream habitat structures (subject to consultation
with IDNR), or re-meandering a straightened linear water body to increase
habitat diversity.
      (4)   Resource protection measures. All required protection measures for
linear water bodies located on the development site shall be installed prior to
the commencement of any site development activity and shall remain in place and
in working, functional order until all site development activities have ceased
or the surrounding area has been stabilized. All required resource protection
measures for linear water bodies shall be installed around the outer limits of
all buffer areas, unless any development activity is proposed within the buffer
areas, in which case the resource protection measures shall be installed around
the outer limits of a water body.
         (a)   Construction fences. Construction fencing (fluorescent
polyethylene laminar safety netting or approved equivalent) with a minimum
height of three feet shall be installed around the outer limits of all linear
water bodies. The fencing shall be secured to ground-mounted metal or wood
posts spaced a maximum of ten feet apart and maintained to prevent clearing,
grading, and development activities from encroaching into linear water body
areas.
         (b)   Soil erosion/sediment control. Soil erosion/sediment control
measures shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance §
151.146(J) and practices described in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency/Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Illinois Urban Manual.
 
COMMENTARY:
For additional guidance with soil erosion/sediment control matters, applicants
are encouraged to refer to the Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission.
 
         (c)   Restricted activities within protected areas. The storage of
trash and the dumping of liquids shall be prohibited within protected areas.
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this chapter, all grading and filling
shall be prohibited within protected areas. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to prohibit other activities within
protected areas (such as construction material/equipment storage and vehicle
parking) as a condition of site development permit/site plan approval if the
Planning, Building and Development Director determines that other reasonably
feasible storage alternatives exist on the subject site. The Planning, Building
and Development Director shall notify the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee of all these decisions within 15 days of action or at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
         (d)   Designation, use, maintenance, and ownership of protected areas.
Protected linear water body areas shall be designated, owned, and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.072. Only those passive uses permitted by §
151.072(C)(1) shall be allowed within protected linear water body areas.
   (H)   Linear water body buffers.
      (1)   Calculation of natural resource area. Linear water body buffers
(that are not delineated as wetlands) shall extend from the ordinary high water
mark. A property may contain a linear water body buffer that originates from a
linear water body on an adjacent property. The natural resource protection area
shall be calculated in the following manner.
         (a)   Linear water bodies with a watershed of more than 20 acres, but
less one square mile, shall have a water body buffer of at least 50 feet on
each side of the water body.
         (b)   When the linear water body has a watershed greater than one
square mile, the minimum linear water body buffer width shall be 30 feet on
each side of the water body.
         (c)   Linear water bodies with an index of biotic integrity (IBI)
greater than 40 shall have a minimum linear water body buffer width of 100 feet
on each side. (Initial IBI based on Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
Illinois Water Quality Report, biannual. A site-specific IBI assessment may
override this report.)
         (d)   Linear water body buffers shall not be required for water bodies
enclosed in an underground conduit or culvert.
      (2)   Protection ratio. A minimum of 80% of all linear water body buffer
areas shall be protected and maintained as permanent open space unless
otherwise expressly provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Buffer averaging. The linear water body buffer width for a
development site may be reduced to a minimum of one-half of the linear water
body buffer width required, upon approval of the Planning, Building and
Development Director, provided that the total linear water body buffer area
required is achieved adjacent to the resource being buffered. The consultation
process of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources or U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service may override the ability to average linear water body buffer
areas upon approval of the Planning, Building and Development Director.
      (4)   Protected areas.
         (a)   Areas having state or federal threatened and endangered species
present or for Illinois Natural Area Inventory sites, linear water body buffer
widths may be modified upon approval of the Planning, Building and Development
Director, to meet the terms and conditions specified during consultation with
the Illinois Department of Natural Resources or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
pursuant to state and federal laws and regulations. However, any additional
linear water body buffer required pursuant to this provision shall not affect
the site capacity calculation.
         (b)   Areas located within 100 feet from the ordinary high water mark
of a water body with slopes exceeding 12% grade shall also be protected and
maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise expressly provided in this
chapter. The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized to
allow improvements such as retaining walls to prevent soil erosion and protect
public safety within protected steep slope areas. Any additional linear water
body buffer required pursuant to this provision shall not affect the site
capacity calculation.
         (c)   All existing native vegetation within protected linear water
body buffer areas shall be left undisturbed. Protected linear water body buffer
areas may be re-graded if the Planning, Building and Development Director
determines that the regrading is necessary to stabilize the area, prevent soil
erosion, or otherwise protect or enhance the protected linear water body buffer
areas. The protected linear water body buffer areas may also be regraded to
allow stormwater basins. Access through protected linear water body buffer
areas shall be provided, when necessary, for maintenance purposes. The linear
water body buffer areas shall be re-stabilized and re-vegetated with native
vegetation immediately after any disturbance or modification. All runoff will
be directed to enter protected linear water body buffer areas as unconcentrated
flow or will be treated to remove all silt and sediment prior to entering the
adjacent water body. Only in those very limited and unique circumstances where
no other reasonable alternative exists, the Planning, Building and Development
Director may allow a direct runoff into the adjacent water body with the design
and implementation of acceptable best management practices (BMPs). The
Planning, Building and Development Director shall report that action to the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee within 15 days of the decision or at
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee.
      (5)   Non-protected areas.
         (a)   Linear water body buffer areas that are not protected (the
remaining 20%) may be developed with structures and impervious surfaces
including paths and trails.
         (b)   This provision is intended to allow boat ramps, walkways and
other similar features.
 
COMMENTARY:
Stormwater basins are allowed within protected linear water body buffer areas.
These basins, when properly designed, act as sediment basins and improve the
quality of water entering the adjacent water body. For guidance in designing
stormwater facilities that meet this intent, please refer to the following
sources: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency/Natural Resources
Conservation Services Illinois Urban Manual, Technical Reference Manual
developed by the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission, Native Plant
Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illinois prepared
by USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service in cooperation with U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Urban Stormwater Best
Management Practices for Northeastern Illinois Course Notebook prepared by the
Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission, Reducing the Impact of Urban Run-
Off: Advantages of Alternative Site Design Approaches, prepared by Northeastern
Illinois Planning Commission for Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
 
      (6)   Resource protection measures. All required protection measures for
linear water body buffers located on the development site shall be installed
prior to the commencement of any site development activity and shall remain in
place and in working functional order until all site development activities
have ceased or the surrounding area has been stabilized.
         (a)   Construction fences. Construction fencing (fluorescent
polyethylene laminar safety netting or approved equivalent) with a minimum
height of three feet shall be installed around the outer limits of all linear
water body buffer areas. The fencing shall be secured to ground-mounted metal
or wood posts spaced a maximum of ten feet apart and maintained to clearing,
grading, and development activities from encroaching into buffer areas.
         (b)   Soil erosion/sediment control. Soil erosion/sediment control
measures shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance §
151.146(J) and practices described in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency/Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Illinois Urban Manual.
 
COMMENTARY:
For additional guidance with soil erosion/ sediment control matters, applicants
are encouraged to refer to the Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission.
 
         (c)   Restricted activities within protected areas. The storage of
trash and the dumping of liquids shall be prohibited within protected areas.
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this chapter, all grading and filling
shall be prohibited within protected areas. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to prohibit other activities within
protected areas (such as construction material/equipment storage and vehicle
parking) as a condition of site development permit/site plan approval if the
Planning, Building and Development Director determines that other reasonably
feasible storage alternatives exist on the subject site.
         (d)   Designation, use, maintenance, and ownership of protected areas.
Protected linear water body areas shall be designated, owned, and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.072. Only those passive uses permitted by §
151.072(C)(1) shall be allowed within protected linear water body areas.
   (I)   Woodlands and significant trees.
      (1)   Calculation of natural resource area.
         (a)   Mature woodlands. A mature woodland is an area or stand of trees
whose total combined canopy covers an area of 20,000 square feet or more, at
least 50% of which is composed of trees having a diameter breast height of 16
inches or more.
         (b)   Groves. A grove is a stand of five or more individual trees
whose total combined canopy covers an area of less than 20,000 square feet, at
least 50% of which is composed of trees having a diameter breast height of 16
inches or more.
         (c)   Young woodlands. A young woodland is an area or stand of trees
whose total combined canopy covers an area of 20,000 square feet or more, at
least 50% of which is composed of trees having a diameter breast height of at
least three inches and less than 16 inches.
         (d)   Significant trees. Significant trees are trees having a diameter
breast height (four and one-half feet above average ground elevation) of 24
inches or greater for deciduous trees and 12 inches or greater for evergreen
trees.
         (e)   Trees planted for commercial purposes.
            1.   Active commercial nurseries and Christmas tree operations
shall be exempt from the woodland protection standards of this subchapter. If a
commercial nursery operation has been abandoned, the areas shall be subject to
the woodland protection standards of this subchapter.
            2.   In determining whether the areas qualify for protection, the
Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized to require the
submission of an assessment of the areas that identifies: the canopy and
understory vegetation; the estimated canopy area; the general health condition
of the trees; and relevant site conditions such as soils or drainage conditions
that may promote or prohibit maturity of the vegetation.
         (f)   Noxious species. Undesirable or non-native tree species such as
Acer negundo (box elder), Robinia pseudoacacia (black locust), Rhamnus
cathartica (common buckthorn), Rhamnus frangula (smooth buckthorn), Ailanthus
altissima (tree of heaven), Morus alba (white or common mulberry), Eleagnus
angustifolia (Russian olive), Eleagnus umbellata (autumn olive), Populus alba
(white poplar) and Ulmus pumila (siberian elm) shall not be considered a
natural resource and shall not require protection under this section.
      (2)   Tree surveys. Tree surveys shall be required for all parcels that
contain mature woodlands, groves, young woodlands, or significant trees. Tree
surveys shall identify the location, size (caliper), species and condition
health rating of all trees having a diameter breast height of 12 inches or
more. Property line and hedge row trees shall be included in the tree survey.
Required tree surveys and inventories shall be conducted by a certified
arborist, professional forester, or by a registered professional in a related
field. The Planning, Building and Development Director may waive all or a
portion of the tree survey requirements if it is determined that no development
will take place within a protected woodland area. A condition health rating
categorizes trees in one of the following health categories: 5) excellent, 4)
very good, 3) good, 2) fair, or 1) poor. The Planning, Building and Development
Director may authorize removal of trees identified as “fair” or “poor” by a
certified arborist or professional forester.
      (3)   Protection ratios. See
Figure 151.071(I).
Figure 151.071(I): Woodland Protection
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3021.jpg]
         (a)   Mature woodlands. A minimum of 70% of mature woodland areas
shall be protected and maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise
expressly provided in this chapter.
         (b)   Groves. A minimum of 70% of grove areas shall be protected and
maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise expressly provided in this
chapter.
         (c)   Young woodlands. A minimum of 50% of young woodland areas shall
be protected and maintained as permanent open space unless otherwise expressly
provided in this chapter.
         (d)   Significant trees. At least 70% of all significant trees shall
be protected and maintained as permanent open space except those trees that are
located within the ultimate rights-of-way of existing roads and existing
drainage and utility easements which may be disturbed during construction. All
care and effort shall be applied to locate buildings and improvements in a way
that reduces the need for removal of significant trees.
         (e)   Mixed (mature-young) woodland areas. In woodland areas
containing a combination of young and mature woodlands, the minimum area that
must be protected may be determined by calculating the weighted average
protection ratio applicable to the woodland as a whole, in accordance with the
following formula:
 
Weighted average woodland protection   (Mature woodland area x .70) + (Young
ratio                                = woodland area x 0.50)
                                       Total woodland area
 
      (4)   Protected areas. Areas located within 100 feet from the edge of the
woodlands with slopes exceeding 12% grade shall be protected and maintained as
permanent open space unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. The
Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized to allow
improvements such as retaining walls to prevent soil erosion and protect public
safety within protected steep slope areas. Any additional buffer required
pursuant to this provision shall not affect the site capacity calculation.
      (5)   Non-protected areas. Woodland areas that are not required to be
protected may be cleared or developed.
      (6)   Resource protection measures. All required protection measures for
woodlands, groves and significant trees located on the development site shall
be installed prior to the commencement of any site development activity and
shall remain in place and in working, functional order until all site
development activities have ceased and the surrounding area has been
permanently stabilized.
         (a)   Construction fences. Construction fencing (fluorescent
polyethylene laminar safety netting or approved equivalent) with a minimum
height of three feet shall be installed around the drip lines of all woodlands,
groves, and significant trees, prior to pruning. The fencing shall be
entrenched, secured to ground-mounted metal or wood posts spaced a maximum of
ten feet apart and maintained to prevent clearing, grading, and development
activities from encroaching into woodlands, groves, and significant tree areas.
         (b)   Soil erosion/sediment control. Soil erosion/sediment control
measures shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance §
151.146(J) and practices described in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency/Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Illinois Urban Manual.
 
COMMENTARY:
For additional guidance with soil erosion/sediment control matters, applicants
are encouraged to refer to the Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission.
 
         (c)   Restricted activities within protected areas. The storage of
trash and the dumping of liquids shall be prohibited within protected areas.
Other activities, such as construction material/equipment storage and vehicle
parking, shall also be prohibited within protected areas. Unless otherwise
expressly allowed by this chapter, all grading and filling shall be prohibited
within protected areas.
         (d)   Designation, use, maintenance, and ownership of protected areas.
Protected woodlands, groves, and significant trees areas shall be designated,
owned, and maintained in accordance with the provisions of §
151.072. Only those passive uses permitted by §
151.072(C)(1) shall be allowed within protected areas.
         (e)   Replacement of woodland credit.  
            1.   If the Planning, Building and Development Director determines
that practical difficulties or hardships will result from strict application of
the woodland and tree protection standards of this subsection (I)(6), the
Planning, Building and Development Director may authorize the clearance of more
protected tree or woodland area than is otherwise permitted by this subsection
(I)(6), in accordance with the following table. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall notify the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
of all these decisions within 15 days of action or at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
 
Zoning District Minimum Protection Area (%)
LC, RC, GC      15
LI, II, GO      30
All other       45
 
            2.   In order to receive replacement of woodland credit, the
following shall be required:
               a.   The developer shall designate a new woodland area on a part
of the site not forested. A reforestation plan, prepared by a certified
arborist or registered landscape architect, shall be submitted to the Planning,
Building and Development Department showing the location, size, and type of all
plant materials to be installed. The materials shall be of a suitable type and
compatible with the existing or native vegetation of the site.
               b.   The new woodland area shall consist of one and one-half
times the surface acreage of the woodland area disturbed pursuant to this
subsection (I)(6) (the new woodland area shall be subtracted from the net
buildable site area calculated under §
151.070).
               c.   The following amount of plant materials shall be provided
per each acre of new woodland to be established. Fractional requirements
resulting from fractions of acres to be established shall be rounded up. Types
of plant materials shall conform to the list of plant materials found in
Appendix A. Either of the following two options may be chosen:
 
Plant Material Required Per Acre Minimum Size of Plant Material
                                 10 Canopy trees     3-inch caliper size
Option 1                         20 Canopy trees     2-inch caliper size
                                 30 Understory trees 2-inch caliper size
Option 2                         10 Canopy trees     3-inch caliper size
                                 50 Understory trees 1-1/2-inch caliper size
 
      (7)   Removal, damage and replacement of significant trees.
         (a)   Removal. The Planning, Building and Development Director may
allow the removal of protected significant trees, when deemed necessary to
allow:
            1.   Work shown on approved construction or engineering plans; or
            2.   Construction of buildings or improvements.
         (b)   Reports. Within 15 days of approving the removal of protected
significant trees, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall
provide a report to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. This report
shall describe the action taken and the basis for the decision.
         (c)   Replacement.
            1.   If the Planning, Building and Development Director allows the
removal of protected significant trees, or if the protected trees are damaged
during the construction process, high-quality replacement trees of the same
species or a species considered native to the area or any other species
approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director after consultation
with other county departments shall be provided on the development site.
            2.   The combined total caliper of the replacement trees shall
equal at least the combined caliper of the trees to be removed, and all
replacement trees shall have a minimum caliper size of three inches.
            3.   If trees that may have fallen under natural resource
protection have been removed prior to site capacity/site plan review approval
or in the absence of a tree survey, a licensed arborist must provide an
assessment of the impact using all available information. The burden of
determining the extent of natural resources shall, in all cases, be upon the
property owner and/or developer. In the absence of credible evidence supplied
by the applicant, staff shall determine the extent to which protected woodlands
or significant trees have been impacted based on all available information.
(Ord., § 4.2, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-
10-2019)
§ 151.072 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Use.
         (a)   Land designated as open space shall be used and maintained as
open space and may not be separately subdivided or developed except as provided
herein.
         (b)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be
authorized to allow development within designated open space areas for the
maintenance or enhancement of the protected open space.
         (c)   When open space areas are designated for specific uses that
require the construction of improvement, the improvements shall be
appropriately sized and designed to meet the needs of the development.
         (d)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall
specifically be authorized to allow fences, walls, signs, and other structures
within open space areas, if necessary to protect or enhance the function of the
open space areas, or when the Planning, Building and Development Director
determines that the improvements or structures will not be detrimental to the
function of the open space area being preserved.
         (e)   Fences at least 90% open shall also be allowed in designated
open space provided at least one of the following circumstances are present:
            1.   Where the designated open space abuts designated open space or
a protected natural resource in an adjacent development;
            2.   Where the fence is proposed within an S-1 bufferyard in a
subdivision platted prior to April 11, 2000; and
            3.   Where the fence is proposed within deed-restricted open space.
      (2)   Design and layout. In designing subdivisions and laying out
developments, efforts shall be taken to maximize the use and enjoyment of open
spaces for the purposes designated. Small strips or spots of open space shall
be avoided; they may be used only when no other practical means exists for
providing required open space.
      (3)   Landscaping. Landscaping within open space areas shall be designed
so that open space areas are aesthetically pleasing and functionally usable for
the purpose specified. Native plant materials shall be used unless otherwise
approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director.
      (4)   Management plan. A management plan covering a minimum period of
five years following release of the maintenance assurance shall be prepared and
submitted for all natural resource protection areas.
      (5)   Review. Open space plans shall be submitted and reviewed as part of
the site capacity calculation/site plan review process of §
151.070 or the subdivision process of §
151.191, whichever occurs first.
      (6)   Performance and maintenance assurances.
         (a)   The Planning, Building and Development Director may require a
performance assurance in order to ensure the proper installation of
landscaping, recreational, or other improvements within open space areas and to
ensure maintenance of natural resource protection areas.
         (b)   The performance assurance may be required in an amount up to
130% of the design engineer’s estimate of cost for maintenance of open space
areas, required improvements, and landscaping, and shall be filed at the time
of county approval of the subject development for a time period of one, two, or
three years.
         (c)   If deemed necessary, the Planning, Building and Development
Director may also require a maintenance assurance equal to at least 10% of the
original performance assurance to be filed at the time of the release of the
performance assurance for a time period of one, two, or three years to ensure
maintenance of the open space areas and improvements located within open space
areas.
   (B)   Designation of open space. The location and total area of all common
or deed-restricted open space shall be clearly identified on all required plans
(see
Figure 151.072, below). Open space shall be designated in one of the following
ways.
      (1)   Natural resource protection areas. Natural resource protection
areas are open space areas required for the protection of those natural
resource areas identified in §
151.071.
      (2)   Restoration areas. Restoration areas are open space areas
designated for the creation, enhancement or restoration of natural habitats,
such as natural or restored wetlands, woodlands, prairies, or savannas.
 
COMMENTARY:
Native prairies present on the site should be identified and restored after
consultation with representatives of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources.
 
      (3)   Recreational areas.
         (a)   Recreational areas are open space areas designated for specific
recreational uses.
         (b)   The uses may include tot lots, tennis courts, swimming pools,
ballfields, and similar active recreational uses.
      (4)   Greenway areas. Greenway areas are open space areas established as
linear green belts linking open space areas with residential areas,
nonresidential areas, or other open space areas.
      (5)   Landscape areas.
         (a)   Landscape areas are open space areas that are typically
landscaped and serve to ameliorate adverse impacts and nuisances between
adjacent land uses or between a land use and a road.
         (b)   The areas designated as landscape areas shall not be counted
toward meeting the open space requirement.
      (6)   Agricultural areas.
         (a)   Agricultural areas are open space areas designated for
agricultural uses and the production of agricultural products.
         (b)   Agricultural areas may also be used as community garden plots
within a development.
      (7)   Stormwater detention areas.
         (a)   Stormwater detention areas are open space areas designed or used
for the detention or retention of stormwater runoff within a development.
         (b)   Only those stormwater detention basins that are designed as
wetlands or wet bottom basins with native vegetation along wetland and water
body buffer areas and side slopes shall be counted toward meeting the open
space requirement.
 
COMMENTARY:
For guidance on designing wet bottom stormwater detention basins or basins that
function as wetlands, applicants should consult the following sources: Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency/Natural Resources Conservation Services
Illinois Urban Manual, Technical Reference Manual developed by the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission, Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater
Facilities in Northeastern Illinois prepared by USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service in cooperation with U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Urban Stormwater Best Management Practices for
Northeastern Illinois Course Notebook prepared by the Northeastern Illinois
Planning Commission, Reducing the Impact of Urban Run-Off: Advantages of
Alternative Site Design Approaches, prepared by Northeastern Illinois Planning
Commission for the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
 
      (8)   Sewage disposal areas. Sewage disposal areas are open space areas
designed or used for the location of community sewage collection and disposal
systems or individual sewage disposal systems.
Figure 151.072: Open Space Plan (example)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3023.jpg]
   (C)   Use of open space. The use of open space areas shall be restricted to
those activities that permit the use and enjoyment of the open space without
compromising designated purpose of the open space area.
      (1)   Natural resource protection areas. The use of natural resource
protection areas shall be limited to non-vehicular, passive recreational
activities. The activities may include nature studies, hiking, cross-country
skiing, picnicking, and other similar passive recreational activities. This
provision shall not be interpreted as prohibiting the use and enjoyment of
lakes and ponds for recreational uses normally associated with the bodies of
water. Improvements such as trails or boardwalks are permitted in natural
resource protection areas, provided that the improvements have no negative
impact on the resource being protected and the improvements comply with all
other applicable standards of this chapter. Access to sensitive natural
resource protection areas may be restricted in order to ensure the preservation
of the areas.
      (2)   Restoration areas. The use of restoration areas shall be limited to
passive recreational activities that do not hinder preservation of the
environmental feature being protected. The activities may include hiking,
biking, cross-country skiing, picnicking, horseback riding and other similar
passive recreational activities.
      (3)   Recreational areas. The use of recreational areas shall be limited
to recreational activities, which may include golf courses, tennis courts,
swimming pools, ballfields, playgrounds, tot lots, and other similar active
recreational uses. The specific uses shall be identified for each designated
recreational area. Roads, parking areas, and structures (such as gazebos, club
houses, and shelter houses) that are ancillary to specific recreational
activities shall be permitted within recreational areas, provided that they
comply with all applicable standards of this chapter and do not exceed the
floor area or impervious surface standards. Recreational areas shall be
accessible to all residents of a development.
      (4)   Greenway areas. The use of greenway areas shall be limited to non-
motorized, passive recreational activities. Greenways shall contain multi-modal
path systems that may be used for walking, jogging, biking, cross-country
skiing, horseback riding, and other similar passive recreational activities. In
golf course communities, golf carts may also be operated within greenways. The
use of greenway areas may be restricted to specific passive recreational
activities. All greenway areas shall remain accessible to all residents of a
development.
      (5)   Landscape areas. Landscape areas shall be subject to the standards
of §
151.167. Access to landscape areas may be restricted in order to preserve their
function.
      (6)   Agricultural areas. The use of agricultural areas shall be limited
to those activities involved in the cultivation of soil, the production of
crops, or the raising of livestock. Access between agricultural areas and non-
agricultural areas may be restricted, provided that when agricultural areas are
designated for garden plots, they shall be accessible to all residents of the
subject development. Uses and structures ancillary to the agricultural use of
the open space area shall be permitted, provided that they comply with all
applicable standards of this chapter and do not exceed the floor area and
impervious surface standards.
      (7)   Stormwater detention areas. The use of stormwater detention/
retention areas shall be limited to those activities that do not interfere with
the area’s function as a stormwater detention area. Access to stormwater
detention areas may be restricted to ensure public safety.
      (8)   Sewage disposal areas. The use of sewage disposal areas shall be
limited to community sewage collection and disposal systems or individual
sewage disposal systems that are designed and approved in accordance with all
applicable county, state, and federal standards.
   (D)   Maintenance of open space.
      (1)   Natural resource protection areas. Maintenance of natural resource
protection areas shall consist of the removal of litter, junk, and debris.
Maintenance shall also include the removal of dead or diseased vegetation and
such species as Lonicera tatarica (honeysuckle), Rhamnus cathartica (common
buckthorn), Phalaris arundinacea (reed canary grass), Lythrum salicaria (purple
loosestrife), Alliaria officinalis (garlic mustard), Rhamnus frangula (smooth
buckthorn), Robinia pseudoacacia (black locust) or other invasive species that
the Planning, Building and Development Director has determined are or may be
detrimental to the health of the resource being protected. Natural watercourses
shall be maintained free-flowing and devoid of debris. Streams and nonlinear
waterbodies shall be maintained so as not to alter floodplain levels.
      (2)   Restoration areas. Maintenance of restoration areas shall consist
of the removal of litter, junk, and debris. Maintenance may also include the
removal of dead or diseased vegetation, those species identified in the
preceding subsection (D)(1), or other invasive species that the Planning,
Building and Development Director has determined are or may be detrimental to
the health of the resource being protected. Natural watercourses shall be
maintained free-flowing and devoid of debris. Stream channels and linear water
bodies shall be maintained so as not to alter floodplain levels.
      (3)   Recreational areas. Recreational areas shall be maintained to
ensure that they remain in usable condition and that no hazards, nuisances, or
unhealthy conditions exit.
      (4)   Greenway areas. Greenway areas shall be maintained to ensure that
they remain aesthetically and functionally usable, as originally designed, and
that no hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions exist.
      (5)   Landscape areas. Landscape areas shall be maintained to ensure that
they remain functionally usable, as originally designed, and that no hazards,
nuisances, or unhealthy conditions exist. This shall include the removal of
litter, junk, and debris and the replacement of dead or diseased vegetation.
      (6)   Agricultural areas. Agricultural areas shall be maintained as
necessary to ensure the productivity of the land for the designated
agricultural use.
      (7)   Stormwater detention areas. Stormwater detention/retention areas
shall be maintained to comply with the site development regulations of §§
151.145 through
151.154.
      (8)   Sewage disposal areas. Sewage disposal areas shall be maintained in
accordance with all applicable county, state, and federal standards, including
those of the Lake County Health Department. Financial assurances or maintenance
bonds may be required to ensure ongoing maintenance.
   (E)   Ownership of open space. The form of ownership of all required open
space areas shall be designated on all plans. Open space areas may be owned by
any one of the following mechanisms, or combinations thereof:
      (1)   Dedication. Open space may be dedicated to the county, township, an
appropriate public agency, or not-for-profit open space organization that is
willing to accept the dedication, provided the terms of the conveyance have
been reviewed and approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director.
      (2)   Common ownership. Open space may be held in common ownership by a
property owners’ association who shall assume full responsibility for its
maintenance and who shall prevent development and subsequent subdivision of the
open space land for other than open space purposes. In the event that open
space is to be owned and maintained by a property owners’ association,
documents establishing the association, detailing its obligation and otherwise
providing for the maintenance and preservation of open space areas shall be
prepared and submitted with all required plans. Covenants shall provide for the
mandatory inclusion of all property owners for the purpose of being responsible
for continuing maintenance of the open space.
      (3)   Deed restriction.
         (a)   Open space may be held in deed-restricted ownership which
ensures that no development and subsequent subdivision of the open space land
for other than open space uses shall be permitted. The maintenance
responsibility of all open space areas shall be specified and provision shall
be made for guaranteeing this responsibility.
         (b)   Within residential developments, open space designated as
recreational areas, greenway areas or stormwater detention areas shall not be
held in deed-restricted ownership, except when otherwise approved by the
Planning, Building and Development Director. Moreover, in residential
subdivisions wherein each lot contains at least 80,000 square feet, required
open space may be held in deed-restricted ownership. The Planning, Building and
Development Director may approve deed-restricted open space on lots less than
80,000 square feet only when: the subdivision consists of five lots or fewer
and each lot within the subdivision contains at least 40,000 square feet of lot
area; or the resultant open space is contiguous to other open space in the
subdivision or on an adjacent property. Within 15 days of approving deed-
restricted open space in accordance with this section, the Planning, Building
and Development Director shall provide a report to the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee. The report shall describe the action taken and the basis for
the decision. Deed-restricted open space shall not be allowed in conservation
developments.
(Ord., § 4.3, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 151.085 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Establishment of zoning districts.
      (1)   Base zoning districts. The following base zoning districts are
hereby established:
         (a)   AG, Agricultural;
         (b)   RE, Rural Estate;
         (c)   E, Estate;
         (d)   R-1, Residential;
         (e)   R-2, Residential;
         (f)   R-3, Residential;
         (g)   R-4, Residential;
         (h)   R-4A, Residential;
         (i)   R-5, Residential;
         (j)   R-6, Residential;
         (k)   RR, Resort Residential;
         (l)   GO, General Office;
         (m)   LC, Limited Commercial;
         (n)   RC, Recreational Commercial;
         (o)   GC, General Commercial;
         (p)   LI, Limited Industrial;
         (q)   II, Intensive Industrial;
         (r)   OS, Open Space; and
         (s)   GW, Gateway.
      (2)   Zoning district hierarchy. References in this chapter to less
restrictive or more restrictive zoning districts refer to the base zoning
districts established in this section and represent a progression from the AG
District, the most restrictive base zoning district, to the II District, the
least restrictive base zoning district. The OS District and the GW District are
not included within the hierarchy.
   (B)   Zoning map. The boundaries of the zoning districts established by this
chapter are shown on the “Official Zoning Map of Lake County, Illinois” which
is a part of this chapter as fully as if it were set out in this chapter in
detail. Original zoning district maps are maintained in the office of the
Planning, Building and Development Director. In case of any dispute regarding
the zoning classification of property subject to this chapter, the original
maps maintained by the Planning, Building and Development Director shall
control.
      (1)   Omitted land. It is the intent of this chapter that every part of
unincorporated Lake County be included in one of the zoning districts
established by this chapter. Any land located now or in the future outside of
municipalities not shown to be included in a zoning district shall be deemed to
be classified in the AG District.
      (2)   Additional land areas. Any land area that comes under the
jurisdiction of this chapter shall automatically be classified in the AG
District.
      (3)   District boundaries. The following rules govern interpretations
regarding the location of zoning district boundaries.
         (a)   Municipal boundaries. Boundaries shown as following or
approximately following the limits of any incorporated municipality shall be
construed as following those limits.
         (b)   Streets. Unless otherwise indicated on the map, boundaries shown
as following or approximately following streets shall be construed to follow
the centerlines of those streets, except in the case of interstate highways. In
the case of interstate highways, boundaries shall be construed as following
rights-of-way lines.
         (c)   Property lines. Boundary lines shown as following or
approximately following platted lot lines or other property lines shall be
construed as following those lines, as shown on the county tax maps.
         (d)   Section lines. Boundaries shown as following or approximately
following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be
construed as following those lines.
         (e)   Railroads. Unless otherwise indicated on the map, boundaries
shown as following or approximately following railroad lines shall be construed
to lie midway between the main tracks of those railroad lines.
         (f)   Shorelines. Boundaries shown as following or approximately
following shorelines of any body of water shall be construed to follow the mean
high waterlines of that body of water and, in the event of change in the mean
high waterline, shall be construed as moving with the actual mean high
waterline.
         (g)   Watercourses. Boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing
watercourses shall be construed as following the channel centerline of those
watercourses taken at mean low water, and, in the event of a natural change in
the location of those streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the zone boundary
shall be construed as moving with the channel centerline.
         (h)   Map scale and distances. Boundaries shown as separated from, and
parallel or approximately parallel to, any of the features listed in this
subsection (B)(3) shall be construed to be parallel to those features and at
the distances as are shown on the zoning district map. Distances not
specifically indicated on the map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(Ord., § 5.1, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.086 AG, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Description. The AG, Agricultural District is intended to promote and
protect agricultural land uses. The standards of the AG District are designed
to permit development that is compatible with existing rural character and
agricultural uses such as cropland, pasture land, orchards, vineyards, and
nurseries, confined feeding operations, and equestrian facilities. The AG
District is intended to implement and correspond to the Regional Framework
Plan’s “Agricultural” future land use designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the AG District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the AG District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.2, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.087 RE, RURAL ESTATE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Description. The RE, Rural Estate District is intended to accommodate
very low-density, very large-lot residential development and to provide
permanent protection for areas that develop in such a manner. The district is
intended to accommodate only a very small amount of the county’s future housing
needs, generally serving the housing needs of those who desire to live in a
very rural, very low-density estate areas and are willing to assume the costs
of doing so. Because of the relatively sparse population in RE-zoned areas, the
county will not give high priority to the provision of public services in those
areas. Instead, public service provision by the county will be concentrated in
areas where more intense future development is called for by the Regional
Framework Plan. The very low densities permitted in the RE District generally
permit (in accordance with applicable Lake County Health Department rules) on-
site, individual sewage disposal systems and wells, thereby reducing the need
for inefficient public expenditures. The RE Zoning District is intended to
implement and correspond to the Regional Framework Plan’s “Residential - Large
Lot” future land use designation. Development in this district should follow
the character description in the Regional Framework Plan’s “Rural Large Lot
Subdivisions” or the conservation development section of the “Community
Character” chapter.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the RE District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the RE District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.3, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.088 E, ESTATE AND R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Description. The E, Estate and R-1 Districts are intended to
accommodate low-density, large-lot residential development and to ensure the
protection of areas that develop in such a manner. These districts are a higher
density version of the very-low density RE District. Like the RE District, the
E and R-1 Districts are expected to accommodate only a very small amount of the
county’s overall housing needs. These districts primarily serve those
households who desire to live in low-density estate areas and are willing to
assume the costs of doing so. Because of the relatively sparse population in E-
zoned and R-1-zoned areas, the county will not give high priority to the
provision of public services in the areas. Instead, public service provision by
the county will be concentrated in areas where more intense future development
is called for by the Regional Framework Plan. The low densities permitted in
the E and R-1 Districts generally permit (in accordance with applicable Lake
County Health Department rules; see Chapter 171) on-site, individual sewage
disposal systems and wells, thereby reducing the need for inefficient public
expenditures. The E and R-1 Districts are intended to implement and correspond
to the Regional Framework Plan’s “Residential-Medium Lot” future land use
designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the E and R-1 Districts in accordance with
the use table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the E and R-1 Districts is
subject to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.4, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.089 R-2, R-3, AND R-4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Description. The R-2, R-3, and R-4 Zoning Districts are expected to
accommodate a large percentage of the residential growth projected in
unincorporated Lake County over the 20-year planning horizon covered by the
Regional Framework Plan. The districts are primarily intended to accommodate
moderate density residential development that can be served by the full range
of infrastructure. The districts are generally intended to be applied in areas
with existing infrastructure. The uses and densities allowed in the R-2, R-3,
and R-4 Districts (1.33 to 2.5 units per acre) offer county residents a variety
of housing choices in the moderate density range. The R-2, R-3, and R-
4 Districts are intended to implement the Regional Framework Plan’s
“Residential” future land use designations.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts in accordance
with the use table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the R-2, R-3, and R-
4 Districts is subject to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.5, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.090 R-4A, R-5, AND R-6 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Description. The R-4A, R-5, and R-6 Zoning Districts are also intended
to accommodate a substantial portion of the county’s residential growth over
the 20-year planning horizon covered by the Regional Framework Plan. Because of
the densities allowed and the need for infrastructure and convenient access to
shopping, employment and other uses. In all cases, development in the R-4A, R-
5, and R-6 Districts shall be adequately served by infrastructure. By allowing
many residential development options (from detached houses on medium-size lots
to moderate density, multi-story apartments), the R-4A, R-5, and R-6 Districts
provide the widest range of housing choices for county residents. Although the
R-4A, R-5, and R-6 Districts allow moderate to high residential densities, they
are not generally appropriate for application in areas that are most
appropriately suited to intensive nonresidential development. The R-4A, R-5,
and R-6 Districts are intended to implement the Regional Framework Plan’s
“Residential - Small Lot” and “Residential - Multifamily” future land use
designations.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in R-4A, R-5, and R-6 Districts in accordance
with the use table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the R-4A, R-5, and R-
6 Districts is subject to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.6, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.091 RR, RESORT RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Description. The RR, Resort Residential District is intended to be
applied in developed areas near lakes and other recreational resources to
preserve the existing resort residential character of the areas. The
regulations of the RR District are intended to encourage maintenance and upkeep
of existing resort residential neighborhoods, while ensuring that any new
development is of a similar character and scale. It is not generally intended
to be applied to large, undeveloped parcels. The RR District is intended to
implement the Regional Framework Plan’s “Retail/ Commercial” future land use
designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the RR District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the RR District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.7, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.092 GO, GENERAL OFFICE.
   (A)   Description. The GO, General Office District is primarily intended to
accommodate office, office park, and research park development generally
adjacent to primary highways. Standards that apply to development in the GO
District ensure that development is visually attractive and well-buffered from
abutting roadways and residential areas. The GO District is appropriate for
application to areas that have been developed with office and research park
uses. It may also be used to accommodate new development proposals that are or
can be served by infrastructure. The GO District is intended to implement the
Regional Framework Plan’s “Office/Research” future land use designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the GO District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the GO District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.8, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.093 LC, LIMITED COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Description. The LC, Limited Commercial District is primarily intended
to accommodate neighborhood-oriented, low-intensity retail sales and service
uses. It is appropriate for application in areas that have been developed with
uses allowed in the district, and it may also be used to accommodate new
development proposals that should be served by all infrastructure and are
compatible with nearby residential uses. The LC District is intended to
implement the Regional Framework Plan’s “Retail/Commercial” land use
designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the LC District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the LC District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.9, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.094 RC, RECREATIONAL COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Description. The RC, Recreational Commercial District is primarily
intended to accommodate commercial activities that are dependent upon locations
near recreational resources, such as lakes. The district also accommodates
retail sales and service and other convenience uses that customarily provide
service near recreational areas. The regulations of the RC District are
intended to encourage maintenance and upkeep of existing commercial recreation
neighborhoods, while ensuring that any new development is of a similar
character and scale. It is not generally intended to be applied to large,
undeveloped parcels. The RC District is intended to implement the Regional
Framework Plan’s “Retail/Commercial” future land use designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the RC District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the RC District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.10, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.095 GC, GENERAL COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Description. The GC, General Commercial District is intended to
accommodate commercial uses. The GC District is not a neighborhood-oriented
district and is not generally appropriate for application within residential
areas. It is intended to be used to accommodate existing commercial uses. It
may also be used to accommodate new development proposals. In all cases, new
development in the GC District should be adequately served by infrastructure.
The GC District is intended to implement the Regional Framework Plan’s “Retail/
Commercial” future land use designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the GC District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the GC District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.11, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.096 LI, LIMITED INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Description. The LI, Limited Industrial District is primarily intended
to accommodate low-intensity industrial uses. It is intended to be used to
accommodate existing low-intensity industrial uses. It may, however, also be
used to accommodate new development proposals in areas that are or can be
adequately served by infrastructure. The LI District is intended to implement
the Regional Framework Plan’s “Industrial” future land use designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the LI District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the LI District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.12, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.097 II, INTENSIVE INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Description. The II, Intensive Industrial District is primarily
intended to accommodate existing heavy industrial uses. It may, however, also
be used to accommodate new development proposals in areas that are adequately
served by infrastructure. The II District is intended to implement the Regional
Framework Plan’s “Industrial” future land use designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the II District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the II District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.13, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.098 OS, OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Description.
      (1)   The OS, Open Space District is primarily intended to accommodate
and protect those lands designated in the Framework Plan as fulfilling local
and regional public open space needs in the county.
      (2)   As such, only those uses that are compatible with or otherwise
support public recreational, resource conservation or other open space purposes
are permitted within the district.
      (3)   The OS District is not intended to accommodate new development but
rather to respond to the regional open space needs generated by a growing
population, as well as to accommodate those uses that by their very nature are
of an open space character, with very low development intensity.
      (4)   The OS District is intended to implement the Regional Framework
Plan’s “Open Space” future land use designation.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the OS District in accordance with the use
table of §
151.111.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the OS District is subject
to the density and dimensional standards of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
(Ord., § 5.14, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.099 GW, GATEWAY.
   (A)   Description. The GW, Gateway Zoning District is intended to implement
Chapter 12 of the Lake County Regional Framework Plan, entitled “Gateway
Economic Development Plan”. The Gateway Economic Development Plan establishes a
long-term vision for high quality economic development that will provide
desirable jobs, a strong tax base, convenient community services, and preserve
the area’s natural resources. The GW, Gateway Zoning District regulations
establish land uses and standards for development of land within the defined
Gateway Economic Development Area as shown on the Future Land Use Map, adopted
by the Lake County Board on February 13, 2007. Applications for rezoning to the
GW, Gateway Zoning District may only be made by landowners within this area;
the GW, Gateway Zoning District is not available elsewhere.
   (B)   Uses. Uses are allowed in the GW, Gateway Zoning District in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.285.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. All development in the GW, Gateway Zoning
District is subject to the standards contained in §
151.285.
(Ord., § 5.15, passed 10-13-2009)
USE REGULATIONS
§ 151.110 USE PERMIT.
   A use permit shall be required prior to the establishment or change of any
use. A use permit may also be obtained to identify a use.
(Ord., § 6.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 151.111 USE TABLE.
   (A)   The Use Table lists the uses allowed within zoning districts.
COMMENTARY:
The Use Table is organized into five major use groups:
         . Residential
         . Public, Civic, and Institutional
         . Retail, Service, and Commercial
         . Industrial
         . Other Uses
Each major use group is further divided into a series of use categories. The
use category system is based on common functional, product, or compatibility
characteristics, thereby regulating uses in accordance with criteria directly
relevant to the public interest. Ordinance users interested in reviewing a more
detailed listing of specific use types should review
Appendix F.
Appendix F will help users identify how specific use types are categorized
under the new use category system of this chapter. Section
151.270 provides a further description of use categories.
 
   (B)   The Zoning Use Table set forth on the following pages lists the uses
allowed within zoning districts.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   A “P” indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective
zoning district.
         (b)   Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations
of this chapter.
      (2)   Conditional uses.
         (a)   A “C” indicates that a use is allowed only if reviewed and
approved as a conditional use, in accordance with the conditional use review
procedures of §
151.050.
         (b)   Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable regulations
of this chapter.
      (3)   Uses not allowed. A blank cell (one without a “P” or “C”) indicates
that a use type is not allowed in the respective zoning district.
      (4)   Use standards.
         (a)   The final “standards” column of the following table contains
references to use standards that apply to the listed use type.
         (b)   The use standards are presented in alphabetical order in §
151.112.
      (5)   Accessory and temporary uses. The regulations that apply to
accessory and temporary uses are contained in §§
151.113 and
151.114.
      (6)   Use categories.
         (a)   All of the use categories listed in the following table are
described in §
151.270.
         (b)   The second column of the use table lists some of the specific
use types included within respective use categories.
         (c)   
Appendix F provides a detailed listing of specific use types and their
assignment to use categories.
Zoning Use Table
                                       Residential                      Nonresidential
Use Category (See § 151.270 for Use   AG RE E R1 R2 R3 R4 R4a R5 R6 RR GO LC RC GC LI II OS Use      CUP
Description)                     Types                                                       Standard Decision
Zoning Use Table
                                                                                                    Residential                       Nonresidential
Use Category (See § 151.270 for Description)         Use Types                                     AG RE E  R1 R2 R3 R4 R4a R5 R6 RR GO LC RC GC LI II OS Use Standard    CUP
                                                                                                                                                                           Decision
                                                      Attached dwelling (attached to nonresidential                                   P  P  P  P           §               
                                                      use)                                                                                                 151.112(I)
                                                      Atrium house1                                                   P  P   P  P                                          
                                                      Cabin or cottage                                                             P        P              §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(J)
                                                      Caretaker’s dwelling unit (accessory use)   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.113(D)
                                                      Duplex2                                                         P  P   P  P                                          
                                                      House, detached                               P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P                                       
Household living (see §                              Lot line house1                                           P  P  P  P   P  P                                          
151.270(C)( 1))                                       Mobile home park                                                       C  C  C                       §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(NN)
                                                      Multi-dwelling structure                                               P  P                                          
                                                      Multiplex2                                                      P  P   P  P                                          
                                                      Patio house1                                                    P  P   P  P                                          
                                                      Townhouse2                                                      P  P   P  P                                          
                                                      Twinhouse2                                                      P  P   P  P                                          
                                                      Village house1                                            P  P  P  P   P  P                                          
                                                      Accessory dwelling unit (accessory use)       P  P  P  P                                             §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.113(D)
Assisted living (see §                                                                            C  C  C  C  C  C  C  P   P  P  P                       §              ZBA
151.270(D)(1))                                                                                                                                             151.112(G)
College (see §                                                                                    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  P  P  P  P  P  P                    Co Bd
151.270(D)(2))
Community service (see §                             Government use (no assembly space)            P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                  
151.270(D)(3))
                                                      Government use (10,000 sq. ft. or less of     P  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §              ZBA
                                                      assembly space)                                                                                      151.112(AA)
                                                      Government use (more than 10,000 sq. ft. of   P  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §              Co Bd
                                                      assembly space)                                                                                      151.112(AA)
                                                      Community service not otherwise classified          C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  P  P  P  P  C                 ZBA
Day care (see §                                                                                   P     C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  P  P  P  P  P  P     §              ZBA
151.270(D)(4))                                                                                                                                             151.112(Q)
Ecotherapy Facilities (see §                                                                      C  C  C                                             C  §              ZBA
151.270(D)(5))                                                                                                                                             151.112(T)
Group living (see §                                                                                                    C   P  P  P                       §               
151.270(D)(5))                                                                                                                                             151.112(BB)
Hospital (see §                                                                                                                     P     P  P  P  P                     
151.270(D)(6))
                                                      Noncommercial park, public open land,         P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                  
                                                      community park, or nature preserve
Parks and open space (see §                          Golf course                                   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P     P           P  §               
151.270(D)(7))                                                                                                                                             151.112(X)
                                                      Cemetery, mausoleum                           C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C                    C  §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(L)
                                                      Parks and open space not otherwise classified P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                  
                                                      Religious institutions (no assembly space)    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(UU)
Religious institutions (see §                        Religious institutions (10,000 sq. ft. or     P  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  P  P  P  P  P  P     §              ZBA
151.270(D)(8))                                        less of assembly space)                                                                              151.112(UU)
                                                      Religious institutions (more than 10,000 sq.  P  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  P  P  P  P  P  P     §              Co Bd
                                                      ft. of assembly space)                                                                               151.112(UU)
School (see §                                                                                     P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                        
151.270(D)(9))
School, private (see §                                                                            C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  P  P  P  P  P                       ZBA
151.270(D)(10))
                                                      Electrical generation plants (all, public or                                                         §
Utility, major (see §                                private)                                                                                    C  C     151.112(V) §   Co Bd
151.270(D)(11))                                                                                                                                            151.112(AAA)
                                                      Major utilities not otherwise classified      C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(AAA)
                                                      Accessory building-mounted                    P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.113(P)
Wind energy facilities                                Accessory tower-mounted                       C3 C3 C3 C  C  C  C  C3  C  C  C  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §              ZBA
                                                                                                             3  3  3  3      3  3  3                       151.113(P)
                                                      Commercial                                    C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(DDD)
                                                      Adult-use Cannabis Dispensary                                                            C  C  C     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(A)
                                                      Adult-use Cannabis Craft Grower                                                          C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(A)
                                                      Adult-use Cannabis Processing Center                                                     C  P  P     §              ZBA
Adult-Use Cannabis Facilities                                                                                                                              151.112(A)
                                                      Adult-use Cannabis Infuser                                                               C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(A)
                                                      Adult-use Cannabis Cultivation Center                                                       C  C     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(A)
                                                      Adult-use Cannabis Transporter                                                           C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(A)
Entertainment event, major (see §                                                                                                         C              §              Co Bd
151.270(E)(1))                                                                                                                                             151.112(S)
                                                      Bus parking                                                                              C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(CC)
                                                      Commercial service-oriented industrial sales                                             C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                      and service not otherwise classified                                                                 151.112(CC)
                                                      Contractor’s equipment sales or storage                                                P  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                      (indoor)                                                                                             151.112(CC)
                                                      Contractor’s equipment sales or storage                                                C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                      (outdoor)                                                                                            151.112(CC)
                                                      Feed and grain sales                          P                                          P  P  P     §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(CC)
Industrial sales and service (see §                  General industrial sales and service not                                                    P  P     §               
151.270(F)(1))                                        otherwise classified                                                                                 151.112(CC)
                                                                                                                                                           §
                                                      Junk yard                                                                                      P     151.112(CC) §   
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(DD)
                                                                                                                                                           §
                                                      Landscape contractor’s storage yard         C                                          C  P  P     151.112(FF) §  ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(CC)
                                                      Petroleum or chemical refining/production                                                   C  C     §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(QQ)
                                                      Truck/trailer parking                                                                    C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(CC)
Office (see §                                        Offices for non-retail nurseries              C  C  C                           P  P  P  P  P  P  C  §              ZBA
151.270(S)(2))                                                                                                                                             151.112(PP)
                                                      Offices not otherwise classified                                                P  P  P  P  P  P                     
Parking, commercial (see §                                                                                                                P  P  P  P     §               
151.270(E)(3))                                                                                                                                             151.112(O)
                                                      Amusement park                                                                        C  C        P  §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(F)
                                                      Camps                                         C                              C  C     P           P  §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(K)
                                                      Golf driving range                                                                    P  P  P  P     §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(Y)
                                                      Marina                                                                                P                              
Recreation and entertainme nt, outdoor (see §        Model airplane club                           C                                       C           C  §              Co Bd
151.270(E)(4))                                                                                                                                             151.112(OO)
                                                      Entertainment- oriented Animal Exhibition                                             C              §              Co Bd
                                                      Facility                                                                                             151.112(U)
                                                      Racetrack, motor vehicle/ moto-cross/BMX/ go-                                         C              §              Co Bd
                                                      cart                                                                                                 151.112(RR)
                                                      Shooting range (outdoor)                      C                                       C           C  §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(YY)
                                                      Outdoor recreation and entertainment not      C                                       P  P  P  P  C                 Co Bd
                                                      otherwise classified
                                                      Adult entertainment establishment                                                        P  P  P     §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(B)
                                                      Antique sales                                                                   C  P  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      Art gallery                                                                     C  P  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
Retail sales and service (see §                      Bicycle shop                                                                    C  P  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
151.270(E)(5))                                        Boat sales/rental/storage/ service                                                    P  C  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      Casino/commercial watercraft                                                          C           C  §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(M)
                                                      Consumer vehicle sales/rental (e.g., cars,                                               C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                      pickup trucks, SUVs, motorcycles) (outdoor)                                                          151.112(O)
                                                      Consumer vehicle sales/rental (e.g., cars,                                               P  P  P                     
                                                      pickup trucks, SUVs, motorcycles) (indoor)
                                                      Crematorium                                                                              P  P  P     §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(P)
                                                      Drive-in theater                                                                      C              §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(S)
                                                      Furniture repair, cleaning or refinishing                                                   P  P                     
                                                      Garden center                                                                            P  P  P                     
                                                      Gift shop                                                                       C  P  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      Greenhouse/nursery, retail                    C                                          P  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(Z)
                                                      Health club                                                                     C  P  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      Hotels and motels                                                               P  C  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      Ice cream shop                                                                  P  P  P  P  P  P                     
                                                      Kennels, animal shelter/obedience school      P                                          P  P  P     §               
                                                      (without outdoor runs)                                                                               151.112(EE)
                                                      Kennels, animal shelter/obedience school      C                                          C  C  C     §              ZBA
                                                      (with outdoor runs)                                                                                  151.112(EE)
                                                      Lumber and building material sales                                                       P  P  P                     
                                                      Medical cannabis dispensary                                                              P  P  P     §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(LL)
                                                      Office equipment and supplies                                                   P  P  C  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      Photocopy, blueprint services                                                   P  P  C  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                     Recreational vehicle sales                                                            P  C  P  P     §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(O)
                                                     Restaurant or coffee shop                                                       P  P  P  P  P  P                     
                                                      Recreational vehicle park                                                             C              §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(SS)
                                                      Sporting goods store                                                            C  P  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      Veterinary clinic                             P                                       P  P  P  P                     
                                                      General retail sales and service not                                            C  C  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      otherwise classified
                                                      Neighborhood-oriented retail sales and                                          C4 P  C4 P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      service not otherwise classified
                                                      Recreational-oriented retail sales and                                          C  C  P  P  P  P                    ZBA
                                                      service not otherwise classified
Rural business (see §                                Rural business (on sites of 200,000 sq. ft.   P     C  C                                             §              ZBA
151.270(G)(4))                                        or more)5                                     5                                                      151.112(VV)
Self-service storage (see §                                                                                                                  C  P  P                    ZBA
151.270(E)(6))
Vehicle repair (see §                                                                                                                        C  P  P     §              ZBA
151.270(E)(7))                                                                                                                                             151.112(BBB)
Vehicle service, limited (see §                                                                                                           P  C  P  P     §              ZBA
151.270(E)(8))                                                                                                                                             151.112(WW)
                                                      Asphalt, concrete or redi-mix plant                                                         C  C     §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(H)
                                                      Boat construction                                                                           P  P     §               
Manufacturing and production (see §                                                                                                                       151.112(CC)
151.270(F)(2))                                        Manufacturing and production not otherwise                                                  P  P     §               
                                                      classified                                                                                           151.112(CC)
                                                      Medical cannabis cultivation centers                                                        P  P     §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(KK)
                                                      Warehousing and freight movement not                                                        P  P     §               
                                                      otherwise classified                                                                                 151.112(CC)
                                                      Dredging material stockpiling and processing  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  P  P  C  §              ZBA
Warehousing and freight movement                                                                                                                           151.112(R)
                                                      Major fill/grade operations10                                                               C  C     §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(JJ)
                                                      Minor fill/grade operations                   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.113(W)
                                                                                                                                                           §
                                                      Landscape waste composting facilities         C                                             C  C  C  151.112(FF) §  Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(CC)
                                                                                                                                                           §
                                                      Landscape waste transfer station                                                            C  C     151.112(HH) §  Co Bd
Waste-related use (see §                                                                                                                                  151.112(CC)
151.270(F)(4))                                                                                                                                             §
                                                      Recycling center                                                                         C  C  P     151.112(TT) §  Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(CC)
                                                      Construction and demolition recycling                                                       C  C     §              ZBA
                                                      facilities                                                                                           151.112(N)
                                                      Waste-related use not otherwise classified                                                     C     §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(CC)
Wholesale sales (see §                                                                                                                       C  P  P     §              Co Bd
151.270(F)(5))                                                                                                                                             151.112(CC)
                                                      Agricultural supplier’s storage and service C                                          C  P  P     §              Co Bd
                                                      center                                                                                               151.112(C)
                                                      Apiary (on lots 200,000 sq. ft. or more)      P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(D)
                                                      Apiary (accessory use on lots less than       P  P  P  P  P  P  P                                 P  §               
                                                      200,000 sq. ft.)                                                                                     151.112(D)
Agriculture (see §                                   Crop raising (sites of less than 200,000 sq.  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                  
151.270(G)(1))                                        ft.)
                                                      Forestry                                      C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  §              Co Bd
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(W)
                                                      Local food garden                             P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(II)
                                                      Stable, private (accessory use)               P  P  P  P                                             §               
                                                                                                                                                           151.113(G)
                                                      Stable (sites of 200,000 sq. ft. or more)     P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                  
                                                      Agricultural education6,7 (accessory use to a
                                                      principal agricultural use on sites of        P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                  
                                                      200,000 sq. ft.)
                                                      Agriculture uses not otherwise classified (on P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                  
                                                      sites of 200,000 sq. ft. or more)
                                                      Airport                                       C                                 C     C  C  C  C  C  §              Co Bd
Aviation and surface transportation facility (see §                                                                                                       151.112(E)
151.270(G)(2))                                        Bus terminal                                                                             C  P  P                    Co Bd
                                                      Heliport                                      C                                 C     C  C  C  C  C  §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(E)
                                                                                                                                                           §
Floodplain/ wetland development /fill                                                              P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  151.148(A)       
                                                                                                                                                           §
                                                                                                                                                           151.148(B)
Mining (see §                                        Mining and resource extraction                C                                             C  C     §              Co Bd
151.270(G)(3))                                                                                                                                             151.112(MM)
Telecommunication facilities (see §                                                               P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §               
151.270(G)(4))                                                                                                                                             151.112(ZZ)
                                                      Principal use                                 C  C  C  C  C  C  C      C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  §              ZBA
Wildlife rehabilitation                                                                                                                                    151.112(CCC)
                                                      Accessory residential use                     C  C  C  C                                             §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.113(O)
                                                      Solar energy system, commercial               C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.112(XX)
                                                      Solar energy system, accessory large-scale8   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  P  P  C  §              ZBA
Solar energy systems                                                                                                                                       151.113(U)
                                                      Solar energy system, accessory medium-scale8  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C   C  C  C  C  C  C  C  P  P  C  §              ZBA
                                                                                                                                                           151.113(U)
                                                      Solar energy system, accessory small-scale8,  C9 C9 C9 C9 C9 C9 C9 C9  C9 C9 C9 P  P  P  P  P  P  P  §              ZBA
                                                      9                                                                                                    151.113(U)
1   Such dwelling types shall be permitted only within conservation residential development.
2    Such dwelling types shall be permitted only within conservation residential development in the R-4 Zoning District, and within conservation and conventional residential
development in the R-5 and R-6 Zoning Districts.
3   However, tower-mounted wind energy facilities on residentially used or zoned parcels shall be permitted by right up to the height of: a) 45 feet on parcels less than 40,000
square feet, b) 75 feet on parcels 40,000 to 200,000 square feet, and c) 100 feet on parcels greater than 200,000 square feet.
4   Such uses shall be allowed by right as accessory uses.
5   A conditional use permit shall be required for outside storage of material or equipment in excess of 10% of the site.
6   Agricultural education (accessory use to a principal agricultural use on sites of 200,000 sq. ft).
7   Commentary: The inclusion of commercial activities may result in this use being considered an event of public interest and becoming subject to temporary use or conditional use
provisions of this chapter.
8   Accessory use ground-mounted solar energy systems of all sizes (small, medium, or large) shall be permitted in all zoning districts for those institutional, commercial, or
industrial uses with campuses comprised of 5 acres or more.
9   Accessory small-scale solar energy systems that meet the exceptions of §
151.113(U)(1)(c)(1) shall not require a conditional use permit.
10   Projects involving the importation of up to 500 cubic yards of soil fill per acre, provided total fill volume is 10,000 cubic yards or less, are permitted by right in all
zoning districts.
 
(Ord., § 6.2, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -; Ord. 15-0701, passed 7-14-
2015; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 21-0744, passed 5-11-2021; Ord. 22-
1356, passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-
12-2024)
§ 151.112 USE STANDARDS.
   Unless otherwise noted, the use standards of this section apply to
respective use types whether they are allowed as permitted uses, conditional
uses, or accessory uses.
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis facilities.
      Preface. It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide zoning
regulations of facilities that dispense, grow, process, infuse, cultivate and
transport adult-use cannabis within unincorporated Lake County as allowed by
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 (Act). Certain provisions of
the Act are referenced in the section as “Commentary”. This section is not
intended to occupy any regulatory field over which the State of Illinois was
granted jurisdiction under the Act and all facilities shall comply with the
regulations provided in the Act. The Act may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder, and it is the intent of this section to be
read in conjunction with any amendments to the Act and regulations promulgated.
Pursuant to § 55-256 of the Act, any conflict between the Act and this section
shall be resolved in favor of the Act. Approved business establishments shall
not commence operations until an adult use license has been procured from the
appropriate state authority per the Act.
      (1)   Adult-use cannabis dispensary.
         (a)   The use shall be subject to site capacity/site plan review
procedures of §
151.070.
         (b)   Adult-use cannabis dispensaries proposed within certain zoning
districts shall comply with the general development standards as specified
within this code. These standards shall include separation from protected uses,
setbacks, buffering, parking, signage, outdoor lighting, site layout, access,
hours of operation, exterior displays, advertising, and security. Approval of
site capacity/site plan review may be obtained concurrently at the time of any
required conditional use permit.
         (c)   Applicant shall install building enhancements, such as security
cameras, lighting, or other improvements, as set forth in the conditional use
permit, to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the dispensary.
These improvements shall be determined based on the specific characteristics of
the dispensary floor plan and the building site.
 
COMMENTARY:
All dispensaries shall comply with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
ILCS 705) and all rules and regulations adopted in accordance thereto.
 
         (d)   Dimensional standards.
            1.   Minimum distance from protected uses. No adult-use cannabis
dispensary shall be established, maintained, or operated on any lot that has a
property line within 250 feet of the property line of a pre-existing forest
preserve property or an area zoned for residential use; within 500 feet of the
property line of a pre-existing daycare center, day care home, or residential
care home, college, hospital, park, or library; or within 1,000 feet of a
public or private nursery school, preschool, primary, or secondary school.
Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a
public or private school for purposes of this section. In all cases, the buffer
shall be measured from the closest portion of the buffered property outside of
areas considered unbuildable, practically inaccessible or otherwise unusable by
occupants for the “sensitive use” due to the presence of protected natural
resources such as wetlands, non-navigable water bodies, or other impassable/
unbuildable natural features. For forest preserve property, the determination
of applicable properties shall be made after consultation with forest preserve
staff to account for current or future plans for improvements of structures
within sensitive areas that would allow areas to be accessible or usable.
            2.   Measurement. For the purposes of the minimum distances
section, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line
of the lot on which an applicable dispensary is located to the nearest point on
any property line of any protected use.
            3.   Setbacks. Each adult-use cannabis dispensary shall be a
minimum of 30 feet from its surrounding property lines.
            4.   Each dispensary shall be a minimum of 1,500 feet from all
other dispensaries, as measured from the applicable property lines.
         (e)   Parking.
            1.   For purposes of determining required parking, dispensary
applicants shall submit a parking plan for review and approval that includes
estimates of parking demand based on the following:
               A.   Phase 1 Parking Plan. Denote adequate parking supply based
on peak demand during initial opening (minimum three-month period).
               B.   Phase 2 Parking Plan. Denote adequate parking supply based
on peak demand during normal operations commencing after the conclusion of
Phase 1.
               Peak demand shall be determined by analysis of reliable data
collected from similar uses. The parking plan shall specifically address the
unique operational needs of the business and include a parking narrative and
traffic management plan that provides site-specific details addressing traffic
circulation, stacking, queuing, etc.
            2.   Visibility and security. Parking shall be located in an area
which is visible from a public road or a private road that is accessible to the
public. It cannot be screened from the roadway with vegetation, fencing, or
other obstructions. Parking areas shall be well lit and monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by dispensary staff and
are continually recorded in a tamper-proof format.
         (f)   Exterior display. No dispensary shall be maintained or operated
in a manner that causes, creates, or allows the public viewing of adult-use
cannabis, adult-use cannabis infused products, or cannabis paraphernalia or
similar products from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way or any
property other than the lot on which the dispensary is located. No portion of
the exterior of the dispensary shall utilize or contain any flashing lights,
search lights, or spotlights or any similar lighting system.
         (g)   Signage.
            1.   All commercial signage for a dispensary shall be limited to
one flat wall sign not to exceed ten square feet in area, and one identifying
sign, not to exceed two square feet in area, which may only include the
dispensary address; such signs shall not be directly illuminated. Exterior
signs on the dispensary building shall not obstruct the entrance or windows on
the dispensary.
            2.   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not
permitted in connection with a dispensary.
 
COMMENTARY:
Signage and advertising shall comply with the rules and regulations set forth
in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705), including the following:
Signage shall not contain cannabis imagery such as cannabis leaves, plants,
smoke, paraphernalia, or cartoonish imagery oriented towards youth or language
referencing cannabis.
Advertising: No cannabis dispensary nor any other person or entity shall place
or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, an advertisement of cannabis
or a cannabis-infused product in any form or through any medium: Within 1,000
feet of the perimeter of school grounds, a playground, a recreation center or
facility, a childcare center, a public park or public library, or a game arcade
to which admission is not restricted to persons 21 years of age or older; On or
in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter; On or in publicly owned
or publicly operated property.
 
 
COMMENTARY: AGE AND ACCESS LIMITATIONS:
Each dispensary shall prohibit any person who is not at least twenty-one (21)
years of age from entering the dispensary facility, except for cardholders
granted medical access under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Act over
18 years of age. Dispensaries shall not employ anyone under the age of twenty-
one (21). Access to the dispensary facility shall be limited exclusively to
dispensary staff and those specifically authorized under the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705).
 
         (h)   Operational standards.
            1.   A dispensary may operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:
00 p.m. local time.
            2.   At least 75% of the floor area of any tenant space occupied by
a dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the dispensing
organization as authorized by the Act, and no dispensing organization shall
sell food for consumption on the premises. Facility may not conduct any sales
or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
            3.   Dispensaries may not have a drive-through service.
         (i)   Security and video surveillance.
            1.   Each dispensary shall be an enclosed locked facility. Each
dispensary shall provide and maintain adequate security on the entire property
on which the dispensary exists, including lighting, video surveillance,
security personnel, and alarms reasonably designed to ensure the safety of
persons and to protect the site from theft.
            2.   The dispensary parking area, client entrance, sales area, back
room, storage areas, delivery bay, and entrance shall be monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by dispensary staff and
continually recorded in a tamper-proof format.
            3.   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes
the following language “This area is under live/recorded video surveillance to
aid in the prosecution of any crimes committed against this facility or its
patrons”.
            4.   The Planning Building and Development Director shall review
the adequacy of lighting, security, and video surveillance installations with
assistance from local law enforcement officials. The Director has the
discretion to conduct periodic review of security features as appropriate.
            5.   Each dispensary shall report all criminal activities occurring
on the property to the applicable law enforcement agency immediately upon
discovery.
            6.   Deliveries shall occur between 7:00 a.m. local time and 9:00
p.m. local time within a secure enclosed delivery bay and shall not be visible
from the exterior of the facility.
 
COMMENTARY:
Adult-use cannabis dispensary facilities shall comply with all applicable
security-related standards set in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705).
 
         (j)   On-site consumption. On-site consumption of cannabis products
shall be prohibited at retail tobacco stores, adult-use cannabis dispensaries,
and on sites occupied by a dispensary or retail tobacco store.
 
COMMENTARY: A retail tobacco store is a retail establishment engaged in the
sale of tobacco and other plants and products as defined in the Smoke Free
Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82).
 
   (2)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower, processing center, infuser,
cultivation center.
      (a)   The use shall be subject to site capacity/site plan review
procedures of §
151.070.
      (b)   Adult-use cannabis craft growers, processing centers, infusers, or
cultivation centers (support organization) proposed within certain zoning
districts shall comply with the general development standards as specified
within this code. These standards shall include dimensional standards, parking,
signage, access, security, and noxious odors. Approval of site capacity/site
plan review may be obtained concurrently at the time of any required
conditional use permit.
      (c)   For adult-use craft growers, processing centers, and infusers
permitted by right within certain zoning districts:
         1.   The use shall require a public information meeting noticed in
accordance with §
151.045(G)(2)(a).
         2.   Staff shall be authorized to impose additional reasonable
conditions related to the construction, layout, or operation of the proposed
use designed to provide additional mitigation of impacts to the surrounding
land uses or area. Such conditions shall not be in conflict with state
regulations or have the effect of practically preventing the establishment of
the use at the proposed location.
 
COMMENTARY:
Applicants are encouraged but not required to incorporate environmentally
sustainable construction and site features including, but not limited to:
carbon neutrality and alternative energy use, low impact development site and
parking design, bird-safe building design, water savings, sustainable
construction materials selection, and other environmentally sustainable
features.
 
 
COMMENTARY:
Each support organization shall comply with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
(410 ILCS 705) and all rules and regulations adopted in accordance thereto.
 
         (d)   Dimensional standards.
            1.   Minimum distance from protected uses. No support organizations
shall be established, maintained, or operated on any lot that has a property
line within 250 feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private
nursery school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day
care home or residential care home, park (including forest preserve property),
hospital, library, or an area zoned for residential use. Learning centers and
vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school
for purposes of this section. In all cases, the buffer shall be measured from
the closest portion of the buffered property outside of areas considered
unbuildable, practically inaccessible or otherwise unusable by occupants for
the “sensitive use” due to the presence of protected natural resources such as
wetlands, non-navigable water bodies, or other impassable/unbuildable natural
features. For forest preserve property, the determination of applicable
properties shall be made after consultation with forest preserve staff to
account for current or future plans for improvements of structures within
sensitive areas that would allow areas to be accessible or usable.
            2.   Measurement. For the purposes of the minimum distance
sections, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects from the nearest point on the property line
of the lot on which an applicable support organization is located to the
nearest point on a property line of any protected use.
            3.   Setbacks. Each support organization shall be a minimum of 30
feet from its surrounding property lines.
         (e)   Parking.
            1.   Required spaces. For purposes of determining required parking,
support organizations shall be classified as “manufacturing and production”
which requires 2.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
area.
            2.   Visibility and security. Parking areas shall be well lit and
monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by
support organization staff and are continually recorded in a tamper-proof
format.
            3.   The electronic security system shall be available 24 hours per
day, and seven days per week to the Department and law enforcement agencies via
a secure web-based portal.
         (f)   Signage.
            1.   All commercial signage for support organizations shall be
limited to one flat wall sign not to exceed ten square feet in area, and one
identifying sign, not to exceed two square feet in area, which may only include
the support organization address. Such signs shall not be directly illuminated.
            2.   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not
permitted in connection with a support organization.
 
COMMENTARY:
All applicable advertising regulations set forth in the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act (410 ILCS 705) shall apply, including the following: signage shall not
contain cannabis imagery such as cannabis leaves, plants, smoke, paraphernalia,
or cartoonish imagery oriented towards youth or language referencing cannabis.
 
 
COMMENTARY: AGE AND ACCESS LIMITATIONS:
Each support organization shall prohibit any person who is not at least twenty-
one (21) years of age from entering the support organization property. Support
organizations shall not employ anyone under the age twenty-one (21). Access to
the support organization site shall be limited exclusively to support
organization staff, local, and state officials and those specifically
authorized under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705).
 
         (g)   Operational standards.
            1.   Infuser. At least 75% of the floor area of any tenant space
occupied by an infusing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the
infusing organization as authorized by the Act. Facility may not conduct any
sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
            2.   Processor. At least 75% of the floor area of any tenant space
occupied by a processing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the
processing organization as authorized by the Act. Facility may not conduct any
sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
         (h)   Security and video surveillance.
            1.   All manufacturing, production, and related operations at a
support organization shall occur in an enclosed locked facility. Each support
organization shall provide and maintain adequate security on the entire site on
which the support organization sits, including lighting, video surveillance,
security personnel and alarms reasonably designed to ensure the safety of
persons and to protect the site from theft. The facility shall be enclosed by
high security fence or wall. The fence or wall must be adequately secure to
prevent unauthorized entry and include gates tied into an access control
system.
               2.   The support organization parking, cultivation and
warehousing areas, shipping bays, and entrance shall be monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by support organization
staff and continually recorded in a tamper-proof format.
               3.   The electronic security system shall be available 24 hours
per day, and seven days per week to the Department and law enforcement agencies
via a secure web-based portal.
            4.   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes
the following language; “THESE PREMISES ARE UNDER CONSTANT VIDEO SURVEILLANCE”.
            5.   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall review
the adequacy of lighting, security, and video surveillance installations with
assistance from local law enforcement officials. The Director has the
discretion to conduct periodic review of security features as appropriate.
            6.   Loading of product shall occur within secure enclosed shipping
bays and shall not be visible from the exterior of the facility.
 
COMMENTARY:
Adult-Use cannabis support facilities shall comply with all applicable
security-related standards set in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705).
 
         (i)   Noxious odors. All support organizations shall operate in a
manner that prevents odor impacts on neighboring premises or properties and, if
necessary, the facility shall be ventilated with a system for odor control.
         (j)   Conduct on site.
            1.   A support organization may not sell or distribute any cannabis
to any individual or entity other than a dispensary organization registered
under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705).
            2.   It shall be prohibited to consume cannabis products in a
support organization or anywhere on the site occupied by the support
organization. A sign, at least 8.5 by 11 inches, shall be posted inside a
support organization building in a conspicuous place visible to staff and shall
include the following language: “Smoking, eating, drinking, or other forms of
consumption of cannabis products is prohibited on support organization
property”.
      (3)   Adult-use cannabis transporter.
         (a)   The use shall be subject to site capacity/site plan review
procedures of §
151.070.
         (b)   Adult-use cannabis transporters proposed within certain zoning
districts shall comply with the general development standards as specified
within this code. These standards shall include dimensional standards, parking,
signage, access, security, and noxious odors. Approval of site capacity/site
plan review may be obtained concurrently at the time of any required
conditional use permit.
 
COMMENTARY:
Each transporter organization shall comply with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act (410 ILCS 705) and all rules and regulations adopted in accordance thereto.
 
         (c)   Dimensional standards. Setbacks: Each transporter organization
shall be a minimum of 30 feet from its surrounding property lines.
         (d)   Parking.
            1.   For purposes of determining required parking, transporter
organizations shall be classified as “warehousing and freight movement” which
requires one off-street parking space per employee.
            2.   Visibility and security. Parking areas shall be well lit and
monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by
support organization staff and are continually recorded in a tamper-proof
format.
            3.   The electronic security system shall be available 24 hours per
day and seven days per week to the Department and law enforcement agencies via
a secure web-based portal.
         (e)   Signage.
            1.   All commercial signage for transporter organizations shall be
limited to one flat wall sign not to exceed ten square feet in area, and one
identifying sign, not to exceed two square feet in area, which may only include
the support organization address. Such signs shall not be directly illuminated.
            2.   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not
permitted in connection with a transporter organization.
 
COMMENTARY:
All applicable advertising regulations set forth in the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act (410 ILCS 705) shall apply, including the following: signage shall not
contain cannabis imagery such as cannabis leaves, plants, smoke, paraphernalia,
or cartoonish imagery oriented towards youth or language referencing cannabis.
 
 
COMMENTARY: AGE AND ACCESS LIMITATIONS:
Each transporter organization shall prohibit any person who is not at least
twenty-one (21) years of age from entering the support organization property.
Transporter organizations shall not employ anyone under the age twenty-one
(21). Access to the transporter organization site shall be limited exclusively
to support organization staff, local, and state officials and those
specifically authorized under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705).
 
         (f)   Security and video surveillance.
            1.   All operations at a transporter organization shall occur in an
enclosed locked facility. Each transporter organization shall provide and
maintain adequate security on the entire site on which the support organization
sits, including lighting, video surveillance, security personnel and alarms
reasonably designed to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the site
from theft. The facility shall be enclosed by high security fence or wall. The
fence or wall must be adequately secure to prevent unauthorized entry and
include gates tied into an access control system.
            2.   The transporter organization parking and warehousing areas and
shipping bays and entrance shall be monitored by video surveillance equipment
whose live images can be viewed by support organization staff and continually
recorded in a tamper-proof format.
            3.   The electronic security system shall be available 24 hours per
day, and seven days per week to the Department and law enforcement agencies via
a secure web-based portal.
            4.   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes
the following language: “THESE PREMISES ARE UNDER CONSTANT VIDEO SURVEILLANCE”.
            5.   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall review
the adequacy of lighting, security, and video surveillance installations with
assistance from local law enforcement officials. The Director has the
discretion to conduct periodic review of security features as appropriate.
            6.   Loading of product shall occur within secure enclosed shipping
bays and shall not be visible from the exterior of the facility.
 
COMMENTARY:
Adult-Use cannabis transporter facilities shall comply with all applicable
security-related standards set in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705).
 
         (g)   Noxious odors. All transporter organizations shall operate in a
manner that prevents odor impacts on neighboring premises or properties and, if
necessary, the facility shall be ventilated with a system for odor control.
         (h)   Conduct on site.
            1.   A transporter organization may not sell or distribute any
cannabis to any individual or entity other than a dispensary organization
registered under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705).
            2.   It shall be prohibited to consume cannabis products in a
transporter organization or anywhere on the site occupied by the support
organization. A sign, at least 8.5 by 11 inches, shall be posted inside a
support organization building in a conspicuous place visible to staff and shall
include the following language: “Smoking, eating, drinking, or other forms of
consumption of cannabis products is prohibited on support organization
property”.
   (B)   Adult entertainment establishment (retail sales and service,
entertainment-oriented use category).
      (1)   Minimum distance from other adult entertainment establishments. No
adult entertainment establishment shall be established, maintained, or operated
on any lot that has a property line within 1,000 feet of the property line of
any other lot on which any other adult entertainment establishment is
established, maintained, or operated.
      (2)   Minimum distance from protected uses.  No adult entertainment
establishment shall be established, maintained, or operated on any lot that has
a property line within 1,000 feet of the property line of any other lot on
which a protected use is established, maintained, or operated.
      (3)   Minimum distance from residential property. No adult entertainment
establishment shall be located, established, maintained, or operated on any lot
that has a property line within 250 feet of the property line of any
residential property.
      (4)   Measurement. For the purposes of this subsection (B), distances
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the
adult entertainment establishment is located to the nearest point on any
property line of a residential property or any lot on which a protected use or
other adult entertainment establishment is located, as the case may be.
      (5)   Limited exception for subsequent protected uses and residential
property. An adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating under this
chapter and under the Lake County Adult Entertainment Establishment Licensing
Ordinance (see Chapter 113) shall not be deemed to be in violation of the
location restrictions set forth in this subsection (B) solely because a
protected use subsequently locates within the minimum required distance of the
adult entertainment establishment, or when any other lot or tract within the
required minimum distance of the adult entertainment establishment subsequently
becomes residential property. This subsection (B)(5) shall not apply to an
adult entertainment establishment at a time when an application for an “adult
entertainment license” under the Adult Entertainment Establishment Licensing
Ordinance for that establishment is submitted after the license has previously
expired, has been revoked, or is at that time under suspension.
   (C)   Agricultural supplier storage and service center (agriculture use
category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall have a minimum area of 200,000 square feet and a
minimum lot width of 300 feet.
      (3)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (4)   All buildings shall be set back at least 30 feet from all lot
lines.
      (5)   All permanent bulk storage tanks shall be set back at least 150
feet from any street or adjoining property line.
      (6)   All trucks, tractors, portable storage tanks, and trailored or
motorized agricultural implements shall be screened from view of adjacent
streets and residential zoning districts.
      (7)   The conditional use permit shall establish reasonable standards to
prevent contamination of water resources due to spillage or leakage of
chemicals, fuels, and other products that are stored on-site. The conditional
use permit process shall also consider the possibility of accidental explosion
in establishing the standards.
      (8)   Sales shall be primarily to serve the agricultural community.
   (D)   Agriculture (agriculture use category).
      (1)   Exempt uses. Uses that qualify for an agricultural exemption under
state statutes shall be subject to the standards of this subsection (D).
         (a)   A site plan shall be submitted at the time of application
showing existing and proposed structures and uses.
         (b)   The minimum lot area shall be 200,000 square feet.
         (c)   Minimum setbacks shall be as follows:
 
 
Street: 30 feet
Side:   30 feet
Rear:   50 feet
 
 
COMMENTARY:
Notwithstanding the setback requirements contained in subsection (D)(1)(c),
pastures enclosing an undivided area of at least 40,000 square feet may extend
to the lot line. All other fenced enclosures must meet the setbacks provided in
this subsection (D)(1)(c). On parcels eligible for the statutory agricultural
exemption there shall be no limit under this chapter on the number of farm
animals.
 
      (2)   Non-exempt uses. Uses that do not qualify for an agricultural
exemption under state statutes shall be subject to the standards of this
subsection (D)(2).
         (a) Non-exempt agricultural uses may be subject to the site capacity
calculation/site plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
         (b)   Minimum setbacks shall be as follows:
 
Street: 30 feet
Side:   30 feet
Rear:   50 feet
 
         (c)   No farm animals, other than equine or chickens or beekeeping as
an accessory use to a principal agricultural use, shall be kept on zoning lots
of less than 200,000 square feet in area.
         (d)   Standards for non-exempt apiaries shall be subject to conditions
provided in §
151.113(R).
   (E)   Airport/heliport (aviation and surface transportation use categories).
      (1)   The use may be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   Documentation shall be submitted showing that the site complies
with all applicable state and federal requirements.
      (3)   Setbacks, landscaping and fencing appropriate to the specific
nature of the use proposed shall be established during the conditional use
permit review process.
      (4)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (5)   All areas proposed for active use, including fuel storage areas,
shall be fenced.
      (6)   Takeoff and landing facilities shall be located so as to minimize
the impact on existing and proposed residential areas.
   (F)   Amusement park (recreation and entertainment, outdoor use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The minimum site area shall be 200,000 square feet.
      (3)   The site shall be located and designed to minimize adverse impacts
on adjacent uses.
      (4)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
   (G)   Assisted living (assisted living use category).
      (1)   Assisted living may or may not include 24-hour caregivers onsite.
      (2)   Assisted living uses may be subject to the site capacity
calculation/site plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (3)   The assisted living structure shall contain a common food
preparation area and may contain individual kitchenettes for occupants.
   (H)   Asphalt, concrete, redi-mix, rock and concrete crushing plants
(manufacturing and production use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall be a minimum of 200,000 square feet in size.
      (3)   The times of operation may be specified as part of the conditional
use permit.
      (4)   All internal roads shall be maintained in a dust-free condition.
The main road from which access is taken shall always be kept free of dust,
dirt, mud and other debris. The access drive from the site shall be paved with
a surface of asphalt or concrete for a distance of at least 50 feet from the
right-of-way of the public road from which access is taken. Provisions shall
also be made to remove dust, dirt, mud, or other debris from the vehicles
before they leave the site.
      (5)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (6)   All activity areas, including driveways and on-site roads, shall be
set back at least 1,000 feet from any residential zoning district or lot
containing a residential use.
   (I)   Attached dwellings (household living use category).
      (1)   Attached dwelling units shall be subordinate in area to the
principal (nonresidential) use occupying the same building.
      (2)   The following minimum gross site area shall be required:
         (a)   Eight thousand, five hundred square feet for the first dwelling
unit;
         (b)   Plus 5,000 square feet for the second dwelling unit; and
         (c)   Plus 3,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
      (3)   In calculating minimum site area requirements, the entire base site
area of the parcel may be counted, including land area devoted to the principal
nonresidential use.
   (J)   Cabins and cottages (household living use category).
      (1)   The minimum lot area and lot width standards for cabins and
cottages shall be as follows:
 
Cabin or Cottage     Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
First unit           8,500
Second unit          5,000
Each additional unit 3,000
 
      (2)   An individual cabin or cottage shall not exceed 1,000 square feet
(gross floor area).
   (K)   Camps (recreation and entertainment, outdoor).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The minimum site area shall be 400,000 square feet.
      (3)   The petitioner shall submit a detailed narrative description of the
proposed camp. This narrative shall include a description of the number of camp
sites proposed, the type of recreational facilities proposed and the months and
hours of operation. The conditional use permit may impose conditions on the
layout and design of the camp, the type of recreational facilities proposed and
the hours of operation.
      (4)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (5)   Caretaker’s residences may be allowed as accessory uses. The number
of caretaker’s residences shall be established as part of the conditional use
permit.
      (6)   In districts where camps are permitted by right, no more than one
caretaker’s residence shall be allowed.
   (L)   Cemetery (parks and open space use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   No landscaping shall be required for a cemetery use.
      (3)   The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the
development of a public infrastructure system, including streets, sewers, and
other utilities.
      (4)   Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing at least
200,000 square feet.
      (5)   All buildings shall be set back at least 30 feet from any property
line. The buildings shall be used for cemetery purposes only, including but not
by way of limitation, offices, memorial chapels, mausoleums, vaults,
columbaria, crematoria, and any other structures as may be necessary for the
preparation, presentation, interment, and cremation of human remains and the
maintenance of the cemetery.
      (6)   Existing cemeteries may continue to operate in a manner consistent
with the existing development in the area presently covered by a conditional
use permit. Any expansion to land not covered by the existing conditional use
permits must comply with the requirements of this subsection (L), except that
existing cemeteries shall be permitted to expand to whatever extent additional
area is available to them without regard to the minimum size requirement for a
new cemetery.
      (7)   A permit may be issued for a pet cemetery without a conditional use
permit if the site has a minimum area of 40,000 square feet, individual lots
are not sold, and there are no provisions for perpetual care.
   (M)   Casino/commercial watercraft (retail sales and service, entertainment-
oriented use category).
      (1)   The use may be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (3)   Documentation shall be submitted detailing the length, width, draft
and height above the waterline of the proposed watercraft. The maximum patron
capacity and the maximum number of crew members (employees) at the largest
shift shall also be provided. The petitioner shall also provide photographs,
artist’s renderings or other visual documents portraying the proposed
watercraft. The County Board may limit in the conditional use permit the size,
capacity and appearance of the proposed watercraft.
      (4)   Documentation shall be submitted detailing the proposed principal
use of the watercraft as well as all other proposed onboard and onshore
accessory uses. The petitioner shall also document the expected time, length,
course, and alternate ports of call of all expected normal cruise operations,
if any. The petitioner shall also provide photographs, artist’s renderings,
site plans or other visual documents portraying the proposed location and
design of all docks, piers, structures, driveways, parking areas and their
relationship to the proposed watercraft. The County Board may impose in the
conditional use permit conditions on operating hours, the type and number of
accessory uses, and the location and design of proposed site improvements.
      (5)   Commercial watercraft shall comply with the following regulatory
floodplain, wetland, and buffer standards.
         (a)   All regulatory floodplain development shall comply with the
regulatory floodplain development standard of §
151.148(B).
         (b)   If development is proposed in or adjacent to a wetland, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers approval shall be required.
         (c)   All development within the otherwise protected buffer area shall
be designed and constructed in such a way to protect the water quality of the
adjoining public body of water.
      (6)   The County Board shall establish the maximum permissible impervious
surface ratio and floor area factor for casino/commercial watercraft as a part
of the conditional use permit.
      (7)   Each bus parking space provided shall be considered four automobile
parking spaces for the purpose of determining the parking lot landscape plant
material requirements.
      (8)   No landscaping shall be required along that portion of the onshore
property adjacent to the public body of water, unless otherwise required as a
condition of the conditional use permit.
   (N)   Construction and demolition recycling facilities. The following
standards shall apply to recycling facilities which will exclusively accept
general construction or demolition debris:
      (1)   The site shall contain a minimum of 200,000 square feet.
      (2)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculations/site
plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
the required conditional use permit review. The site plan shall include, at a
minimum, a legal description of the subject property; access/egress point(s);
parking areas; any buildings, structures or fixed equipment; the extent of
paved or impervious surfaces; material tipping/receiving areas; material
processing areas; areas of proposed material stockpiling (by material type);
material loading areas; and fencing, berm or screening features.
      (3)   The application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied
by:
         (a)   An architectural drawing depicting building and structure
elevations and descriptions of such buildings and structures necessary to
convey the architectural appearance and physical magnitude of the proposed
improvements;
         (b)   A narrative description of the activities proposed to be
conducted indoors or under cover within the facility boundaries; and
         (c)   A narrative description of other proposed uses (such as, but not
limited to truck storage, maintenance, fueling, and container storage) and a
demonstration that other such uses can be conducted in a safe and unobtrusive
manner without interference with safe recycling activities on the site.
      (4)   The conditional use permit shall be effectuated upon receipt of a
permit from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with §
22.38 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act. It shall be a condition of
the conditional use permit that the facility continue to operate in accordance
with §
22.38 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and all other applicable
permits. Enforcement of this provision shall be subject to the revocation
procedures of §
151.253(E).
      (5)   The facility shall be located at least 500 feet from any
residential zoning district unless otherwise specified by the conditional use
permit.
 
COMMENTARY:
For purposes of subsection (N)(5), considerations for modifying the locational
standard may include the separation of the residentially zoned property from
the proposed site by a designated truck route, active rail line, high voltage
power transmission easement or other clearly demarcated land-use planning
transition boundary.
 
      (6)   The general construction or demolition debris receiving/tipping
areas shall be constructed of a low permeability material (e.g., Portland
cement concrete, asphalt concrete) such that it prevents infiltration and is
able to withstand anticipated loads.
      (7)   he facility shall be equipped with a fence no less than eight feet
in height located to secure the operating areas of the facility during non-
operating hours as well as assist in minimizing the potential for litter to
leave the facility.
      (8)   If the applicant and the Solid Waste Agency of Lake County or the
County of Lake have previously entered into a host agreement(s) for the
proposed construction and demolition recycling facility, the terms and
conditions of such host agreement shall be incorporated as conditions of the
conditional use permit and may be enforced by any party of the host agreement
(s).
      (9)   Operating standards. The applicant shall provide an operating plan.
The operating plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following information:
         (a)   Number of employees anticipated at the facility;
         (b)   Proposed hours of operations for receipt of general construction
or demolition debris and for processing and shipment of general construction or
demolition debris;
         (c)   Proposed daily average/maximum volume (in tons) of general
construction or demolition debris to be received at the facility;
         (d)   Identification of the maximum number of vehicles (by vehicle
type) proposed to utilize the facility on a daily basis;
         (e)   Description of any processing equipment (i.e., grinders/
shredders/balers) proposed to be utilized to prepare the recyclable general
construction or demolition debris for stockpiling or shipment and the location
and design of any noise-buffering elements, sheltering and operating controls
to minimize noise impacts;
         (f)   Description of operating methods employed to control odor,
accidental combustion of materials, vectors, dust, and litter;
         (g)   Description of the method and equipment utilized to load
recyclable and non-recyclable general construction or demolition for shipment
from the facility; and
         (h)   Specification of typical and maximum anticipated height of
stockpiled recyclable construction or demolition debris for each recyclable
material by type. Identification of the buffering and/or screening measures
employed to minimize the visual impact of the proposed stockpiles from
surrounding land uses.
 
COMMENTARY:
Noise standards shall be specified as part of the conditional use permit.
 
   (O)   Consumer vehicle sales (retail sales and service, sales-oriented use
category), commercial parking lots and recreational vehicle sales/rental. All
parked, displayed, or stored vehicles shall be set back at least five feet from
the right-of-way and all property lines. Concrete wheel stops or other
permanent barriers shall be installed to prevent vehicles from encroaching on
required setbacks. In lieu of providing side and rear setbacks, landowners of
adjoining properties shall be entitled to enter into an agreement that provides
for a waiver or partial waiver of the requirements. The agreement shall be in
the form of a covenant or deed restriction and shall require approval of the
Planning, Building and Development Director. Once approved, the agreement shall
be recorded by the Lake County Recorder of Deeds and shall run with the land.
   (P)   Crematorium (retail sales and service, personal service-oriented).
Crematoria shall also be allowed as an accessory use to a cemetery. See
subsection (L) of this section.
   (Q)   Day care facilities (day care use category).  The standards of this
subsection (Q) apply to day care facilities for more than seven people.
      (1)   The use may be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall concurrent with required
conditional use permit review.
      (2)   All day care facilities shall comply with all applicable state
requirements for the location of the facilities and the minimum square feet of
safe, outdoor recreation area, and usable floor area for every person that the
day care facility is licensed to accommodate.
      (3)   Applications for permission to construct or operate a day care
facility for children shall be accompanied by copies of all valid permits
required by this state and any other applicable county or federal agency. If
the permits cannot be obtained prior to the time of application, the
application must be accompanied by a report from the applicable licensing
agency stating the licensing requirements and an explanation of how the
applicant intends to meet these requirements.
      (4)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (5)   Day care shall be a permitted use in the AG District only when
operated in conjunction with a religious institution use that is located on the
same zoning lot.
   (R)   Dredging material stockpiling and processing (warehousing and freight
movement).
      (1)   Dimensions. All sites located in residential, AG and OS Zones shall
have a minimum area of 200,000 square feet. However, staff may recommend the
approval of a smaller site, if exceptional site characteristics and/or
application conditions would mitigate any adverse impacts on the surrounding
area, as part of the conditional use permit (CUP) process.
      (2)   Site plan review. The use shall be subject to the site capacity
calculation/site plan review procedures of UDO Subchapter: Site Capacity, Site
Plan Review and Natural Resource Protection (§
151.070). Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review. The site plan shall include:
         (a)   Access/egress point(s); parking areas.
         (b)   Any buildings, structures or fixed equipment.
         (c)   The extent of paved or impervious surfaces.
         (d)   Material tipping/receiving areas, material processing areas,
areas of proposed material stockpiling and material loading areas.
         (e)   Fencing, berm or screening features.
         (f)   A site restoration plan.
         (g)   Any phasing of activity and associated restoration plans.
      (3)   Access.
         (a)   For properties without an approved access location, evidence
that an access permit can be obtained, for the proposed use, from the highway
authority or having jurisdiction. For properties with a previously approved
access location, evidence from the highway authority having jurisdiction that
the existing access point is sufficient to serve the proposed use; if the
existing access is insufficient to handle weight or traffic volumes generated
by the proposed use, evidence that a new access permit can be obtained, for the
proposed use, from the highway authority having jurisdiction.
         (b)   For properties with an access location onto a private road,
evidence that permission can be obtained, for the proposed use from: 1)
homeowners’ association having responsibility for maintenance of the private
road, or 2) a majority of the property owners fronting the access road in the
absence of an active association. Applicants must also show that they have or
can obtain access permits from the highway authority which has jurisdiction
over the road onto which the private road terminates, as outlined in the
preceding paragraph.
      (4)   Permission to use the property. The application must include a
signed, written permission from the owner of or the agency having jurisdiction
over the subject property or properties.
      (5)   Operating standards. The applicant shall provide an operating plan.
The operating plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following information:
         (a)   Number of employees anticipated at the facility.
         (b)   Proposed hours of operations for receipt of material and for
processing and shipment of material.
         (c)   Proposed daily average/maximum volume (in tons) of material to
be received at the facility.
         (d)   Identification of the maximum number of vehicles (by vehicle
type) proposed to utilize the facility on a daily basis.
         (e)   Description of any processing equipment proposed to be utilized
to prepare the material for stockpiling or shipment and the location and design
of any noise-buffering elements, sheltering and operating controls to minimize
noise impacts.
         (f)   Description of operating methods employed to control odor,
accidental combustion of material, disease vectors, dust, and litter.
         (g)   Description of the method and equipment utilized to load
recyclable and non-recyclable general construction or demolition material for
shipment from the facility.
         (h)   Specification of typical and maximum anticipated height of
stockpiled dredging material and debris. Identification of the buffering and/or
screening measures employed to minimize the visual impact of the proposed
stockpiles from surrounding land uses.
      (6)   Other conditions. The conditional use permit may establish, as
necessary, reasonable conditions that regulate activity on the site including
but not limited to:
         (a)   Hours and days of operation.
         (b)   Vehicle trips generated per day.
         (c)   Noise and dust emissions.
   (S)   Drive-in theater, amphitheater, sports arena (entertainment event,
major).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall contain at least 200,000 square feet.
      (3)   All structures, viewing (parking) areas, and seating areas shall be
set back at least 100 feet from any street or boundary line.
      (4)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (5)   The following accessory uses may be permitted as incidental to, and
limited to patrons of, the principal use:
         (a)   Playground;
         (b)   Refreshment/souvenir stands or booths; and
         (c)   Offices.
      (6)   For any drive-in theater:
         (a)   The theater screen shall not be visible from any collector
street, arterial street, or freeway within 1,200 feet;
         (b)   The viewing (parking) area shall be screened in such a manner
that it cannot be observed from outside the property; and
         (c)   Off-street space for automobiles of patrons awaiting admission
to the theater shall be equal to, at a minimum, 15% of the capacity of the
viewing area. All entrances and exits shall be separated, and internal
circulation shall be laid out to provide one-way traffic.
   (T)   Ecotherapy Facilities.
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The minimum site area shall be 200,000 square feet.
      (3)   The petitioner shall submit a detailed written narrative describing
the proposed use. This narrative shall, at a minimum, describe the types of
facilities and services proposed and the days and hours of operation.
      (4)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (5)   A caretaker’s residence may be allowed as an accessory use.
   (U)   Entertainment-oriented animal exhibition facility (recreation and
entertainment, outdoor use category).
      (1)   This use category shall not include temporary animal shows for
wildlife education or agricultural purposes, which are separately addressed in
§
151.114 of this Code.
      (2)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (3)   The site shall have a minimum area of at least ten acres.
      (4)   The exhibition area and all building, viewing areas, seating areas,
and structures for housing animals shall be located no closer than 250 feet
from any public road right-of-way or site boundary line.
      (5)   If night exhibitions are to be conducted, all parking areas and
access ways shall be adequately lighted; provided that this lighting, as well
as lighting for the exhibition area, shall be shielded to prevent light and
glare spillover to adjacent residential properties.
      (6)   All facilities for housing and maintaining animals shall comply
with the following requirements:
         (a)   Applicable Lake County Health Department, state, and federal
regulations. State and federal wildlife permits shall be also be obtained as
required by law.
         (b)   A 100-foot wide area of vegetation cover, exclusive of pasture
area, shall be maintained between any corral, unvegetated exercise area, manure
pile, or application area and any surface water or well, in order to minimize
runoff, prevent erosion, and promote quick nitrogen absorption.
      (7)   All facilities for housing and maintaining animals shall meet the
conditions specified in the conditional use permit.
      (8)   The following accessory uses may be permitted as incidental to and
limited to patrons of the principal use:
         (a)   Refreshment stands or booths;
         (b)   Souvenir stands or booths;
         (c)   Restaurants or lounges;
         (d)   Playgrounds and day care facilities; and
         (e)   Any other customary and incidental uses which may be deemed
appropriate by the County Board.
   (V)   Electrical generation plants (private) (major utility use category).
The following standards shall apply to all private electrical generation
facilities with power generation potential of 30 megawatts or more:
      (1)   Petitioner shall submit a site plan prepared and certified by a
registered surveyor licensed in this state that complies with the site plan
review submission requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The facility’s operational area shall be located at least 1,000
feet from all parcel boundary lines that adjoin any zoning district other than
Limited Industrial (LI) or Intensive Industrial (II). The term "operational
area" shall mean all electrical generation equipment, cooling equipment,
exhaust or venting equipment, and any structures housing the equipment.
      (3)   Fencing shall be provided around the boundary of the property to
prevent unauthorized access.
      (4)   All current state and federal permits, waivers of permits,
licenses, and certificates of insurance shall be on file with the Planning,
Building and Development Department throughout the life of the conditional use.
      (5)   All equipment on the subject property shall operate in accordance
with the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency’s Class “C” nighttime noise
regulations (Title 35 Ill. Adm. Code Subtitle H, Chapter I) throughout the life
of the conditional use permit, as measured at the boundaries of the nearest
property zoned for residential purposes.
      (6)   The conditional use permit shall establish reasonable standards to
prevent contamination of water resources due to spillage or leakage of
chemicals, fuels, and other products that are stored on-site. The conditional
use permit process shall also consider the possibility of accidental explosion
in establishing the standards.
      (7)   Any increase in the schedule, intensity, or energy output of
operations, as established under the original conditional use permit, shall
require an amendment to the conditional use permit.
      (8)   If all operations at the facility cease for a period of 24
consecutive months, removal of all equipment, structures, foundations, tanks,
towers, and fences shall be completed within the next 12 calendar months; the
site shall be returned to its previous landscape by that time. A bond or letter
of credit in the amount of 150% of an independent engineer’s estimate of site
cleanup (removal of structures, foundations, tanks, towers, and fences) shall
be submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
      (9)   All electrical generation plants shall employ best available
control technology, as specified by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
   (W)   Forestry (agriculture use category). The clearing of young or mature
woodlands in any zoning district shall only be allowed pursuant to a
conditional use permit, except that no such permit is required for the
following: authorized clearing of trees in accordance with plans approved
pursuant to §
151.071(I); removal of dead or diseased trees or noxious non-native species;
and the removal of trees on parcels less than 40,000 square feet in size. The
following standards shall be considered the minimum requirements governing the
issuance of any conditional use permit for forestry uses.
      (1)   The forestry activities shall be necessary for the reasonable use
of the subject property.
      (2)   Potential soil erosion shall be addressed with appropriate soil
stabilization techniques.
      (3)   A reforestation plan, if applicable, shall be submitted detailing
the types and numbers of trees and the schedule of plantings.
   (X)   Golf course (parks and open space use category).
      (1)   A golf course may include swimming pools, snack shops, or
refreshment stands on the course and a club house that may contain dining/
banquet facilities, locker room and shower facilities, a pro shop, and a
lounge. It may also include a golf practice range as accessory to the golf
course, provided that it is an integral part of the golf course, is not lighted
or operated other than daylight hours, and is not operated at hours other than
those during which the golf course is open for play. These lighting regulations
and operating hour restrictions shall apply only when the facility is located
in or adjacent to a residential zoning district.
      (2)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
   (Y)   Golf driving range (recreation and entertainment, outdoor use
category).
      (1)   The use may be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. In addition to information otherwise required, the site plan shall
show the layout of the property with all tee boxes, putting greens, sand traps,
lights, structures, parking areas, fencing, and plant materials.
      (2)   The site shall be configured to permit a minimum driving distance
of 300 yards from each proposed tee, exclusive of the required landscape area.
      (3)   No tee shall be located closer than 50 feet from any adjoining
property.
      (4)   The site shall comply with the landscaping standards of §
151.167.
      (5)   Lighting shall comply with §
151.168 in order to minimize glare and reflection onto neighboring properties
and public streets.
      (6)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
   (Z)   Greenhouse/nursery center, retail (retail sales/service, sales-
oriented use category). The standards of this subsection (Z) apply in the AG
District.
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall have a minimum area of at least 200,000 square feet.
      (3)   Permitted activities may include the off-site delivery of plant
materials and the use and storage of all vehicles, equipment, and crew
necessary for those activities. However, off-site maintenance of plant
materials and planting shall constitute landscape contracting, shall require a
conditional use permit and shall be subject to the use standards for a
landscape contractor’s storage yard.
      (4)   The majority of plants offered for sale shall have been grown on-
site.
   (AA)   Government use. The standards of this subsection shall apply when a
government use is located within a platted residential subdivision and takes
direct access exclusively to a local road:
      (1)   Operational requirement. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:
00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; any assembly occurring outside these established hours of
operation shall require a temporary use permit in accordance with §
151.114(K). A maximum of 15 such events per calendar year (per zoning lot)
shall be permitted. Requests for modifications or waivers from the limits of
this subsection shall require review and approval in accordance with the
delegated conditional use permit procedures of §
151.050. This operational requirement shall not apply to the following
activities: ancillary activities unrelated to the core service functions of the
government institution, involving, in the aggregate, only a fraction of the
assembly space.
      (2)   Classification. A school, day care, or camp associated with the use
shall be classified as a separate principal use.
   (BB)   Group living (group living use category). Group living is
characterized by the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people
who do not meet the definition of “household living”. Examples include
dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries, and convents.
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070.
      (2)   Tenancy shall be arranged on a monthly or longer basis.
      (3)   The residents may receive care, training, or treatment, and
caregivers may reside at the site.
      (4)   The following shall not be considered group living:
         (a)   Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than
30 days is to be considered a hotel or motel use and classified in the retail
sales and service category; and
         (b)   Lodging where the residents meet the definition of “household”
and where tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period
is classified as household living.
   (CC)   Industrial uses (industrial use category). The use standards of this
subsection (CC) apply to all industrial uses that require permits from the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      (1)   Current state and federal permits, waivers of permits, licenses,
and certificates of insurance shall be on file with the Planning, Building and
Development Department throughout the life of the conditional use permit.
      (2)   All equipment on the subject property shall operate in accordance
with the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency’s nighttime noise regulations
(Title 35 Ill. Adm. Code Subtitle H, Chapter I). Compliance with these noise
standards shall be measured at the boundary of the subject property.
   (DD)   Junk yards (industrial use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070.
      (2)   The site shall have a minimum area of at least 200,000 square feet
of area.
      (3)   The landscaping surrounding all outdoor storage areas shall include
a solid fence at least six feet, but no more than eight feet in height. Storage
between the street and the fence or screen, or above the height of the fence or
screen, is expressly prohibited.
      (4)   All gasoline, motor oils, brake and transmission fluids,
antifreeze, hydraulic fluids, battery acids, and other fluids shall be removed
immediately from all salvaged vehicles. The fluids shall be stored and disposed
of in such a manner to avoid soil and environmental contamination of the
subject site and prevent contamination of surrounding properties and waterways.
      (5)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
   (EE)   Kennels, animal shelters, and dog obedience schools (retail sales and
service, personal service-oriented use category).
      (1)   General standards. The following standards shall apply to all
indoor and outdoor kennels.
         (a)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site
plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review. In addition to information
otherwise required, the site plan shall show all fencing, berming, and building
material soundproofing designed to mitigate the noise impact of the proposed
use on the surrounding properties.
         (b)   Kennels shall be permitted only on parcels having an area of at
least 200,000 square feet in the Agriculture (AG) zoning district and 80,000
square feet in the permitted nonresidential zoning districts.
         (c)   The preceding lot area requirement shall not apply to kennels
consisting exclusively of the boarding of domesticated felines.
         (d)   State license shall be prominently displayed.
      (2)   Kennels with outdoor runs. The following standards shall apply to
all kennels with outdoor runs.
         (a)   Kennels with outdoor runs shall require a conditional use
permit. Landscaping, fencing and berming requirements for kennels with outdoor
runs shall be established as part of the conditional use permit process.
         (b)   All points on the perimeter of any kennel structure shall be at
least 150 feet from all residential zoning districts.
         (c)   Operational requirements: outdoor exercise areas, runs, or yards
shall be restricted to use during daylight hours, with the exception of
necessary supervised dog-walking.
   (FF)   Landscape contractor’s storage yard (industrial sales and service use
category).
      (1)   The following standards apply in the AG District.
         (a)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site
plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
         (b)   The site shall have a minimum area of at least 200,000 square
feet.
         (c)   Reserved.
         (d)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
         (e)   No more than 20% of the site may be used for exposed landscape
material, outdoor equipment storage and landscape-related bulk material
storage.
         (f)   Equipment, parking facilities, and bulk material storage areas
shall be screened from adjoining properties as established in the conditional
use permit. Bulk material storage shall not exceed ten feet in height or a
height established by the conditional use permit.
         (g)   No open burning shall be permitted on-site.
         (h)   Landscaping need only be provided for the portion of the site
that is not planted and maintained in nursery stock.
         (i)   Landscape waste composting, wood-chipping, mulching and grinding
activity, and wholesale sales of landscape-related bulk materials shall be
allowed as an accessory use only if expressly approved as part of the
conditional use permit application. Noise abatement measures for any permitted
mulching, chipping, or grinding activity shall be addressed as part of the
conditional use permit. Snow removal operations, including the storage of plow
blades, shall be allowed as an accessory use.
         (j)   The main road from which access is taken shall always be kept
free of dust, dirt, mud, and other debris.
      (2)   The following standards apply in the GC District.
         (a)   Equipment, parking facilities, and bulk material storage areas
shall be screened from adjoining properties as established in the conditional
use permit. Bulk material storage shall not exceed ten feet in height or a
height established by the conditional use permit.
         (b)   Landscape waste composting, wood-chipping, mulching and grinding
activity, and wholesale sales of landscape-related bulk materials shall be
allowed as an accessory use only if expressly approved as part of the
conditional use permit application. Noise abatement measures for any permitted
mulching, chipping, or grinding activity shall be addressed as part of the
conditional use permit.
   (GG)   Landscape waste composting facilities (waste-related use category).
The standards of this subsection (GG) shall apply to landscape waste composting
facilities that are principal uses.
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   A conditional use permit shall not be required for a landscape
waste composting facility that meets the following standards:
         (a)   The facility complies with state standards under the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act for site location and operation;
         (b)   The facility is located on a farm that produces manure as a
byproduct of its principal business;
         (c)   The compost produced from the facility contains a minimum of 5%
animal manure that is produced on the farm;
         (d)   The farm associated with the facility contains at least 500
acres and grows a majority of the feed used in its operation; and
         (e)   The facility is located at least one-eighth mile from the
nearest public road or non-farm residence.
      (3)   All new landscape waste composting sites shall be located on a site
with a minimum area of at least 400,000 square feet.
      (4)   The location of the portion of the site where active biological
decomposition of the landscape waste is taking place shall be located a minimum
of 500 feet from any existing residence, school, park, or playground and shall
be set back no less than 200 feet from any property line.
      (5)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (6)   Operational personnel shall be present on site during all hours
which the facility is open for the receipt of landscape waste.
      (7)   Limits on the days and hours during which landscape waste may be
accepted and processed may be imposed as part of the conditional use permit
review process.
      (8)   A gate shall be constructed to bar access to the site by vehicles
during the hours that the facility is closed for the receipt of landscape
waste. This gate shall be locked during all non-receiving hours.
      (9)   Conditions may be imposed requiring that soil samples be taken
prior to the commencement of operations at the site to establish a base line
for future monitoring. The conditions may specify the timing and frequency of
the soil samples.
      (10)   Conditions may be imposed requiring that surface waters leaving
the site be tested prior to the beginning of composting operations for
quantities and concentrations of heavy metals, organic compounds, solvents,
fertilizers, and other potentially harmful substances.
      (11)   Conditions may be imposed limiting the volume of landscape waste
accepted daily.
      (12)   Conditions may be imposed requiring fencing of a certain type and
height in certain locations.
      (13)   Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of all composted
material.
      (14)   The operation of a landscape waste composting facility shall not
be permitted unless all permits required by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency have been obtained.
      (15)   The main road from which access is taken shall always be kept free
of dust, dirt, mud, and other debris.
   (HH)   Landscape waste transfer station (waste-related use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculations/site
plan review procedures of §
151.070.
      (2)   The site shall contain a minimum of 200,000 square feet.
      (3)   All structures, activities, and storage areas shall be set back a
minimum of 30 feet from all property lines.
      (4)   Landscaping and fencing requirements shall be established as part
of the conditional use permit.
   (II)   Local food garden (agriculture use category). The standards of this
subsection (II) shall apply to local food gardens that are principal uses.
      (1)   Operations and maintenance.
         (a)   The operation and maintenance of local food gardens shall be
allowed only during daylight hours.
         (b)   Regular weeding and maintenance shall be required to maintain a
property free from grass and/or weed growth in excess of ten inches.
         (c)   If a cover crop or mulch is not used during end of season
maintenance, all annual plants shall be cropped to a height of not more than
ten inches and waste material must be discarded at the end of the growing
season.
         (d)   Any composting areas shall be located on the same parcel as the
permitted local food garden, all composted materials must be produced on site,
no compost pile shall exceed four feet in height, and no single compost pile
can be in excess of 100 square feet in area. All compost piles shall be fenced
with a six foot solid fence, and be setback a minimum of 30 feet from any
existing structure on any adjoining parcel, not including storage structures
such as garages or sheds.
         (e)   Local food gardens must be maintained as to remain free from
undue accumulated waste, such as to cause odors reasonably detectable on
adjacent properties.
      (2)   Accessory structures.
         (a)   Sheds not to exceed 250 square feet in area shall be permitted
to serve local food gardens and shall only contain tools and materials to
cultivate onsite crop raising.
         (b)   Hoophouses shall be permitted and shall comply with §
151.113(J).
         (c)   Above ground water storage structures and/or cisterns may be
permitted at the discretion of the Planning, Building and Development Director,
and adequate visual screening and buffering is required for such structures.
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from
any existing structures on any adjoining parcel, such as dwellings,
nonresidential buildings, patios, porches, gazebos, decks, or swimming pools,
but not including storage structures such as garages or sheds.
      (3)   Ornamental plants may be cultivated in local food gardens.
      (4)   Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided to serve local food
garden operations, as determined by the Planning, Building and Development
Director.
 
COMMENTARY:
Mechanized equipment and hand labor similar in scale and designed for
residential gardening shall be permitted. The use of large-scale mechanized
farm equipment not customarily used for residential gardening such as combines,
disc plows, and large engine tractors is prohibited.
 
   (JJ)   Major fill/grade operations (warehousing and freight movement). The
following standards shall apply to fill/grade operations.
 
COMMENTARY:
Contaminated soil is regulated by state and federal environmental protection
regulations, and fill/grade operations and activities should independently
comply with all such rules and regulations adopted in accordance thereto.
 
      (1)   Total volume. The importation of fill over 2,000 cubic yards per
acre, or over a total volume of 60,000 cubic yards, to a site shall be
regulated as a major fill/grade operation and subject to a non-delegated
conditional use permit in the LI and II zoning districts.
      (2)   Site specifications.
         (a)   Setbacks. Fill areas must be placed at least 30 feet from any
street or public right-of-way and the fill area shall be located at least 1,000
feet from any residential zoning district. Both setback requirements may be
increased by the conditional use permit.
         (b)   Height. Fill material height maximum shall be established as
part of the conditional use permit.
         (c)   Fencing. The fill area shall be equipped with a fence of no less
than 100% opacity and no less than eight feet in height, located to secure the
operating areas of the site until fill/grade operations have ceased.
      (3)   Site plan review. The use shall be subject to the site capacity
calculations/site plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review may be conducted concurrently with the
required conditional use permit review. The site plan shall include, at a
minimum:
         (a)   A legal description of the subject property;
         (b)   A plat of survey of the site at a scale no greater than one-inch
equals 100 feet that shows the existing topography at one-foot contour
intervals;
         (c)   An outline of the area to be filled;
         (d)   Ingress/egress point(s) and parking areas;
         (e)   Locations of any buildings, structures, fixed equipment, and
equipment storage areas;
         (f)   The extent of paved or impervious surfaces;
         (g)   Locations of material tipping/receiving areas, material
processing areas; proposed fill/grade operational areas; and material loading
areas;
         (h)   Screening features such as fencing, berms or landscaping; and
         (i)   Final grading and site stabilization plan and performance
assurances as noted in §
151.262.
 
COMMENTARY:
If in consultation with Stormwater Management Commission (SMC), the Director
concludes that regional stormwater impacts may occur or be exacerbated by the
project, the Director may request concurrent review by SMC.
 
      (4)   Application. The application for a conditional use permit shall be
accompanied by:
         (a)   Plans depicting any building profiles, site elevations and
descriptions of such buildings and site elevations necessary to convey the
appearance and scale of the proposed operation;
         (b)   A narrative description of the activities proposed to be
conducted within the site boundaries;
         (c)   A narrative description of any other proposed uses (such as, but
not limited to truck storage, maintenance, and fueling) and a demonstration
that other such uses can be conducted in a safe and unobtrusive manner without
interference with activities on the site; and
         (d)   Written approvals from both the operator and the landowner, to
allow the county or its contractor to enter onto the site to remediate a
discontinued operation, which shall run with the land.
      (5)   Operating standards. The operator shall provide an operating plan.
The operating plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following information:
         (a)   Number of employees anticipated at the site;
         (b)   Proposed hours of operations for receipt of fill material and
for processing/grading of fill material;
         (c)   Proposed daily average/maximum volume (in tons) of fill material
to be received at the site;
         (d)   Identification of the maximum number of vehicles (by vehicle
type) proposed to utilize the site on a daily basis;
         (e)   Description of any processing and/or grading equipment proposed
to be utilized to prepare the fill material for stockpiling or grading and the
location and design of any noise-buffering elements, sheltering and operating
controls to minimize noise impacts;
         (f)   Description of operating methods employed to control overflow,
run-off, and dust;
         (g)   Description of the method and equipment utilized to unload and
spread fill material;
         (h)   Specification of typical and maximum anticipated heights of
imported fill material; and
         (i)   Identification of the buffering and/or screening measures
employed to minimize the visual impact of the proposed fill on surrounding
properties.
      (6)   Other conditions. The conditional use permit may establish, as
necessary, reasonable conditions that regulate activity on the site including
but not limited to:
         (a)   Hours and days of operation;
         (b)   Vehicle trips generated per day;
         (c)   Noise and dust emissions;
         (d)   Interim screening requirements to mitigate the visual impact of
the proposed fill operation on surrounding properties;
         (e)   Erosion control measures to mitigate impact to neighboring
properties associated with the additional import/export of fill beyond that of
a typical site development permit, as provided in § 151.146(J);
         (f)   Methods employed to prevent the tracking of dirt/mud onto the
main road from which access is taken;
         (g)   Methods employed to clean and repair the main road from which
access is taken.
   (KK)   Medical cannabis cultivation centers (manufacturing and production
use category).
      (1)   Minimum distance from protected uses. No medical cannabis
cultivation center shall be established, maintained, or operated on any lot
that has a property line within 2,500 feet of the property line of a pre-
existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or day
care center, day care home, group day care home, part day child care facility,
or an area zoned for residential use.
      (2)   Measurement. For the purposes of subsection (KK)(1) above,
distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot
on an applicable cultivation center is located to the nearest point on a
property line of any protected use (as defined in subsection (KK)(1) above).
      (3)   Site plan review. The use shall be subject to the site capacity
calculation/site plan review procedures.
      (4)   Compliance with state regulations and rules. Each cultivation
center shall comply with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) and all rules and regulations adopted in
accordance thereto.
      (5)   Single use site. No cultivation center may be established in
multiple use or tenant property or on a site that shares parking with other
uses.
      (6)   Setbacks. Each cultivation center shall be a minimum of 50 feet
from its surrounding property lines.
      (7)   Parking.
         (a)   Parking areas shall be well lit and monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by cultivation center
staff and are continually recorded in a tamper-proof format.
         (b)   The electronic security system shall be available 24 hours per
day, and seven days per week to the Department and law enforcement agencies via
a secure web-based portal.
      (8)   Signage.
         (a)   All commercial signage for a cultivation center shall be limited
to one flat wall sign not to exceed ten square feet in area, and one
identifying sign, not to exceed two square feet in area, which may only include
the cultivation center address. Such signs shall not be directly illuminated.
         (b)   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not permitted
in connection with a cultivation center.
         (c)   Signage shall not contain cannabis imagery such as cannabis
leaves, plants, smoke, paraphernalia, or cartoonish imagery oriented towards
youth or language referencing cannabis.
      (9)   Age and access limitations. Each cultivation center shall prohibit
any person who is not at least 21 years of age from entering the cultivation
center property. Cultivation centers shall not employ anyone under the age 21.
Access to the cultivation center site shall be limited exclusively to
cultivation center staff, local and state officials and those specifically
authorized under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act
(410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
      (10)   Security and video surveillance.
         (a)   All cultivation, production and related operations at a medical
cannabis cultivation center shall occur in an enclosed locked facility
(“facility”). Each cultivation center shall provide and maintain adequate
security on the entire site on which the cultivation center sits, including
lighting, video surveillance, security personnel and alarms reasonably designed
to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the site from theft. The
facility shall be enclosed by high security fence or wall. The fence or wall
must be adequately secure to prevent unauthorized entry and include gates tied
into an access control system.
         (b)   The medical cannabis cultivation center parking area,
cultivation, production, warehousing areas, and shipping bays and entrance
shall be monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be
viewed by cultivation center staff and continually recorded, in a tamper-proof
format.
         (c)   The electronic security system shall be available 24 hours per
day, and seven days per week to the Department and law enforcement agencies via
a secure web-based portal.
         (d)   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes
the following language: “THESE PREMISES ARE UNDER CONSTANT VIDEO SURVEILLANCE”.
         (e)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall review the
adequacy of lighting, security and video surveillance installations with
assistance from local law enforcement officials. The Director has the
discretion to conduct periodic review of security features as appropriate.
         (f)   Loading of product shall occur within secure enclosed shipping
bays and shall not be visible from the exterior of the facility.
      (11)   Noxious odors. All cultivation centers shall operate in a manner
that prevents odor impacts on neighboring premises or properties and, if
necessary, the facility shall be ventilated with a system for odor control.
      (12)   Conduct on site.
         (a)   A cultivation center may not sell or distribute any cannabis to
any individual or entity other than a dispensary organization registered under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et
seq.).
         (b)   It shall be prohibited to cultivate, manufacture, process or
package any product, other than medical cannabis and cannabis infused products,
at a cultivation center.
         (c)   It shall be prohibited to consume cannabis products in a
cultivation center or anywhere on the site occupied by the cultivation center.
A sign, at least 8.5 by 11 inches, shall be posted inside a cultivation center
building in a conspicuous place and visible to staff and shall include the
following language: “Smoking, eating, drinking or other forms of consumption of
cannabis products is prohibited on cultivation center property”.
   (LL)   Medical cannabis dispensary (retail sales and services use category).
      (1)   Minimum distance from protected uses.
         (a)   No medical cannabis dispensing organization shall be
established, maintained, or operated on any lot that has a property line within
1,000 feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool
or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day care home, group day
care home, or part day child care facility.
         (b)   No medical cannabis dispensary shall be established, maintained
or operated on any lot that has a property line within 500 feet of the property
line of a pre-existing residential zoning district, place of worship, park, or
forest preserve.
      (2)   Measurement. For the purposes of subsection (LL)(1) above,
distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot
on which an applicable dispensary is located to the nearest point on any
property line of any protected use (as identified in subsection (LL)(1) above).
      (3)   Site plan review. The use shall be subject to the site capacity
calculation/site plan review procedures.
      (4)   Compliance with state regulations and rules. All dispensaries shall
comply with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (410
ILCS 130/1 et seq.) and all rules and regulations adopted in accordance
thereto.
      (5)   Single use site. No dispensary shall be established in multiple use
or tenant property or on a site that shares parking with other uses.
      (6)   Setbacks. Each medical cannabis dispensary shall be a minimum of 30
feet from its surrounding property lines.
      (7)   Buffering from other medical cannabis dispensaries. Each dispensary
shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet from all other dispensaries, as measured from
the applicable property lines.
      (8)   Parking.
         (a)   Parking shall be located in an area which is visible from a
public road or a private road that is accessible to the public. It cannot be
screened from the roadway with vegetation, fencing, or other obstructions.
         (b)   Parking areas shall be well lit and monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by dispensary staff and
are continually recorded in a tamper-proof format.
      (9)   Exterior display. No dispensary shall be maintained or operated in
a manner that causes, creates or allows the public viewing of medical cannabis,
medical cannabis infused products or cannabis paraphernalia or similar products
from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way or any property other than
the lot on which the dispensary is located. No portion of the exterior of the
dispensary shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights, or
spotlights or any similar lighting system.
      (10)   Signage and advertising.
         (a)   All commercial signage for a dispensary shall be limited to one
flat wall sign not to exceed ten square feet in area, and one identifying sign,
not to exceed two square feet in area, which may only include the dispensary
address; such signs shall not be directly illuminated. Exterior signs on the
dispensary building shall not obstruct the entrance or windows on the
dispensary.
         (b)   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not permitted
in connection with a dispensary.
         (c)   Signage shall not contain cannabis imagery such as cannabis
leaves, plants, smoke, paraphernalia, or cartoonish imagery oriented towards
youth, or language referencing cannabis.
         (d)   A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near all
dispensary entrances and shall include the following language: “Only
cardholders, designated caregivers, and staff may enter these premises. Persons
under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering”. The required text shall be
no larger than one inch in height.
         (e)   Any additional merchandise packaging provided by a dispensary,
such as bags, sacks, totes or boxes, shall be opaque without text or graphics
advertising or identifying the contents of the products contained within.
      (11)   Drug paraphernalia sales. Dispensaries that display or sell drug
paraphernalia shall do so in compliance with the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia
Control Act (720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.) and the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
      (12)   Age and access limitations. Each dispensary shall prohibit any
person who is not at least 18 years of age from entering the dispensary
facility. Dispensaries shall not employ anyone under the age of 18. Access to
the dispensary facility shall be limited exclusively to dispensary staff,
cardholders, designated caregivers, local and state officials, and those
specifically authorized under Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
      (13)   Hours of operation. A dispensary may operate between 6:00 a.m.
local time to 8:00 p.m. local time.
      (14)   Drive-thru windows. Dispensaries may not have a drive-through
service.
      (15)   Security and video surveillance.
         (a)   Each dispensary shall be an enclosed locked facility
(“facility”). Each dispensary shall provide and maintain adequate security on
the entire property on which the dispensary exists, including lighting, video
surveillance, security personnel, and alarms reasonably designed to ensure the
safety of persons and to protect the site from theft.
         (b)   The dispensary parking area, client entrance, sales area, back
room, storage areas, and delivery bay and entrance shall be monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by dispensary staff and
continually recorded in a tamper-proof format.
         (c)   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes
the following language: “This area is under live/recorded video surveillance to
aid in the prosecution of any crimes committed against this facility or its
patrons”.
         (d)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall review the
adequacy of lighting, security and video surveillance installations with
assistance from local law enforcement officials. The Director has the
discretion to conduct periodic review of security features as appropriate.
         (e)   Each dispensary shall report all criminal activities occurring
on the property to the applicable law enforcement agency immediately upon
discovery.
         (f)   Deliveries shall occur between 7:00 a.m. local time and 9:00
p.m. local time within a secure enclosed delivery bay and shall not be visible
from the exterior of the facility.
      (16)   Conduct on site.
         (a)   Loitering is prohibited on the dispensary property.
         (b)   It shall be prohibited to consume cannabis products in the
medical cannabis dispensary
or anywhere on the site occupied by the dispensary. A sign, at least 8.5 by 11
inches, shall be posted inside the dispensary building in a conspicuous place
and visible to a client and shall include the following language: “Smoking,
eating, drinking or other forms of consumption of cannabis products is
prohibited on dispensary property”.
   (MM)   Mining and extractive uses (mining use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review. In addition to information
otherwise required, the site plan shall show a plan for the proposed operation
and rehabilitation of the site that shall include the following:
         (a)   An outline of the area to be excavated;
         (b)   The proposed locations of sorting, grading, crushing, and
similar equipment necessary to the operation and initial distribution of the
excavated products;
         (c)   The proposed locations of any buildings, scale-house, equipment
storage areas, and equipment repair sheds or areas; and
         (d)   The sequence of operations and the schedule of rehabilitation
measures.
      (2)   A plat of survey of the site, or a map, at a scale of no greater
than one inch equals 100 feet, shall be submitted showing the existing
topography at one-foot contour intervals.
      (3)   The operation and rehabilitation of extractive products area shall
be in accordance with the following conditions:
         (a)   Excavation to a depth of more than ten feet shall not take place
within 30 feet of any street or public right-of-way;
         (b)   Access ways and roads shall be maintained in a dust-free
condition;
         (c)   All operations shall be conducted in a safe manner, especially
with respect to hazards to persons, damage to adjacent lands or improvements,
and damage to any street by slides, sinking, or collapse of supporting soil
adjacent to an excavation. No extractive operation shall be conducted in a
manner so as to lower the water table on surrounding properties;
         (d)   No excavation, removal, or fill shall be permitted if the
finished conditions would contain the following:
            1.   Deep pits having side slopes of greater than 30 degrees;
            2.   Serious on-site erosion problems or erosion problems which
could extend to neighboring properties; and
            3.   Undrained depressions other than artificial lakes, or drainage
problems which adversely affect neighboring properties.
         (e)   After completion of operations, and in accordance with the
approved rehabilitation map, the premises shall be cleared of debris, and a
layer of soil capable of supporting vegetation shall be spread over the
premises to a depth of at least three inches (except for areas under water) and
shall be seeded with grass or other groundcover to prevent erosion.
      (4)   A performance assurance in the form of a letter of credit or cash
bond shall be furnished to the county in an amount adequate to assure
compliance with the approved rehabilitation plan. The exact amount and a
termination date for the completion of operations and the rehabilitation of the
tract shall be established in the conditional use permit review process and
imposed at the time of approval, based upon the estimated costs of
rehabilitating the site and the estimated length of time the operation will be
conducted.
      (5)   The hours and days of operation may be specified in the conditional
use permit.
      (6)   The lifespan of the permit may be specified. Extension of the
lifespan shall be subject to review and approval by the County Board.
      (7)   The site and its operations shall be subject to an annual review
and inspection for compliance with this chapter.
      (8)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
      (9)   The access drive from the site shall be paved with a surface of
asphalt or concrete for a distance of at least 50 feet from the right-of-way of
the public road from which access is taken. Provisions shall also be made to
remove dust, dirt, mud, and other debris from vehicles exiting the site. The
main road from which access is taken shall always be kept free of dust, dirt,
mud, and other debris.
   (NN)   Mobile home parks (household living use category).
      (1)   Land; ownership. A mobile home park shall consist of a contiguous
parcels of land that has been developed for the placement of mobile homes and
is owned in its entirety by an individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or
private association or corporation. No lots shall be individually sold.
      (2)   Site capacity/site plan review. The use shall be subject to the
site capacity calculation/site plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (3)   Mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be permitted only in approved
mobile home parks, except where the agricultural exemption applies or when
occupied as a temporary shelter in accordance with §
151.114. Mobile home/manufactured housing sales are classified in the
“wholesale sales” use category. The sales activities shall be allowed only in
zoning districts that allow wholesale sales uses.
      (4)   Application and licensing requirements; inspections.
         (a)   No person shall construct or expand any mobile home park unless
they hold a valid permit according to § 4, Public Act 77-1472 Mobile Home
Parks, State of Illinois and a permit is issued by the Planning, Building and
Development Department in the name of the person for the specific proposed
construction, alteration or extension.
         (b)   No person shall operate any mobile home park unless they hold a
valid license issued annually by the Planning, Building and Development
Department in the name of the person for the specific mobile home park. All
applications for licenses shall be made to the Planning, Building and
Development Department according to the provisions and licensing application
forms provided by the Planning, Building and Development Department.
         (c)   Licensing inspections shall be performed annually by the
Planning, Building and Development Department.
      (5)   Minimum park size. Mobile home parks shall be at least nine acres
in size. Any addition to an existing mobile home park shall be sufficient to
provide for a total site area of at least nine acres.
      (6)   Density and open space. Mobile home parks shall comply with the
maximum density standard and minimum open space ratio established for the
underlying zoning district.
      (7)   Minimum lot area and width. Every mobile home shall be located on a
mobile home site having at least 4,000 square feet of land area exclusive of
park streets. The minimum lot or site width shall be 40 feet.
      (8)   Setbacks. Minimum setbacks/ separations shall be as follows:
Table 151.112(NN)
 Setback/Separation Minimum Distance (Feet)
Table 151.112(NN)
   Setback/Separation                                   Minimum Distance (Feet)
1. Mobile homes and accessory structures to mobile home 50
   park boundaries[a]
2. Mobile homes and accessory structures to ultimate    30
   right-of-way of public street or highway[a]
3. Mobile homes and accessory structures to interior    10
   streets[(a)1.a.]
4. Mobile home to mobile home (side to side)[(a)1.a.][  20
   (a)1.b.]
5. Mobile home to mobile home (end to end, staggered)[  10
   (a)1.a.][(a)1.b.]
6. Mobile home to mobile home (end to end, not          20
   staggered)[(a)1.a.][(a)1.b.]
7. Mobile homes to unattached accessory structures (on  4
   same or other site)
   Mobile homes and accessory structures to other
8. mobile home park accessory structures, such as       20
   laundry buildings, community buildings and offices
   Mobile homes and accessory structures to any body of per §§
9. water                                                151.145 through
                                                        151.154
 
         (a)   1.   In mobile home parks that were legally established before
July 1, 1998, mobile home dwelling units may be replaced even if the
replacement unit does not comply with the mobile home setback and separation
distances required by items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of
Table 151.112(NN) above, provided that the following minimum setbacks/
separation distances are maintained:
               a.    Mobile home to mobile home (side to side): ten feet;
               b.    Mobile home to mobile home (end to end, staggered): eight
feet;
               c.    Mobile home to mobile home (end to end, not staggered):
ten feet; and
               d.   Mobile homes and accessory structures may be no closer to
mobile home park boundaries or ultimate rights-of-way than the dwelling units
they replaced or the minimum setback distance, of item 1 or 2 of
Table 151.112(NN), whichever is less.
            2.   This provision shall not be interpreted as allowing additional
mobile home units (above the number that existed on July 1, 1998) to be placed
within the mobile home park, unless the additional units are allowed under the
maximum density standards in effect at the time of application and the units
comply with all applicable setback and separation standards for new mobile home
parks.
         (b)   In measuring the minimum separation distance between mobile
homes, measurements shall be taken from the outermost projection of the mobile
home or from any attached accessory structure, such as decks, stairs, porches,
and carports. For the purpose of this provision, a structure shall be
considered attached if it is not separated from the mobile home by the minimum
distance specified in item 7 of
Table 151.112(NN), above.
      (9)   Mobile home stands. All mobile homes shall be situated on a
concrete slab or a set of piers or runners that meet all state requirements.
Mobile homes shall be anchored in accordance with all applicable state
requirements.
      (10)   Streets and vehicular access. All internal streets shall be
privately owned and maintained. All internal streets shall have a minimum
right-of-way width of 50 feet and minimum pavement width of 24 feet (minimum
pavement width of 36 feet if on-street parking is allowed). All streets and
vehicular access within the mobile home park shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with all other applicable standards of this chapter, including
the access, sight distance, intersection, right-of-way, paving, length, and
vertical and horizontal curve standards. Drainage systems within the road
right-of-way shall be closed curb and gutter systems.
      (11)   Parking. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided per
mobile home site. Size and paving of each parking space shall conform to the
standards of §
151.165(H).
      (12)   Tenant storage. A minimum of 80 square feet/300 cubic feet of
storage area shall be provided per each mobile home within the mobile home
park. The required storage area may be located within a central, community
storage building or in individual storage units on each mobile home site.
      (13)   Required recreation area. The amount of required recreation area
shall be determined by the site capacity calculations. A recreation area shall
be as centrally located as possible, free of traffic hazards, and easily
accessible to all mobile home park residents. In larger mobile home parks, some
decentralization of recreational areas shall be allowed. All recreation areas
shall contain the following:
         (a)   Sufficient space for community use buildings, facilities,
playing fields, and open spaces for active and passive adult, senior adult, and
child-oriented recreational uses;
         (b)   Suitable landscaping, fencing and benching; and
         (c)   A series of pedestrian pathways that shall, as much as possible,
be connected to the residential areas of the mobile home park through
pedestrian pathway extensions.
      (14)   Service buildings and other community facilities. Management
offices, repair shops, storage areas, sanitary facilities, laundry facilities,
indoor recreation areas, service and recreational buildings, and commercial
uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of park
occupants shall be allowed as accessory uses and shall be constructed to meet
all applicable requirements of the applicable building code.
      (15)   Sewage disposal.
         (a)   An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all
mobile home parks for the conveying, treatment, and disposal of sanitary
sewage. When a public sewage system of adequate capacity is available within
250 feet of the site boundary, connection to the centralized sewage system
shall be required.
         (b)   At least one sanitary station shall be provided in each mobile
home. Sanitary stations shall be located at sites readily accessible to all
mobile home park occupants and shall be approved in design and operation by the
Lake County Health Department prior to permit issuance.
      (16)   Water supply. All mobile home parks shall be served by community
or public water supplies. All community or public water supplies shall be
designed and operated in accordance with all applicable standards and
regulations of the Lake County Health Department, Lake County Department of
Public Works, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois
Plumbing codes.
      (17)   Electrical distribution systems. All mobile home parks shall
contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wires, fixtures, equipment,
and appurtenances, which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
all applicable state and national electrical codes.
      (18)   Lighting and illumination.  All lighting and illumination shall be
designed and constructed to comply with §
151.168.
      (19)   Refuse storage and collection. As part of the conditional use
permit application, the site plan shall also indicate the areas for refuse
storage and collection and briefly describe the method of refuse storage,
collection, and disposal.
   (OO)   Model airplane club (recreation and entertainment, outdoor use
category). The following standards shall apply to all model airplane clubs.
      (1)   The minimum flying area shall be 30 acres.
      (2)   A minimum 1,000-foot setback shall be maintained from the center of
the flying field to the nearest residence that is not located on the subject
property.
   (PP)   Offices for non-retail nurseries (office use category). The following
standards shall apply only when a conditional use permit is required for
establishment of the non-retail nursery.
      (1)   The minimum gross site area shall be ten acres.
      (2)   A minimum of 50% of the site shall be planted, grown, or propagated
in nursery stock.
      (3)   Centralized offices for clerical and professional personnel may be
maintained in one or more buildings for personnel performing functions for
nursery-related businesses located elsewhere, but under the same ownership.
      (4)   The total allowable floor area shall be established as part of the
conditional use permit.
      (5)   The height of office building shall not exceed 35 feet.
      (6)   Building setbacks and landscaping shall be established as part of
the conditional use permit.
      (7)   Whenever the property ceases to be used as a non-retail nursery,
all authorization for the conditional use permit for centralized offices shall
lapse, and the conditional use permit shall terminate and become null and void.
      (8)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
   (QQ)   Petroleum or chemical refining or production (industrial sales and
service use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall be a minimum of 200,000 square feet in size.
      (3)   The site shall have frontage on and access to an arterial street,
provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the subject road may
approve alternative access.
      (4)   The access drive from the site shall be paved with a surface of
asphalt or concrete for a distance of at least 50 feet from the right-of-way of
the public road from which access is taken. Provisions shall also be made to
remove dust, dirt, mud, and other debris from vehicles exiting the site. The
main road from which access is taken shall always be kept free of dust, dirt,
mud, and other debris.
   (RR)   Racetrack, motor vehicle/motocross/BMX/ go-cart (recreation and
entertainment, outdoor use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall have a minimum area of at least 20 acres.
      (3)   The racetrack and all building, viewing areas, seating areas, and
areas reserved for vehicles to be raced shall be located no closer than 300
feet from any ultimate public road right-of-way or site boundary line.
      (4)   All parking areas and access ways shall be adequately lighted;
provided that this lighting, as well as lighting for the racetrack, shall be
shielded to prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent properties.
      (5)   The following accessory uses may be permitted as incidental to and
limited to patrons of the principal use:
         (a)   Refreshment stands or booths;
         (b)   Souvenir stands or booths;
         (c)   Vehicle fuel and supplies sales limited to owners or operators
of vehicles to be raced;
         (d)   Temporary campgrounds;
         (e)   Playgrounds and day care facilities; and
         (f)   Any other customary and incidental uses which may be deemed
appropriate by the County Board.
   (SS)   Recreational vehicle parks (retail sales/ service, entertainment-
oriented use category).
      (Preface.) This county’s recreational vehicle parks have enjoyed a long
history. Nonetheless, a number of parks have been the source of environmental,
traffic, aesthetic, and other negative impacts on surrounding communities. The
following regulations have been adopted and shall be enforced in order to
minimize the conflict between the recreational vehicle parks and the neighbors
surrounding these parks and to ensure that the health, safety, and welfare of
recreational vehicle park residents and neighbors is protected, enhanced, and
maintained. Specifically, these regulations establish standards for the design,
construction, alteration, extension and maintenance of recreational vehicle
parks and related utilities and facilities; authorize the issuance of permits
for construction, alteration, and extension of recreational vehicle parks; and
provide for the licensing and inspection of recreational vehicle parks.
      (1)   Use. Recreational vehicle parks shall be considered a
nonresidential use. Recreational vehicles shall be used for occupancy only in
approved recreational vehicle parks or when occupied as a temporary shelter in
accordance with §
151.114.
      (2)   Applicability. All recreational vehicle pad additions, relocations
of pads for purposes other than compliance with the provisions of subsection
(SS)(19) below, expansions to recreational vehicle parks and new recreational
vehicle parks shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and obtain a
conditional use permit (CUP). Any portion of an existing park where no
additions or expansions are proposed shall not be required to be brought up to
the standards of this chapter except all existing recreational vehicle parks
shall comply with the provisions of subsection (SS)(19) if applicable. Adding
accessory structures such as decks and porches to existing pads shall require
permits but shall not be considered an expansion and shall not require a CUP.
      (3)   Application, licensing and operational requirements; inspections.
All parks shall comply with the following application, licensing, operational,
and inspection requirements.
         (a)   All applications for licenses shall be made to the Planning,
Building and Development Department according to provisions and licensing forms
available in the Planning, Building and Development Department. A map or a plat
showing the site layout of recreational vehicle sites shall accompany the
application.
         (b)   Each application shall be accompanied by a current license from
the Illinois Department of Public Health.
         (c)   No person shall construct or expand any recreational vehicle
park unless they hold a valid permit according to the requirements of this
state and a permit issued by the Planning, Building and Development Department
in the name of the person for the specific proposed construction, alteration,
or extension.
         (d)   No person shall operate any recreational vehicle park unless he
or she holds a valid license issued annually by the Planning, Building and
Development Department in the name of the person for the specific recreational
vehicle park.
         (e)   All existing and new parks shall only be permitted to operate
between April 1 and October 31, and shall be closed for the remainder of the
year. All water and gas service shall be disconnected from all recreational
vehicles during the time the park remains closed.
         (f)   All recreational vehicle sites shall be sequentially numbered.
The reflective site numbers shall be placed on a separate post on the site and
shall be clearly visible. A map of the site layout with site numbers shall be
placed at the entrance of the park in such a manner that it is clearly visible
to the entrants. The base flood elevation for the park shall also be delineated
on the map. A copy of the map shall be provided to the local fire protection
district.
         (g)   No parking of any vehicles shall be permitted within any street
right-of-way.
         (h)   Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to
the Planning, Building and Development Department within 24 hours of having
sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control
of any recreational vehicle park. The notice shall include the name and address
of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the recreational
vehicle park. Upon application in writing for transfer, the license shall be
transferred if the recreational vehicle park is in compliance with all
applicable provision of this chapter.
         (i)   Licensing inspections shall be performed annually by the
Planning, Building and Development Department prior to the renewal of licenses.
      (4)   Minimum size.
         (a)   Recreational vehicle parks shall be at least 20 acres in size.
         (b)   Any addition to an existing recreational vehicle park shall be
sufficient to provide for a total site area of at least 20 acres.
      (5)   Site capacity/site plan review.
         (a)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site
plan review procedures of §
151.070.
         (b)   Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently
with any required conditional use permit review.
         (c)   In addition to information otherwise required, the site plan
shall show all recreation areas, pedestrian pathways, means of water supply,
and sewage disposal.
      (6)   Density and open space.
         (a)   No recreational vehicle park shall have an overall density
greater than 18 recreational vehicles per acre of land.
         (b)   No recreational vehicle park shall have more than one
recreational vehicle or two camping units (tents) permitted on any one camp
site.
      (7)   Minimum site area. Every recreational vehicle shall be located on a
site having a minimum area of 1,500 square feet.
      (8)   Required setbacks and separation.
         (a)   The following setbacks and separation distances shall apply.
         (b)   In measuring these distances, all required setbacks and required
separations shall be measured from the outermost edges of any steps, decks, or
porches adjacent to the recreational vehicle.
         (c)   A recreational vehicle site shall not encroach into the ultimate
public right-of-way or in any area designated as a buffer or landscape
easement.
Table 151.112(SS)(8)
Setback/Separation Minimum Distance (Feet)
Table 151.112(SS)(8)
Setback/Separation                                      Minimum Distance (Feet)
Accessory structure to any other structure on another   8 feet
recreational vehicle site
Accessory structure to site boundary                    4 feet
Recreational vehicle and accessory structure to any     Per §§
body of water                                           151.145 through
                                                        151.154
Recreational vehicle and accessory structures to        30 feet
ultimate right-of-way of public street or highway
Recreational vehicle or accessory structure to interior 8 feet
street
Recreational vehicle to other structures accessory to a 4 feet
recreational vehicle structure
Recreational vehicle to other structures accessory to
recreational vehicle park, including community          16 feet
buildings and offices
Recreational vehicle to recreational vehicle (end to    8 feet
end)
Recreational vehicle to recreational vehicle (side to   8 feet
side)
Recreational vehicle to recreational vehicle park       50 feet
boundaries
Recreational vehicle to site boundary                   4 feet
 
      (9)   Accessory structures. Decks and porches may be placed adjacent to
the recreational vehicles, provided they are not attached to the recreational
vehicle. The total combined area of all decks and porches shall not exceed the
size of the recreational vehicle to which it adjoins or 250 square feet,
whichever is less. The total area of covered decks and porches shall not exceed
150 square feet. The total area of any storage shed shall not exceed 80 square
feet.
      (10)   Streets and vehicular access. Each recreational vehicle site shall
have direct access from an internal park street. All internal streets shall be
privately owned and maintained so that emergency vehicles can safely access all
area of the site during the recreational vehicle park’s operating season. All
internal streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 33 feet and minimum
pavement width of 18 feet. The streets shall be constructed with an 18-foot
wide gravel base with an eight-inch thickness of compacted gravel. A two-inch
layer of bituminous surface may be placed on this gravel base. The roads shall
be maintained in a dust free condition. All streets and vehicular access within
a recreational vehicle park shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with all other applicable standards of this chapter, including the access,
sight distance, intersection, length, and vertical and horizontal curve
standards. Drainage systems within the road right-of-way may be closed (curb
and gutter systems) or open (grass swale or open ditch).
      (11)   Parking. A minimum of one and one-quarter parking spaces shall be
provided per recreational vehicle camp site, one of which shall be located on
each individual recreational vehicle camp site, the remainder to be located
off-street. Size and paving of each parking space shall conform to the
standards of §
151.165.
      (12)   Required recreation areas. In all recreational vehicle parks, a
recreation area shall be provided that shall be as centrally located as
possible, free of traffic hazards, and easily accessible to all recreational
vehicle park residents. In larger recreational vehicle parks some
decentralization of recreational areas shall be allowed. All recreational areas
shall, in total, amount to at least 20% of the recreational vehicle park site
and shall contain the following:
         (a)   Sufficient space for community use buildings, facilities playing
fields, and open spaces for active and passive adult, senior adult, and child-
oriented recreational uses;
         (b)   Suitable landscaping, fencing, and benching; and
         (c)   A series of pedestrian pathways that shall, as much as possible,
be connected to the residential areas of the recreational vehicle park through
pedestrian pathway extensions.
      (13)   Sewage disposal.
         (a)   An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all
recreational vehicle parks for the conveying, treatment, and disposal of
sanitary sewage. When a public sewage system of adequate capacity is available
within 250 feet of the site boundary, connection to the centralized sewage
system shall be required.
         (b)   At least one sanitary station shall be provided in each
recreational vehicle park. Sanitary stations shall be located at sites readily
accessible to all park occupants and shall be approved in design and operation
by the Lake County Health Department prior to permit issuance.
      (14)   Water supply. All recreational vehicle parks shall be served by
community or public water supplies. All the community or public water supplies
shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable standards and
regulations of the Lake County Health Department, Lake County Department of
Public Works, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois
Plumbing codes.
      (15)   Electrical distribution systems. All recreational vehicle parks
shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wires, fixtures,
equipment, and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with all applicable state and national electrical codes.
      (16)   Lighting and illumination. All lighting and illumination shall be
designed and constructed to comply with §
151.168.
      (17)   Group camping. Areas may be specified for group camping, subject
to the following standards.
         (a)   Group camping areas shall be at least one acre in area.
         (b)   Group camping areas shall contain at least one conveniently
located toilet facility.
         (c)   Group camping areas shall not contain more than 40 RV or tent
sites.
         (d)   Group camping areas may contain more than one RV or tent on any
single site.
         (e)   In group camping areas, all recreational vehicles equipped for
electrical service shall be required to use park service in lieu of other
portable or self-contained power supply.
         (f)   Group camping areas shall not be permitted within 75 feet of
recreational vehicle park boundaries.
      (18)   Owners’/manager’s units. Each recreational vehicle park may have a
maximum of two mobile homes or one detached dwelling and one mobile home for
residential purposes of the owner or manager. Mobile homes shall comply with
the standards of §
151.112(NN).
      (19)   Legal nonconforming recreational vehicle park. Any recreational
vehicle park that existed and was properly licensed by the State of Illinois on
or before July 13, 1976 and fails to meet the requirements of this chapter
shall be considered a legal nonconforming use and shall be subject to the
nonconforming provisions of this chapter. Any expansions or additions made
subsequent to July 13, 1976 to these legal nonconforming parks shall be subject
to the provisions of this subsection (SS)(19). Any park established subsequent
to July 13, 1976 which failed to meet the requirements of the Recreational
Vehicle Park Ordinance approved by the County Board on July 13, 1976 shall also
comply with the provisions of this subsection (SS)(19). All existing parks or
portions of existing parks that are subject to the provisions of this
subsection (SS)(19) shall be brought into compliance with the following minimum
requirements by March 31, 2004:
         (a)   Site capacity. Site capacity, site plan review and natural
resource protection standards and procedures of §
151.070.
         (b)   Setbacks.
            1.   All internal setback requirements of this chapter;
            2.   All recreational vehicles shall be set back at least 20 feet
from any body of water;
            3.   The following setbacks and landscaping standards shall be met
along the boundaries of the recreational vehicle parks that abut residential
uses, residential zoning, or public streets. Whenever the regulations require
installation of a fence, the fence shall be placed along the interior boundary
of the setback and the plant materials shall be installed along the outside of
the fence facing the residential use, residential zone, or the public street:
Table 151.112(SS)(19)
Required Plant Material/100 Feet
Table 151.112(SS)(19)
Required Plant Material/100 Feet
For 25-foot setback 3 canopy trees
                   2 understory trees
                   3 evergreen trees
                   8 shrubs
                   6-foot high, 95% opaque fence placed at the higher
                    intensity use
For 30-foot setback 2 canopy trees
                   1 understory tree
                   3 evergreen trees
                   7 shrubs
                   6-foot high, 95% opaque fence placed at the higher
                    intensity use
For 40-foot setback 1 canopy tree
                   1 understory tree
                   2 evergreen trees
                   6 shrubs
                   3 feet high, 25% opaque fence placed at the higher
                    intensity use
For 50-foot setback 1 canopy tree
                   1 understory tree
                   2 evergreen trees
                   5 shrubs
 
            4.   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be
authorized to modify the landscaping standards based on topography, existing
vegetation, and other site conditions, provided that adjoining properties are
still afforded a comparable level of protection; and
            5.   Each park shall have submitted a site plan demonstrating
compliance with the above stated provisions by March 31, 2002 and shall have
obtained approval of the site plan no later than January 1, 2003. Non-
compliance with this requirement shall result in either revocation or
discontinuation of license. The county shall respond to each submittal of the
site plan within 60 days of the submittal date and take final action on the
site plan no later than January 1, 2003.
   (TT)   Recycling center (waste-related use category).
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall have a minimum area of at least 80,000 square feet.
      (3)   There shall be at least two parking spaces per 100 square feet of
floor area open to the public.
      (4)   All processing operations shall be conducted within an enclosed
structure.
      (5)   All vehicles, or parts thereof, on the premises shall be operable
and shall meet all state and federal licensing requirements.
      (6)   Outdoor storage shall be limited to drop-off recycling bins and
shall be fenced with a solid fence of at least six feet, but not more than
eight feet in height. Storage may not exceed the height of the fence.
   (UU)   Religious institution. The standards of this subsection shall apply
when a religious institution is located within a platted residential
subdivision and takes direct access exclusively to a local road:
      (1)   Operational requirement. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:
00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; any assembly occurring outside these established hours of
operation shall require a temporary use permit in accordance with §
151.114(K). A maximum of 15 such events per calendar year (per zoning lot)
shall be permitted. Requests for modifications or waivers from the limits of
this subsection (UU)(1) shall require review and approval in accordance with
the delegated conditional use permit procedures of §
151.050. This operational requirement shall not apply to the following
activities: ancillary activities unrelated to the core congregate/worship
practice, involving, in the aggregate, only a subset of the members of the
religious institution and only a fraction of the assembly space.
      (2)   Classification. A school, day care, or camp associated with the use
shall be classified as a separate principal use.
   (VV)   Rural business.
      (1)   Site plan review. The use may be subject to the site capacity
calculation/site plan review procedures of §
151.070.
      (2)   Site area. The site shall have a minimum area of at least 200,000
square feet. No more than 10% of the site may be used for exposed material and
equipment storage, not including the access drive. However, outside storage of
material or equipment in excess of 10% on agricultural sites of 200,000 square
feet or more, shall require a conditional use permit and may be subject to
additional conditions.
      (3)   Location. Rural businesses shall not be located on lots within
platted subdivisions.
      (4)   Setbacks. All structures, activities, and storage areas shall
comply with
Table 151.125(4).
      (5)   Outdoor storage. Equipment, parking facilities, and material
storage shall be screened from adjoining properties. For those uses allowed by
right, material storage shall not exceed ten feet in height or a height
established by the conditional use permit.
   (WW)   Service stations (vehicle service, limited use category).
      (1)   The use may be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan
review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required review.
      (2)   All services except fuel and motor oil sales shall be performed
within a completely enclosed building.
      (3)   Service stations shall store all refuse and vehicle parts within a
completely enclosed building or within an area that is completely screened from
view of residential uses.
      (4)   Islands, including pumps and underground fuel storage tanks, shall
be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all ultimate public road rights-of-way.
Canopies shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public road ultimate
right-of-way and property line.
      (5)   The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial street, provided that the highway authority with jurisdiction over the
subject road may approve alternative access.
   (XX)   Commercial solar energy systems. Commercial solar energy systems
shall require a conditional use permit in all zoning districts. The following
standards shall apply to all commercial solar energy systems:
      (1)   Approval. Commercial solar energy systems in all zoning districts
shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan review procedures
of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
the conditional use permit review.
      (2)   Fencing. Commercial solar energy systems shall be enclosed with an
approved fence that restricts access to the public. Such fencing shall, at a
minimum, encompass the entire system’s facility, contain a locking mechanism,
and be subject to the fence regulations of §
151.113(L)(1).
      (3)   Height. The total height of the panels shall not exceed 20 feet, as
measured from grade to the highest point of the solar arrays when the solar
energy facility's arrays are at full tilt.
      (4)   Lot coverage. Ground-mounted solar panels are not subject to
impervious surface ratio (ISR) calculations of §§
151.125,
151.233(C)(1)(e), and
151.233(C)(2)(f).
      (5)   Site development permits. A site development permit may be
required, per regulations set forth in §
151.145(B), depending on proposed foundation, footings, and/or site
disturbance.
      (6)   Location and setbacks.
         (a)   Commercial solar energy systems must meet the setback
requirements for a principal structure in the underlying zoning district.
         (b)   The setback requirements may be waived by the written consent of
the owner(s) of each affected nonparticipating property. The applicant does not
need to obtain a variance from the county upon waiver by the property owner of
any of the above setback requirements. Any waiver agreement of the above
setback requirements shall be in the form of a covenant or deed restriction and
require approval from the Director of Planning, Building and Development. Once
approved, the agreement shall be recorded with the Recording Division of the
Lake County Clerk's Office and shall run with the land.
      (7)   Concentrated solar technology. No solar energy system may utilize
concentrated solar thermal technology in any zoning district.
   (YY)   Shooting/archery range, outdoor (recreation and entertainment,
outdoor use category).
      (1)   The site shall have a minimum area of at least 40 acres for a
shooting range or 20 acres for an archery range.
      (2)   The petitioner shall submit a site capacity calculation and a
detailed site plan showing the layout and design of the proposed outdoor
shooting range, including all required setbacks and landscaping and the
existing and proposed structures, their floor areas and impervious surfaces.
The scale of the site plan shall be no greater than one inch = 100 feet.
      (3)   The petitioner shall submit a detailed written narrative describing
the proposed use. This narrative shall, at a minimum, describe the type of
range (i.e., public, private, or government), the type of firearms and targets
expected to be used, and the days and hours of operation. The County Board may
impose conditions in the conditional use permit on the layout and design of the
range, and the days and hours of operation.
   (ZZ)   Telecommunications facilities (telecommunications facilities use
category). The provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes which authorize
counties to regulate certain specified facilities of a telecommunications
carrier, 55 ILCS 5/5-12001.1, are incorporated by reference and made a part of
this chapter. (See commentary below.)
 
COMMENTARY:
In general terms, Illinois Statutes establish the following regulations for
Telecommunications Facilities:
Regardless of location or height, an antenna may be attached to any existing
structure or new structure permitted by this section (a “qualifying structure”)
provided that the antenna does not extend more than 15 feet above the height of the
structure.
A residentially zoned lot that is less than 2 acres in size and is used for
residential purposes shall not be used for a facility. The height of a
telecommunications facility shall not exceed 75 feet if the telecommunications
facility will be located in a residential zoning district or 200 feet if the
telecommunications facility will be located in a nonresidential zoning district. No
portion of a telecommunications facility’s supporting structure or equipment
housing shall be less than 15 feet from the front lot line of the facility lot or
less than ten feet from any other lot line. If the supporting structure is an
antenna tower other than a qualifying structure then (1) if the telecommunications
facility will be located in a residential zoning district, the telecommunications
facility shall be set back from the nearest residentially zoned lot by a distance
of at least 50 percent of the height of the telecommunications facility's
supporting structure or (2) if the telecommunications facility will be located in a
nonresidential zoning district, the horizontal separation distance to the nearest
principal residential building shall be at least equal to the height of the
telecommunications facility’s supporting structure.
The county’s review of a building permit application for a telecommunications
facility shall be completed within 30 days. If a decision of the County Board is
required to permit the establishment of a telecommunications facility, the county’s
review of the application shall be simultaneous with the process leading to the
County Board’s decision.
 
 
The County Board may grant variations affecting the location, height or setback of
a facility, after a public hearing on the proposed variations conducted before the
Zoning Board of Appeals, by a favorable vote of a majority of the members present
at a meeting held no later than 75 days after submission of an application. If the
County Board fails to act on the application within 75 days after submission, the
application shall be deemed to have been approved. In its consideration of an
application for variations, the County Board and Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider only those standards specified by Statute. It is Lake County's desire to
minimize the erection of new cellular communications towers. To that end, Lake
County encourages new antennas to be located on existing, permitted structures.
When this is not possible or practical, a lot located outside of a residential
zoning districts is the most desirable location. A lot within a residential zoning
district that is not used for residential purposes is the next most desirable
location. The least desirable allowed location is a residentially zoned lot of
more than two acres which is used for residential purposes.
It is also Lake County’s desire to minimize the impact of new cellular
communication towers on surrounding property. To that end, the County encourages
new towers to utilize “stealth technology”. For purposes of this commentary,
“stealth technology” means those features, materials, or equipment that are
designed to hide, disguise, or otherwise soften the appearance of towers.
 
   (AAA)   Utility installation and service, public or private. A conditional
use permit shall be required of all buildings and structures not specifically
exempted from zoning regulations by state statutes and not specifically
permitted by right within a zoning district, pertaining to water, sanitary
sewer, gas, telephone, and electric utilities. Any sewage treatment involving
surface discharge or land application not exempted by state statute shall
require a conditional use permit. Regardless of exempt or non-exempt status,
all public and private utility installations shall comply with the site
development regulations of §§
151.145 through
151.154.
   (BBB)   Vehicle repair (vehicle repair use category).
      (1)   Setback. All vehicles shall be set back at least five feet from the
right-of-way and all property lines. Vehicles shall not be parked within an
intersection visibility triangle (unless otherwise) permitted pursuant to §
151.172. Concrete wheel stops or other permanent barriers shall be installed to
prevent vehicles from encroaching on required setbacks. In lieu of providing
side and rear setbacks, landowners of adjoining properties shall be entitled to
enter into an agreement that provides for a waiver or partial waiver of the
requirements. The agreement shall be in the form of a covenant or deed
restriction and shall require approval of the Planning, Building and
Development Director. Once approved, the agreement shall be recorded by the
County Recorder of Deeds and shall run with the land.
      (2)   Operational requirements. All vehicle repair uses shall comply with
the following operational requirements: no vehicles shall be parked outdoors on
the site of a vehicle repair use for over 14 consecutive days except in the II
Zoning District. For purposes of this provision, outdoor storage of vehicles
will be deemed to have occurred if a vehicle remains outdoors for over 14
consecutive days or if a vehicle does not have current license tags and remains
outdoors for any length of time. Regardless of the above, a vehicle repair use
may have 15% of the site area, excluding area in floodplain and wetland,
designated for long-term parking of vehicles that are either in the process of
repair or title acquisition. This area shall be fenced-in with an eight-foot
high solid fence. No vehicles shall be stored in this area for more than three
months. No vehicle, without current license tags or missing body panels (e.g.,
hoods, trunks, fenders, doors, and the like), shall be stored outside of this
fenced-in area for any length of time.
   (CCC)   Wildlife rehabilitation facilities. This use shall be allowed only
by a delegated conditional use permit. Setbacks, screening, and noise abatement
requirements shall be addressed as part of the conditional use permit. The
following standards shall apply:
      (1)   The use shall be subject to the site capacity/site plan review
procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   The site shall contain a minimum of 80,000 square feet.
      (3)   All structures containing rehabilitation activities shall be set
back a minimum of 30 feet from all property lines.
      (4)   When adjacent to a residential use, all structures containing
rehabilitation activities shall be separated from the residential use by
providing landscaping consisting of one plant unit per every 100 linear feet.
Additional site-specific screening may be required by the Zoning Board of
Appeals as a condition of approval.
      (5)   Wildlife education shall be allowed as an accessory use to a
wildlife rehabilitation facility that is classified as a principal use only if
expressly approved as part of the conditional use permit application. Limits on
attendance, hours and days of operation, and frequency of programming shall be
addressed as part of the conditional use permit.
      (6)   State and federal wildlife permits shall be obtained as required by
law.
 
COMMENTARY:
Rehabilitation shall be limited to wildlife species allowed under the permit
holder's applicable state and federal wildlife permits and shall not include
species that are not naturally found living in the wild within the United
States or that may be considered to be an exotic species.
 
   (DDD)   Wind energy systems, commercial. Commercial wind energy systems
shall require a conditional use permit in all zoning districts. Except as
expressly provided for in this section, the following standards shall apply to
all principal use commercial wind energy systems:
      (1)   Approval. Commercial wind energy systems (WECS) in all zoning
districts shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan review
procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (2)   Fencing. All WECS towers must be unclimbable by design or protected
by anti-climbing devices such as:
         (a)   Fences with locking portals at least six feet high; or
         (b)   Anti-climbing devices 12 feet vertically from the base of the
WECS tower.
      (3)   Height. Height is measured as the distance from the rotor blade at
its highest point to the top surface of the WECS foundation.
 
COMMENTARY:
The turbine height may not exceed FAA height limits under 14 CFR Part 77
pursuant to a Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation.
 
      (4)   Site development permits. A site development permit may be
required, per regulations set forth in §
151.145(B), depending on proposed foundation, footings, and/or site
disturbance.
      (5)   Location and setbacks. WECS towers shall be sited as follows, with
setback distances measured from the center of the base of the WECS tower:
         (a)   Occupied community buildings: 2.1 times the maximum blade tip
height of the WECS tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the
structure;
         (b)   Participating residences: 1.1 times the maximum blade tip height
of the WECS tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the structure;
         (c)   Nonparticipating residences: 2.1 times the maximum blade tip
height of the WECS tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the
structure;
         (d)   Boundary lines of participating property: no setback required;
         (e)   Boundary lines of nonparticipating property: 1.1 times the
maximum blade tip height of the WECS tower to the nearest point on the property
line of the nonparticipating property;
         (f)   Public road rights-of-way: 1.1 times the maximum blade tip
height of the WECS tower to the center point of the public road right-of-way;
         (g)   Overhead communication and electric transmission and
distribution facilities (not including overhead utility service lines to
individual houses or outbuildings): 1.1 times the maximum blade tip height of
the WECS tower to the nearest edge of the property line, easement, or right-of-
way containing the overhead line;
         (h)   Overhead utility service lines to individual houses or
outbuildings: no setback required; and
         (i)   Fish and wildlife areas and Illinois Nature Preserve Commission
protected lands: 2.1 times the maximum blade tip height of the WECS tower to
the nearest point on the property line of the fish and wildlife area or
protected land.
      (6)   Operating requirements. The following are requirements for the
operation of WECS. Additional requirements and standards for WECS shall apply
as identified in Appendix Q. Provisions for violations, penalties and
enforcement shall apply as identified under §§
151.250 through
151.261.
         (a)   Sound level limitation for commercial wind energy facilities.
Noise levels from each WECS or WECS Project shall be in compliance with
applicable Illinois Pollution Control Board (IPCB) regulations. The applicant
shall submit manufacturer's wind turbine sound power level characteristics and
other relevant data regarding wind turbine noise characteristics necessary for
a competent noise analysis. The applicant, through the use of a qualified
professional, shall appropriately demonstrate compliance with the applicable
noise requirements in its conditional use permit application. Any waiver of any
of the above sound level requirements shall be set forth in a written waiver
executed by the occupied community building owner(s) or non-participating
residence owner(s) and be recorded with the Recording Division of the Lake
County Clerk's Office.
         (b)   Shadow flicker. The applicant shall appropriately demonstrate
through industry standard modeling that no occupied community building or non-
participating residence will experience 30 hours or more per year of shadow
flicker under planned operating conditions.
         (c)   Sun glint. The facility's surface finish shall be flat or matte,
so as to reduce incidence of sun glint.
         (d)   Electronic interference. Facilities shall not cause
electromagnetic interference with communications systems. The determination of
degradation of performance and of quality and proper design shall be made in
accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles
and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute
of Radio Engineers or Electrical Industries Association.
      (7)   Waivers. Wind energy facility requirements for setbacks, sound
level limitations or shadow flicker may be waived by impacted occupied
community building owner(s) or non-participating residence owner(s). The
written waiver shall notify non-participating property owner(s) of the
requirements established by this chapter and how the proposed wind energy
facility is not in compliance. The applicant does not need obtain a variance
from the county upon waiver by the property owner of the setback requirement.
The waiver shall be signed by the non-participating property owner(s) giving
consent to exceed the limits for setback, sound level limitations, or shadow
flicker on his or her property. Waivers shall be recorded with the Recording
Division of the Lake County Clerk's Office against title to the affected real
property.
      (8)   Signage.
         (a)    A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations, and at all
entrances to wind towers.
         (b)   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, plastic
sleeves, reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires
and along the guy wires up to a height of 15 feet from the ground.
(Ord., § 6.3, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2012;
Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed - -; Ord. 15-0701, passed 7-14-2015; Ord. 19-1378,
passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 21-0744, passed 5-11-2021; Ord. 22-1356, passed 10-11-
2022; Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 151.113 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Authorization. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter,
accessory uses and structures shall be allowed only in connection with any
lawfully established principal use.
   (B)   General standards. All accessory uses shall comply with the following
standards.
      (1)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, accessory uses and structures
shall be located on the same zoning lot as a lawfully established principal use
and cannot continue in the absence thereof unless lawfully converted to a
permitted principal use. Notwithstanding the above, an underground improvement
such as a septic system and/or well located on an abutting parcel under common
or separate ownership may be allowed.
      (2)   (a)   No accessory structure or use shall be constructed or
established on any lot prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
principal structure or an occupancy permit for a principal use to which it is
accessory.
         (b)   This provision shall not prohibit the issuance of a permit for a
detached garage at the time of issuance of a building permit for a principal
dwelling unit on the subject parcel.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, accessory structures and
uses shall comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter, including
the floor area ratio, impervious surface ratio, height and setback regulations
(see also subsection (C) below).
         (b)   No accessory use or structure shall cause any of these standards
to be exceeded for the underlying zoning district.
      (4)   No accessory structure maybe located within four feet of any other
structure except fences, any at-grade improvements, or any other structures
that do not unreasonably impede access for emergency and/or maintenance
purposes or otherwise create a fire or safety hazard.
      (5)   (a)   Accessory uses and structures must be subordinate to the
principal use and structure on the subject lot in terms of area, extent, and
purpose.
         (b)   The total gross floor area of all accessory structures on a lot
shall not exceed one and one-half times the total gross floor area of the
principal structure on the lot.
         (c)   Nonresidential or agricultural-exempt uses, or hoophouses or
greenhouses, exclusively used for growing ornamental plants or plants for local
food production in residential zoning districts, shall be exempt from area-
related provisions for accessory structures.
      (6)   Signs shall be subject to §
151.173.
      (7)   (a)   No more than three accessory buildings associated with a
principal residential use shall be located on a single parcel in a residential
district.
         (b)   1.   There shall be no limit on the number accessory buildings
that may be located on a parcel in a nonresidential zoning district or on a
parcel in a residential zoning district containing a principal nonresidential
use, provided that they comply with all other general accessory use standards
of this section (subsection (B)).
            2.   The provisions of this subsection (B)(7) shall not apply to
agricultural-exempt uses.
         (c)   Hoophouses or greenhouses, exclusively used for growing
ornamental plants or plants for local food production in residential zoning
districts, open gazebos, pergolas, swimming pools, cabanas, ground-mounted
solar energy systems or similar structures shall not be counted as buildings
for purposes of this provision. (See
Figure 151.113.)
Figure 151.113: Accessory Structures
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3030.jpg]
      (8)   A basement shall not be permitted in any accessory structure;
however, a crawl space may be permitted. An attic shall be permitted in an
accessory structure only if the rafter or ceiling height is no greater than six
feet and the attic is used for storage purposes only.
      (9)   Uses prohibited as accessory uses:
         (a)   Uses specifically prohibited by subsections (E)(5) and (N) of
this section;
         (b)   Recreational use of motorized vehicles as residential accessory
uses;
         (c)    Temporary hoophouses, greenhouses, or other frame-designed
structures not meeting applicable building codes except as allowed under the
state’s agricultural exemption or for exclusively growing ornamental plants or
plants for local food production in residential zoning districts;
         (d)   Temporary storage structures, including trailers and freight
containers not meeting building codes; and
         (e)   Donation drop-off containers.
   (C)   Height and setback standards.
      (1)   Height. The following height standards shall apply to accessory
uses and accessory structures unless otherwise expressly stated:
Zoning District Maximum Height (§
                151.131(E))
Zoning District Maximum Height (§
                151.131(E))
AG              30 feet/l story
RE              25 feet/1 story
E               25 feet/1 story
R1              25 feet/1 story
R2              25 feet/1 story
R3              25 feet/1 story
R4              25 feet/1 story
R-4A            25 feet/1 story
R5              25 feet/1 story
R6              25 feet/1 story
RR              25 feet/1 story
GO              30 feet/1 story
LC              30 feet/1 story
RC              30 feet/1 story
GC              30 feet/1 story
LI              30 feet/1 story
II              30 feet/1 story
OS              30 feet/1 story
 
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Residential development. In residential zoning districts,
accessory uses and structures shall meet the street setback requirement of the
underlying zoning district. No accessory use or structure may be located within
six feet of any side or rear property line.
         (b)   Nonresidential. In nonresidential zoning districts, accessory
uses and structures shall meet all the setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
   (D)   Accessory dwellings and caretaker’s residences.
      (1)   Where allowed.
         (a)   Accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units (attached to
or detached from the principal structure) shall be an allowed accessory use to
any allowed detached house use on lots in the AG, RE, E, R-1 Districts with a
minimum area of 80,000 square feet or more. Any attached accessory dwelling
unit may be located within any level of the house to which it is attached, but
shall not internally exceed one story.
         (b)   Caretaker’s residences. Caretaker’s residences shall be an
allowed accessory use to any allowed nonresidential use.
      (2)   Other ordinance standards.
         (a)   Accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units shall comply
with the building codes, codified as
Chapter 150. Accessory dwelling units shall be subject to all setback and
impervious coverage standards that apply to principal structures in the
underlying zoning district. The maximum height of detached accessory dwelling
units shall be subject to the accessory standards of subsection (C)(1) above.
 
COMMENTARY:
The existence of an accessory dwelling will not be accepted as a justification
for rezoning to a higher density residential district.
 
         (b)   Caretaker’s residences. Caretaker’s dwelling units shall be
subject to all setback and impervious coverage standards that apply to
principal structures in the underlying zoning district. The maximum height of
detached caretaker’s residences shall be subject to accessory standards of
subsection (C)(1) above.
         (c)   Maximum number of units. No more than one accessory dwelling
unit or caretaker’s residence shall be allowed on a lot unless otherwise
expressly allowed by this chapter or state law.
      (3)   Occupancy.
         (a)   Accessory dwelling units. The combined total number of
individuals that reside in the principal and accessory dwelling units shall not
exceed the number that is allowed for a single household. See definition of
“household”. If the subject parcel has an area of more than 200,000 square
feet, an accessory dwelling may be occupied by a domestic or farm employee and
the employee’s immediate family, regardless of the number of family members.
The owner of the real property upon which the accessory dwelling unit is
located must occupy either the principal or accessory dwelling unit.
         (b)   Caretaker’s residences. Care-taker’s residences shall be
occupied exclusively by the caretaker and his or her immediate family.
      (4)   Size.
         (a)   Accessory dwelling units. Any accessory dwelling unit shall
contain no more than one bedroom and no more than 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
         (b)   Caretaker’s residences. A care-taker’s residence shall contain
no more than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   (E)   Customary home occupations.
      (1)   General. Some types of work can be conducted at home with little or
no effect on the surrounding neighborhood. The home occupation regulations of
this subsection (E) are intended to permit residents to engage in customary
home occupations, while ensuring that the home occupations will not be a
detriment to the character and livability of the surrounding area. The
regulations require that home occupations (an accessory use) remain subordinate
to the allowed principal use (residential) and that the residential viability
of the dwelling unit is maintained. Approval of a zoning certificate shall be
required.
      (2)   Allowed uses. The home occupation regulations of this subsection
(E) establish performance standards rather than detailed lists of allowed home
occupations. Uses that comply with all of the standards of this subsection (E)
will be allowed as home occupations unless they are specifically prohibited.
The home occupation must be clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling as a
residence.
      (3)   Where allowed. Home occupations that comply with the regulations of
this section shall be allowed as an accessory use to any allowed residential
use.
      (4)   Size. A home occupation shall occupy less than 50% of the floor
area of the principal dwelling unit.
      (5)   Prohibited uses.
         (a)   Vehicle and large equipment storage/repair. Any type of repair,
assembly, or storage of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines
(such as autos, motorcycles, scooters, snowmobiles, outboard marine engines,
lawn mowers, chain saws, and other small engines) or of large appliances (such
as washing machines, dryers, and refrigerators) or any other work related to
automobiles and their parts is prohibited as a home occupation.
         (b)   Dispatch centers. Dispatch centers, where employees come to the
site to be dispatched to other locations, are not allowed as home occupations.
         (c)   Animal care or boarding facilities. Animal care or boarding
facilities are not allowed as home occupations. This includes animal hospitals,
kennels, public stables, and all other types of animal boarding and care
facilities.
         (d)   Barber shops, beauty shops, and nail salons. Barber shops,
beauty shops, and nail salons and similar cosmetology services shall be
prohibited as home occupations when not served by community sewer systems.
         (e)   Food service businesses. Food service businesses, including all
types of restaurants and food catering operations, shall be prohibited as home
occupations. Cottage food operations, which permits production of certain food
items in the kitchen of a person’s primary residence for sale exclusively at
farmer’s markets, shall be allowed as a home occupation.
         (f)   Mobile (off-site) vehicle servicing. Associated storage for
mobile vehicle servicing involving service calls to clients’ off-site
locations, consisting of repair, detailing, and servicing of boats,
recreational vehicles, and other consumer vehicles, is not allowed as a home
occupation. The maintaining of a home office for the business and the parking
of a commercial vehicle in accordance with subsection (N) below shall be
allowed as a home business.
         (g)   Contracting businesses. Associated storage for contracting
businesses, including plumbing, electrical, carpentry, and other trades, and
storage thereto, is not allowed as a home business. The maintaining of a home
office for the business and the parking of a commercial vehicle in accordance
with subsection (N) below shall be allowed as a home business.
      (6)   Employees. A maximum of two nonresident employee shall be allowed
in conjunction with a home occupation. For the purpose of this provision, the
term “nonresident employee” includes an employee, business partner, co-owner,
or other person affiliated with the home occupation, who does not live at the
site, but who visits the site as part of the home occupation.
      (7)   Resident operator. The operator of a home occupation shall be a
full-time resident of the dwelling unit.
      (8)   Signs. No signs shall be allowed.
      (9)   Location. All activities and storage areas associated with home
occupations must be conducted and located inside the principal dwelling unit,
not in detached buildings or garages.
      (10)   Exterior appearance. There shall be no visible evidence of the
conduct of a home occupation when viewed from the street right-of-way or from
an adjacent lot. There may be no change in the exterior appearance of the
dwelling unit that houses a home occupation or the site upon which it is
conducted that will make the dwelling appear less residential in nature or
function. Examples of the prohibited alterations include construction of
parking lots, paving of required setbacks, or adding commercial-like exterior
lighting.
      (11)   Customers. Customers may visit the site only during the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., and no more than six customers or clients may visit the
site in any single day.
      (12)   Operational impacts.
         (a)   No home occupation or equipment used in conjunction with a home
occupation may cause odor, vibration, noise, electrical interference, or
fluctuation in voltage that is perceptible beyond the lot line of the lot upon
which the home occupation is conducted.
         (b)   No hazardous substances may be used or stored in conjunction
with a home occupation.
      (13)   Deliveries. Deliveries or pickups of supplies or products
associated with home occupations are allowed only between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. Vehicles used for delivery and pickup are limited to those normally
servicing residential neighborhoods.
      (14)   Retail sales and display.
         (a)   No stock-in-trade shall be produced upon the premises, with the
exception of the following:
            1.   The hand-assembly or hand-crafting of arts and crafts. For
purposes of this subsection (E)(14), the kiln-firing of hand-wrought or hand-
painted ceramics shall also be permitted.
            2.   The hand-wrapping or finishing of gift baskets, variety packs,
or other similar multi-content stock, wherein the component items have been
manufactured elsewhere.
         (b)   No stock-in-trade shall be sold upon the premises, with the
exception of the following:
            1.   The trans-shipment or pre-arranged pickup of items
specifically pre-ordered or pre-purchased by a customer, with the exception of
vehicles and large equipment as described in subsection (E)(5)(a), above; and
            2.   The direct shipment of items to a customer that were
specifically pre-ordered or pre-purchased by the customer.
      (15)   Number. There shall be no limit on the number of home occupations,
provided that the home occupations in cumulative total comply with the
standards of this section.
   (F)   Cottage food operations. Cottage food operations shall be subject to
the home occupation provisions of subsection (E) above. The operator must
annually submit an application for cottage food operation registration form to
the Lake County Health Department.
 
COMMENTARY:
The Illinois Cottage Food Operation Act, 410 ILCS 625/4, provides additional
standards for the preparation and sale of food under a cottage food operation,
including compliance with applicable health regulations.
 
   (G)   Rural home occupation.
      (1)   General. The purpose of rural home occupations is to provide a
means to allow business activity of a greater intensity than that of a
customary home occupation, while still maintaining compatibility with the rural
character of the surrounding area. Residents on larger lots located in rural
areas may be able to conduct higher intensity uses with little or no effect on
surrounding properties. The business activity shall be conducted within the
dwelling or one accessory building. The use of the property for a rural home
occupation must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential use.
      (2)   Allowed Uses. The rural home occupation regulations of this
subsection (G) establish performance standards rather than detailed lists of
allowed rural home occupations. Uses that comply with all of the standards of
this subsection (G) will be allowed as rural home occupations unless they are
specifically prohibited. The rural home occupation must be clearly incidental
to the use of the dwelling as a residence.
      (3)   Where allowed. The minimum lot size for a rural home occupation is
80,000 square feet. For zoning lots less than 80,000 square feet, the
provisions of §
151.113(E) shall apply. The rural home occupation may occupy either a portion
of the principal residential dwelling or one accessory building. Detached
accessory structures, which are used in conjunction with a rural home
occupation, shall conform to all applicable principal setback and building
separation requirements.
      (4)   Size. Operations and storage associated with the rural home
occupation shall occupy less than 50% of the floor area of the principal
dwelling unit or in one accessory building. The portion of the accessory
building devoted to the rural home occupation shall not exceed 1,000 square
feet. Incidental office work occurring in the principal structure in
conjunction with the primary use of an accessory structure for the rural home
occupation shall not apply towards the allowable gross floor area.
      (5)   Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses include outdoor storage, repair of
large equipment, vehicle repair not incidental to the maintenance or repair of
vehicles associated with the home occupation, dispatch centers, and kennels.
Barber shops, beauty shops, and nail salons are allowed only when served by
community sewer systems.
      (6)   Employees. A maximum of three nonresident employees shall be
allowed in conjunction with a rural home occupation. For the purpose of this
provision, the term NONRESIDENT EMPLOYEE includes an employee, business
partner, co-owner, or other person affiliated with the home occupation, who
does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the rural home
occupation.
      (7)   Resident operator. The operator of a rural home occupation shall be
a full-time resident of the dwelling unit.
      (8)   Signs. No signs shall be allowed.
      (9)   Location. All activities and storage areas associated with rural
home occupations must be conducted and located inside the principal dwelling
unit or inside one accessory structure that meets the principal residential
structure setbacks for the district.
      (10)   Exterior appearance. There shall be no visible evidence of the
conduct of a rural home occupation when viewed from the street right-of-way or
from an adjacent lot. No outdoor storage of materials or goods shall be
permitted.
      (11)   Customers. Customers may visit the site only during the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., and no more than six customers or clients may visit the
site in any single day.
      (12)   Operational impacts.
         (a)   No rural home occupation or equipment used in conjunction with a
rural home occupation may cause odor, vibration, noise, electrical interference
or fluctuation in voltage that is perceptible to the nearest residential
structure on an adjoining parcel.
         (b)   No hazardous materials may be used or stored in conjunction with
a home occupation.
      (13)   Vehicles. Outside storage of commercial vehicles must meet all
standards of §
151.113(N). Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for all employees and
patrons.
      (14)   Inspections. Rural home occupations shall be subject to monitoring
inspections during normal business hours as necessary to ensure the occupation
and use of the property remains in compliance with the standards of this
subsection.
   (H)   Bed and breakfast. Bed and breakfast operations shall be subject to
the home occupation provisions of subsection (E) above and the following
standards, provided that the home occupation customer limits of §
151.113(E)(11) above shall not apply. In the event of conflict, the following
standards shall apply.
 
COMMENTARY:
The Illinois Bed and Breakfast Act, 50 ILCS 820, provides additional standards
for the establishment of a bed and breakfast, including compliance with
applicable health and fire safety regulations.
 
      (1)   Guest rooms. No more than five bedrooms or guest rooms shall be
rented per night.
      (2)   Health Department approval. Approval and inspection by the Lake
County Health Department shall be required.
      (3)   Planning, Building and Development Department approval.  Approval
and inspection by the Planning, Building and Development Department shall be
required.
      (4)   Signs. A maximum of one sign with a maximum area of one square foot
shall be allowed.
      (5)   Length of stay. Occupancy by any guest shall not exceed seven
consecutive days. A permanent register shall be maintained to show the names
and signatures of all guests.
   (I)   Private stables.
      (1)   Zoning. Private stables shall be allowed only in the AG, RE, E, and
R-1 Zoning Districts, provided that all applicable standards are met.
      (2)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 80,000 square feet for the
first two equine, plus an additional 40,000 square feet for each additional
equine. There shall be no limit on the number of equine kept on parcels with an
area of 200,000 square feet or more.
      (3)   Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall be provided:
         (a)   On parcels of less than 200,000 square feet, all feed and
bedding shall be stored indoors;
         (b)   Stables on parcels of at least 200,000 square feet shall be
regulated in accordance with §
151.112(C)(1);
         (c)   Pastures enclosing an undivided area of at least 40,000 square
feet may extend to the lot line; and
         (d)   All stable buildings and corrals shall be set back from all lot
lines and rights-of-way lines as follows:
            1.   From nonresidential districts (including AG), RE, E, and R-1 -
30 feet; and
            2.   From R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, and RR Districts - 100 feet.
 
COMMENTARY:
Fenced enclosures for equine shall be considered corrals, and subject to corral
setbacks, if containing less than 40,000 square feet of undivided space. Manure
shall be regulated in accordance with Lake County Health Department
regulations.
 
   (J)   Hoophouses.
      (1)   Hoophouses and greenhouses on residentially zoned properties shall
be used for the primary exclusive purpose of growing ornamental plants or
plants for local food production. Hoophouses shall not exceed, in the
aggregate, 100 square feet in area for lots 10,000 square feet in lot area or
less. An additional 100 square feet in area shall be allowed for each
additional 20,000 square feet in lot area. There shall be no limit on the size
or number of hoophouses kept on agriculturally exempt parcels with an area of
200,000 square feet or more.
      (2)   Location and setbacks. Hoophouses shall not be located between the
principal building and any improved road right-of-way. In the case of an
unimproved right-of-way, this provision may be modified by the Planning,
Building and Development Department Director in consultation with the
appropriate local roadway authority.
      (3)   Hoophouses shall be covered with a colorless and transparent,
plastic, polyethylene-film material and shall be maintained intact with all
parts secure. Any repairs shall maintain consistency in appearance and
condition with the original construction. The hoophouse must be replaced,
removed, or repaired upon evidence of deterioration.
   (K)   Private swimming pools and tennis courts.
      (1)   Setbacks. Pools and tennis courts, including but not limited to
walls and equipment rooms, shall not extend into any required setback area.
      (2)   Fences. Swimming pools of more than two feet in depth shall be
provided with a protective barrier in accordance with the building code.
      (3)   Private use only. A pool or tennis court accessory to a principal
residential use shall not be operated as a business or private club.
   (L)   Fences and walls.
      (1)   Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be permitted in any
required setback (except within required visibility triangles, see §
151.172). The finished/ornamental side of the fence shall face outward;
however, this requirement may be waived by the Planning, Building and
Development Director if it is determined no practical benefit is served based
upon an assessment of site conditions. The maximum height of walls and fences
shall be six feet, or six feet six inches when the fence is required to be
elevated due to the drainage requirement. In instances when greater height is
deemed necessary to provide adequate visual screening, buffering and security,
the Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized to allow a
maximum fence or wall height of eight feet. However, an eight- foot high fence
or a wall may be allowed separating residential and nonresidential uses without
the Planning, Building and Development Director’s authorization. The finished/
ornamental side of the fence shall face outward. Fences for tennis courts,
volleyball courts, or similar recreational purposes located at or beyond all
required setback lines shall not exceed the maximum height provided in
subsection (C)(1). If a recreational fence is greater than six feet in height,
it shall be a minimum of 90% open. The maximum height of fences surrounding
commercial solar energy systems shall be eight feet. Fences and walls shall be
permitted in any required setback (except within required intersection,
visibility triangles, see §
151.172, or within designated open space areas, unless otherwise permitted
pursuant to §
151.072(A)(1).
      (2)   Retaining walls. Retaining walls (i.e., walls that support fill)
shall be set back a minimum of four feet from all property lines unless site
conditions warrant a lesser setback, in which case, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to allow a reduced setback. Retaining
walls shall not be permitted within required visibility triangles (see §
151.172).The maximum height of retaining walls shall be six feet. If site
conditions warrant, the Planning, Building and Development Director may allow
the height of a retaining wall to be greater than six feet.
   (M)   Tents. No tent shall be used, erected, or maintained as living
quarters. Tents used for camping purposes wherever permitted shall be of a
temporary nature. Tents erected for a consecutive period of more than seven
days in conjunction with a series of temporary events shall be permitted only
by conditional use permit. Canopies, awnings, and other similar temporary open
shelters (with no enclosing sides or walls) attached to the building that
accommodate outdoor seating areas for restaurants and taverns shall be allowed,
provided the structures meet all applicable zoning and building code
requirements, and further provided the ancillary use of the structures to
accommodate any temporary events, including outdoor music, shall require a
temporary use permit.
   (N)   Commercial vehicle parking. One vehicle, customarily used for
commercial purposes, not to exceed eight feet in width and 22 feet in length,
may be allowed to be parked outdoors as an accessory use to an existing
residential use in Residential Zoning Districts. Two commercial vehicles, not
to exceed eight feet in width and 22 feet in length, may be allowed to be
parked outdoors in the Agricultural (AG) zone on parcels having 200,000 square
feet or larger area as an accessory use to any principal permitted use. In no
case shall semi-trailers, semi-trailer cabs, tow trucks, dump trucks, aerial
ladders, bucket trucks, flat bed trucks, box trucks, and/or any commercial
vehicle with a diesel engine be permitted in the Residential or Agricultural
(AG) Zoning Districts. Uses qualifying for agricultural exemption shall be
exempt from this requirement.
   (O)   Wildlife rehabilitation facilities. Wildlife rehabilitation shall be
considered an accessory use to an existing residential use in AG, RE, E and R-
1 Zoning Districts. This use shall be allowed only by a delegated conditional
use permit. Setbacks, screening, and noise abatement requirements shall be
addressed as part of the conditional use permit. The following standards shall
apply:
      (1)   The site shall contain a minimum of 80,000 square feet.
      (2)   All structures containing rehabilitation activities shall be set
back a minimum of 30 feet from all property lines.
      (3)   When adjacent to a residential use, all structures containing
rehabilitation activities shall be separated from the residential use by
providing landscaping consisting of one plant unit per every 100 lineal feet.
Additional site-specific screening may be required by the Zoning Board of
Appeals as a condition of approval.
      (4)   State and federal wildlife permits shall be obtained as required by
law.
 
COMMENTARY:
Rehabilitation shall be limited to wildlife species allowed under the permit
holder's applicable state and federal wildlife permits and shall not include
species that are not naturally found living in the wild within the United
States or that may be considered to be an exotic species.
 
   (P)   Wind energy facilities, accessory. Wind energy facilities include
building-mounted and tower-mounted turbines, less than 200 feet in height, and
are considered to be an accessory use to principal residential and
nonresidential uses. It is permissible to sell excess electricity produced by a
wind energy facility to an electric utility company, provided that the majority
of energy produced is intended to serve the principal use on site.
      (1)   Height.
         (a)   Residential Zoning Districts.
            1.   As measured from its highest point, accessory building-mounted
turbines shall be allowed up to the height of 15 feet above the highest point
of the building structure, but in no case shall exceed 45 feet above the
structure’s average ground elevation in a residential zoning district.
            2.   Accessory tower-mounted turbines shall be permitted by right
up to the heights of: 45 feet on parcels less than 40,000 square feet; 75 feet
on parcels 40,000 to 200,000 square feet; and 100 feet on parcels larger than
200,000 square feet, as measured from the base of the tower to the top of a
fully extended blade. Proposed turbines over these limits shall require a
delegated conditional use permit. Turbines shall be limited to 125 feet in
height if located within 500 feet of a nonparticipating residentially zoned
property.
            3.   The blade tip of a tower-mounted horizontal axis turbine shall
have ground clearance of not less than 25 feet at its lowest point. The blade
tips of a vertical access turbine shall have ground clearance of not less than
15 feet at their lowest point.
         (b)   Nonresidential Zoning Districts.
            1.   As measured from its highest point, accessory building-mounted
turbines shall be allowed at the height of 15 feet above the highest point of
the building structure, in a nonresidential zoning district.
            2.   The turbine height for an accessory tower-mounted turbine (as
measured at its highest point) shall be less than 200 feet in a nonresidential
zoning district. Accessory tower-mounted turbines shall be limited to 125 feet
in height if located within 500 feet of a nonparticipating residentially zoned
property.
            3.   The blade tip of an accessory tower-mounted horizontal axis
turbine shall have ground clearance of not less than 25 feet at its lowest
point. The blade tips of a vertical access turbine shall have ground clearance
of not less than 15 feet at their lowest point.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Accessory tower-mounted turbines shall be set back a minimum
distance equal to 150% of (1.5 times) the turbine height, from the exterior
surface of the base of the tower to nonparticipating property lines.
         (b)   Accessory tower-mounted turbines for which the generated
electricity is exclusively used on-site shall be set back a minimum distance
equal to 110% of (1.1 times) the turbine height, from the exterior surface of
the base of the tower to nonparticipating property lines.
         (c)   Accessory tower-mounted turbines shall be set back a minimum
distance equal to 110% of (1.1 times) the turbine height, from third party
transmission lines and communication towers.
      (3)   Operating requirements. The following are requirements for the
operation of accessory wind energy facilities. Additional requirements and
standards for wind energy facilities shall apply as identified in Appendix Q.
Provisions for violations, penalties and enforcement shall apply as identified
under §§
151.250 through
151.261.
         (a)   Sound level limitations for accessory wind energy facilities.
            1.   The sound level limits identified below shall apply.
Measurement procedures are outlined in
Appendix Q. Measurements can be taken at any location on nonparticipating
properties and must account for ambient sound contributions.
 
Receiving Property    Hours of Operation     Sound Level Limits
Residential           10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 45 dB(A)
Residential           7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 55 dB(A)
Other non-residential 24 hours               60 dB(A)
Industrial            24 hours               65 dB(A)
 
            2.   No facility shall operate with an average sound level more
than five dB(A) above the non-operational ambient level, as measured within 100
feet of any residential dwelling on a neighboring property.
            3.   To limit the level of low-frequency sound, the average C-
weighted sound level during facility operation shall not exceed the A-weighted
ambient sound level by more than 20 dB.
         (b)   Shadow flicker. The facility’s shadow flicker shall not fall on
any nonparticipating residential building, built at the time of approval, for
more than one hour a day. The owner must commit to a schedule for turning the
turbine off during periods exceeding that limit.
         (c)   Width. As measured at its widest point, the width of building-
mounted turbine(s) shall not exceed 20% of the shortest width of the building’s
front or side elevation, for residential buildings and non-residential
buildings abutting residentially used properties. The width of the building-
mounted turbine shall not exceed 50% of the shortest width of the front or side
elevation of a nonresidential building, not abutting residentially used
properties.
         (d)   Sun glint. The facility’s surface finish shall be flat or matte,
so as to reduce incidence of sun glint.
         (e)   Electronic interference. Facilities shall not cause
electromagnetic interference with communications systems. The determination of
degradation of performance and of quality and proper design shall be made in
accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles
and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute
of Radio Engineers or Electrical Industries Association.
      (4)   Waivers. Requirements for setbacks, sound level limitations or
shadow flicker from wind energy facilities may be waived by impacted
nonparticipating property owners. The written waiver shall notify
nonparticipating property owner(s) of the requirements established by this
chapter and how the proposed wind energy facility is not in compliance. The
waiver shall be signed by the nonparticipating property owner(s) giving consent
to exceed the limits for setback, sound level limitations, or shadow flicker on
his or her property.
   (Q)   Recycling dumpsters and bins.
      (1)   Recycling dumpsters and bins shall be provided appropriate area for
multi-family dwellings as defined by the Solid Waste Agency of Lake County.
      (2)   Areas used for collecting solid waste shall include adequate areas
for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Wherever feasible, areas for
collecting and loading recyclable materials shall be adjacent to solid waste
collection areas.
   (R)   Beekeeping and apiaries. The keeping of honey bees, of the European
species Apis mefifera, shall be permitted in the Agricultural, Rural Estate.
Estate, R1, R2, R3, and R4 Zoning Districts on lots less than 200,000 square
feet in area, as an accessory use to a principal use, provided the following
conditions are met,
      (1)   Number of beehives. Two full beehives (hives) and two “nucleus
hives” shall be permitted on lots up to and including a-minimum lot area of
10,000 square feet of area, and one beehive and one nucleus hive shall be
permitted for each additional 10,000 square feet. There shall be no limit on
the number of hives kept on parcels with an area of 200,000 square feet or
more. Nucleus hives, consisting of five or fewer frames, are kept for the
purposes of queen and pest management.
      (2)   Location and setbacks.
         (a)   Setbacks to property lines. Hives and related structures that
form the apiary shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from any adjoining
improved alley, easement for purposes of ingress or egress, or road right-of-
way and a minimum of ten feet from all other property lines. ln the case of an
unimproved right of way, this provision may be modified by the Planning.
Building and Development Department Director in consultation with the
appropriate local roadway authority.
         (b)   Setback to habitable structures. Hives shall be located a
minimum of 30 feet from any existing habitable structures on any adjoining
parcel, such as dwellings, non-residential buildings, patios, porches, gazebos,
decks, swimming pools, or permanently affixed play equipment, but not including
storage structures such as garages or sheds.
         (c)   Fencing. On parcels of 40,000 square feet or less, hives shall
be enclosed behind a minimum four-foot high fence, hedge, or wall.
         (d)   Signage. In lieu of the fencing requirement in subsection (R)(2)
(c) above, a sign, or signs, identifying the presence of beehives on the
property shall be posted so as to be reasonably visible within close proximity
of the apiary.
         (e)   Flyway barrier. On parcels of 40,000 square feet or less, where
the beehive entrance is oriented to an exterior property line, a six-foot high,
solid flyway barrier (e.g., fence, wall, or dense shrub) shall be located
between the hive entrance and the property line and shall extend five feet in
each direction.
      (3)   Management practices.
         (a)   Water supply.
            1.   A supply of water shall be continuously available and located
within the parcel, provided that it is closer than water sources on any
adjoining parcel.
            2.   Water supply shall be designed to allow bees to access water
by landing on a hard surface. Water requirement shall be in effect from April 1
to November 30 or any and all days in which temperature exceeds 55 degrees for
three consecutive days.
         (b)   Requeening. In any instance in which a hive exhibits unusually
aggressive characteristics, as verified by Illinois Apiary inspector, the
property owner shall destroy, move to another parcel, or requeen the hive
within 14 days of observation.
         (c)   Moveable combs. All honey bees shall be kept in hives with
removable combs, which shall be kept in good repair and usable condition.
 
COMMENTARY:
State Regulations: Per the Illinois Department of Agriculture, hives shall be
registered with the Illinois Department of Agriculture and actively maintained
in accordance with 510 ILCS 20/1 et seq., the Illinois Bees and Apiaries Act.
 
   (S)   Chickens. The keeping of hens, the female of the chicken species
Gallus gailus domesticus, shall be permitted in single family residential
zoning areas, on zoning lots of 10,000 square feet or greater, provided the
following conditions are met.
      (1)   Number of hens.
         (a)   This table identifies the number of hens allowed on non-exempt
residential property.
 
Minimum Lot Size Maximum Number of Hens Allowed
None             4
10,000 sq. ft.   6
20,000 sq. ft.   8
40,000 sq. ft.   10
80,000 sq. ft.   12
 
         (b)   There shall be no limit on the number of hens kept on parcels
with an area of 200,000 square feet or more.
      (2)   Chicken coops and yards.
         (a)   Chicken coop.
            1.   Hens shall be kept in an enclosed outdoor coop, an accessory
structure used for the purpose of keeping live chickens, so as to offer
protection from weather elements and from predators and trespassers.
            2.   Coops shall be built and kept in such a manner, large enough
to provide at least three square feet per hen and allow the hens easy ingress
and egress to an enclosed chicken yard. Coops may be freestanding or integrated
into an accessory structure. Freestanding coops shall not exceed eight feet in
height.
            3.   Coops shall be covered with uniform materials and shall be
maintained intact with all parts secure. Any repairs shall maintain consistency
with original structure in appearance and condition. The coop must be replaced,
removed, or repaired upon evidence of deterioration.
         (b)   Chicken yard.
            1.   Coops shall be connected with an enclosed chicken yard or run.
            2.   Hens may be allowed to roam in a fenced back yard, but shall
not be allowed to roam outside of the fenced yard. Hens must be returned to the
secured chicken coop each night.
            3.   Chicken yards constructed with wire mesh fencing shall retain
a flat, uniform plane, in a well-maintained, safe condition.
      (3)   Location and setbacks.
         (a)   Street setbacks. Chicken coops and yards shall not be located
between the principal building and any improved alley, easement for purposes of
ingress or egress, or road right-of-way. In the case of an unimproved right of
way, this provision may be modified by the Planning, Building and Development
Department Director in consultation with the appropriate local roadway
authority.
         (b)   Setback to habitable structures. In addition to setback
requirements for accessory structures, chicken coops shall be located a minimum
of 30 feet from any existing structures on any adjoining parcel, such as
dwellings, non-residential buildings, patios, porches, gazebos, decks, or
swimming pools, but not including storage structures such as garages or sheds.
      (4)   Prohibitions and management practices.
         (a)   Roosters. The keeping of roosters shall not be allowed on non-
exempt property.
         (b)   Odors. Chicken coops and yards must be cleaned on a regular
basis so they remain free from undue accumulated waste, such as to cause odors
reasonably detectable on adjacent properties.
         (c)   Feed. All feed for hens shall, except when placed for
consumption by the hens, be kept in containers with tightly fitted lids that
are rodent-proof.
         (d)   Maintenance of coops. Coops shall be maintained in good repair
and non-dilapidated condition.
         (e)   Slaughter. No outdoor slaughter of chickens shall be allowed.
 
COMMENTARY:
State Regulations: Per the Illinois Department of Agriculture, those wishing to
keep chickens hens on their premises shall complete a Livestock Premises
Registration.
 
   (T)   Value added agricultural processing. Value added agricultural
processing is permitted as an accessory use to an agriculture use on zoning
lots of 200,000 square feet or more, provided the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The agricultural processing must be clearly subordinate to and
supportive of the principal agricultural use of the property. The total
processing area must be 1,200 square feet or less in gross floor area. The
primary ingredients used must be grown on-site.
      (2)   The agricultural processing will not cause odor, vibration, noise,
electrical interference, or fluctuation in voltage that is perceptible beyond
the lot line of the parcel upon which the agricultural processing is conducted.
      (3)   Any outdoor processing operation shall be located at least 50 feet
from all property lines.
      (4)   Examples of permitted agricultural processing of products include
but are not limited to food products, cheese, honey, herbal products, soap, and
woolen goods. Any and all processing of fish, meat or game is prohibited.
      (5)   The operation shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws.
   (U)   Accessory solar energy systems.
      (1)   Types.
         (a)   Roof-mounted. Building-mounted solar energy systems may be
mounted on accessory or principal structures in all zoning districts. All
applicable accessory or principal structure requirements apply to building-
mounted solar energy systems.
         (b)   Building-integrated. Building-integrated solar energy systems
may be integrated into accessory or principal structures in all zoning
districts. Solar energy systems that are integrated into any structure shall be
regulated as architectural features, including applicability of setback
exceptions of §
151.131(C)(3)(l).
         (c)   Ground-mounted. Ground-mounted solar energy systems that meet
the definitions of accessory solar energy systems in §
151.271 shall be regulated as follows:
            1.   Residential districts. Accessory use medium- and large-scale
solar energy systems shall require a conditional use permit in all residential
zoning districts. Accessory use small-scale solar energy systems in all
residential zoning districts shall require a conditional use permit unless
exempted as follows:
               a.    Accessory small-scale solar energy systems that are
accessory to a nonresidential use shall be permitted by right.
               b.    Accessory small-scale solar energy systems that are
accessory to a residential use that do not exceed 5% of the net buildable area
of a lot, or 500 square feet, whichever is less, shall be permitted by right.
            2.   Nonresidential districts. Small-scale solar energy systems are
permitted as an accessory use in all nonresidential districts. Medium- and
large-scale solar energy systems are permitted by right as an accessory use in
the II and LI zoning districts and shall require a conditional use permit in
all other nonresidential zoning districts.
            3.   Campus settings. Accessory use ground-mounted solar energy
systems of all sizes (small, medium, or large) shall be permitted by right in
all zoning districts for those institutional, commercial, or industrial uses
with campuses comprised of five acres or more.
      (2)   Approval. Accessory use medium and large-scale solar energy systems
in all zoning districts shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site
plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (3)   Street setbacks. Accessory use ground-mounted solar energy systems
located in residential zoning districts shall not be located between the
principal building and any road right-of-way. In the case of an unimproved
right-of-way, this provision may be modified by the Planning, Building and
Development Department Director in consultation with the appropriate local
roadway authority.
      (4)   Location. Accessory use ground-mounted solar energy systems must
meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure in the underlying
zoning district.
      (5)   Height.
         (a)   Residential. The total height of any ground-mounted solar energy
system accessory to a residential use shall not exceed ten feet, as measured
from grade to the highest point of the solar arrays. In instances when greater
height is deemed necessary to allow for maximum efficiency of the solar energy
system, or when necessary to address site constraints such as topography, the
Planning Director shall be authorized to allow a maximum height of 15 feet.
         (b)   Nonresidential. The total height of any ground-mounted solar
energy system accessory to a nonresidential use shall not exceed 15 feet, as
measured from grade to the highest point of the solar arrays.
      (6)   Lot coverage. Ground-mounted solar panels are not subject to
impervious surface ratio (ISR) calculations of §§
151.125,
151.233(C)(1)(e), and
151.233(C)(2)(f).
      (7)   Site development permits. A site development permit may be
required, per regulations set forth in §
151.145(B), depending on proposed foundation, footings, and/or site
disturbance.
      (8)   Concentrated solar technology. No solar energy system may utilize
concentrated solar thermal technology in any zoning district.
   (V)   Non-customary recreational structures. Non-customary recreational
structures include certain recreational structures which do not customarily
occur as an accessory use in residential districts and which have aspects that
are characteristic of public, commercial, or community facilities. Examples of
non-customary recreational structures include but are not limited to
skateboard/bike ramps, sports courts, and ice rinks.
      (1)   Zoning. Non-customary recreational structures shall be allowed as
an accessory use in the following districts AG, E, and R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5,
and R-6 zoning districts on lots with a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet,
provided all applicable standards are met. A delegated conditional use permit
shall be required for lots with an area of less than 40,000 square feet.
      (2)   Setbacks. Non-customary recreational structures must meet principal
structure setbacks required in the underlying zoning district. In addition to
setback requirements for principal structures, non-customary recreational
structures shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from any existing structures
on any adjoining parcel, such as dwellings, nonresidential buildings, patios,
porches, gazebos, decks, but not including swimming pools or storage structures
such as garages or sheds. Given the unique impacts of non-customary
recreational structures, setbacks and buffering may be modified on a site-
specific basis. See subsection (V)(4) of this section.
      (3)   Noise. The noise level resulting from a non-customary recreational
structure shall not exceed 60 decibels when measured from an adjoining property
line.
      (4)   Buffering. Given the unique impacts of such structures on
surrounding properties, non-customary recreational structures shall require
landscape buffering and/or fencing to be determined on a site-specific basis.
      (5)   Hours of use. Hours of use shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. For those properties requiring a conditional use permit, hours of use will
be determined as a condition of approval.
      (6)   Lighting. Lighting shall subject to the standards of §
151.168(A)(3) and the hours of operations of subsection (V)(5) above.
   (W)   Minor fill/grade operations. Projects in all zoning districts shall be
subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan review procedures of §
151.070. Site capacity/site plan review shall be conducted concurrently with
any required conditional use permit review.
      (1)   Total volume.
         (a)   Development projects necessitating the accessory importation of
fill material between 500 and 2,000 cubic yards per acre, provided total fill
volume is 60,000 cubic yards or less, shall require a delegated conditional use
permit in all zoning districts. In addition to seeking a delegated conditional
use permit, minor projects that meet the criteria of this subsection must
follow all site specifications, site plan review requirements, application
requirements, operating standards and other conditions listed in §
151.112(JJ) Major Fill/Grade Operations, with the exception of the fill area
setback requirements which shall be established by the conditional use permit.
         (b)   All projects consisting of the importation of fill as a
principal use at a scale less than a major fill/grade operation shall require a
delegated conditional use permit in all zoning districts.
 
COMMENTARY:
Development projects necessitating the accessory importation of fill material
up to 500 cubic yards per acre are allowed in all zoning districts, provided
total fill volume is 10,000 cubic yards or less (but see subsection (1)b above
for standards governing minor principal fill/grade operations).
 
 
COMMENTARY:
Any projects importing over 2,000 cubic yards per acre of fill or a total fill
volume of greater than 60,000 cubic yards are considered a major fill/grade
operation and are subject to the standards set forth in Section
151.112(JJ) Major Fill/Grade Operations.
 
(Ord., § 6.4, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed - - ; Ord.
19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 22-1356, passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 23-0675,
passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024)
§ 151.114 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   Authorization. Temporary uses are allowed in accordance with the
following
Table 151.114 and all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
Table 151.114: Temporary Uses
Use Types AG RE E R1 R2 R3 R4 R4A R5 R6 RR GO LC RC GC LI II OS
Table 151.114: Temporary Uses
Use Types                                                       AG RE E R1 R2 R3 R4 R4A R5 R6 RR GO LC RC GC LI II OS
Animal show (see §                                             P  P  P                  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(E))
Batch plant for road construction (see §                       P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(G))
Carnival or circus (see §                                      P                      P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(H))
Contractor’s model home (see §                               P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(J))
Contractor’s office and construction equipment sheds (see §  P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(I))
Events of public interest (see §                               P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(K))
                                         Material staging       P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
                                         Material stockpiling
Material staging, stockpiling, and       and processing of
processing of dredged materials (see §  dredged materials (on  P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(L))                              residential lots
                                         200,000 sq. ft. or
                                         more)1
Public safety training structure (see §                        P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(M))
Real estate sales office (see §                                P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   
151.114(N))
Rodeo (see §                                                   P  P  P                  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(F))
Shelters, temporary (see §                                     P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
151.114(P))
                                         Christmas tree sales   P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
                                         lots
                                         Farm produce, seasonal P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Temporary sales (see §                  sales of
151.114 (O))                             Farmers' market        P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
                                         Food sales                                         P       
                                         Garage sales           P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
                                         Retail nursery stock   P  P  P P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
                                         sales
P= permitted subject to all other applicable standards of this chapter.
1200,000 square feet shall be required; however, a smaller site area may be
approved by the Director, in consultation with the MDT team, if exceptional
site characteristics and/or application conditions would mitigate any adverse
impacts on the surrounding area.
   (B)   Temporary use permit required. No temporary use shall be established
unless a temporary use permit evidencing the compliance of the use with the
provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this chapter has
been issued by the Planning, Building and Development Director. The Planning,
Building and Development Director shall be authorized to impose conditions on
the application in accordance with §
151.045(I).
   (C)   Applications. Applications for temporary use permits shall be
submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms
available in the Planning, Building and Development Department. Applications
shall be submitted at least 30 days before the date of the event or start of
the temporary use, unless this timeframe is reduced by the Planning, Building
and Development Director. Each application shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of structures,
improvements, parking areas and other features that exist or are proposed on
the site; and
      (2)   Signed, written permission from the owner of or the agency having
jurisdiction over the subject property.
   (D)   General standards. The following standards shall apply to all
temporary uses unless otherwise expressly stated.
      (1)   Access approval from the highway authority with jurisdiction over
the subject road shall be required.
      (2)   No permanent or temporary electrical connection shall be installed
without an electrical permit and inspection.
      (3)   A building permit and inspection shall be obtained prior to the
construction of any temporary structures.
      (4)   Temporary structures shall be located at least four feet from any
buildings or structures on the subject property.
      (5)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized
to require evidence of approval from the Lake County Health Department
regarding temporary sanitation facilities.
      (6)   No signs in connection with a temporary use shall be permitted
except in accordance with the provisions of §
151.173. All temporary signage shall be removed immediately upon cessation of
the temporary use.
      (7)   Temporary uses or structures shall not encroach into any required
landscaping.
      (8)   Parking areas shall be provided for the temporary use (in addition
to required parking for any principal use existing or proposed on the site),
and the areas shall be capable of accommodating the number of parking spaces
that are required for the most similar use type under §
151.165.
      (9)   Requests for modifications or waivers from any of the time limits
of this section shall require review and approval in accordance with the
delegated conditional use permit procedures of §
151.050.
      (10)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall have the
authority to suspend, revoke, or modify a temporary use permit immediately upon
determination that the conditions and requirements set forth in the permit have
been violated. Written notice of the Planning, Building and Development
Director’s determination to suspend, revoke, or modify the permit shall be
promptly provided to the applicant. A determination under this subsection (C)
shall be final and conclusive unless the applicant takes an appeal to the
Zoning Board of Appeals within ten calendar days after receipt of notice of the
Planning, Building and Development Director’s determination.
      (11)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall have the
authority to deny temporary use permits to any person who owns, applied for or
otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of this chapter or who
has demonstrated a willful history of violations, including any condition
attached to a permit or approval previously granted by the county. This
provision shall apply regardless of whether the property for which the permit
or other approval is sought is the property in violation.
      (12)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall have the
authority to deny temporary use permits on any land or structure or
improvements thereon, upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a
provision of this chapter, including any condition attached to a permit or
approval previously granted by the county. This enforcement provision shall
apply regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is responsible for
the violation in question.
      (13)   The main road from which access is taken shall always be kept free
of dust, dirt, mud, and other debris.
      (14)   Any food service operation that sells, prepares or serves
potentially hazardous food must obtain an approved food service permit from the
Lake County Health Department and is subject to inspection.
   (E)   Animal show. Animal shows shall be allowed for special events for
agricultural and wildlife education purposes, including but not limited to
shows, exhibitions, and contests. The maximum length of such a permit shall be
ten days, with no more than three permits for a total of no more than 20 days
issued per zoning lot in any calendar year.
 
COMMENTARY:
Private, non-public events on the sponsor's property such as private
educational activities are not considered animal shows.
 
   (F)   Rodeo.
      (1)   Rodeos shall be allowed when accessory to an approved agricultural
exempt use and limited to specified hours and a maximum of seven days per
calendar year per zoning lot.
      (2)   Rodeos shall be limited to the dates and hours of operation
specified in the permit.
      (3)   The minimum setbacks for the Agricultural (AG) Zoning District
shall apply for any structure or activity associated with the rodeo.
      (4)   Rodeos shall be permitted only on parcels greater than ten acres in
size. A parcel containing a rodeo shall be located at least 500 feet away from
any property zoned and used for residential purposes.
      (5)   Noise levels associated with rodeos shall not exceed 70 dB(A) (SLOW
meter response) at the property line of any property zoned and used for
residential purposes.
      (6)   If liquor will be sold on the property, a liquor permit shall be
obtained from the Chair of the Liquor Control Commission, as required by the
Liquor Control Ordinance (see
Chapter 111).
      (7)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized
to require proof of insurance to ensure public safety and protection.
      (8)   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to see that
the area used for the event is maintained in a condition that provides for the
public health, safety, and welfare for event attendees and neighbors alike.
         (b)   In the event that authorized personnel from the Lake County
Sheriff’s Office determine that the activity is a threat to the public health,
safety, or general welfare, the Lake County Sheriff’s Office shall have the
right to close the event to ensure the health, safety, or general welfare of
attendees or neighbors.
   (G)   Batch plant for road construction.
      (1)   Batch plants shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
building used for residential purposes.
      (2)   The period for which the permit shall be valid shall be stated on
the permit and shall not exceed the duration of the construction contract by
more than 14 days.
      (3)   All facilities placed or located on the site shall be removed and
the site restored to a clean and vegetated condition within the timeframe of
the permit.
   (H)   Carnival or circus.
      (1)   The maximum length of the permit shall be ten days and no more than
one permit shall be issued per zoning lot in any calendar year.
      (2)   No structure or equipment shall be located within 200 feet of any
(off-site) building used for residential purposes.
      (3)   Carnival or circus events may not use live animals in any manner.
   (I)   Contractor’s office and construction equipment sheds.
      (1)   (a)   Contractor’s office and construction equipment sheds shall be
allowed in any zoning district when accessory to an allowed construction
project.
         (b)   Contractor’s office and construction equipment sheds must be
located on the same site as the construction project unless approved by the
Planning, Building and Development Director.
      (2)   No contractor’s office or shed shall contain sleeping or cooking
accommodations, except as necessary to accommodate security personnel.
      (3)   The maximum length of the permit shall be one year. The permit may
be renewed throughout the duration of the construction period.
      (4)   Any office or shed shall be removed within 14 days of completion of
the construction project.
   (J)   Contractor’s model homes.
      (1)   Temporary use permits for one or more contractor’s model homes may
be issued for any subdivision that has received final plat approval.
      (2)   Temporary use permits for one or more model homes may be issued
prior to final plat approval, subject to the following standards:
         (a)   Final engineering plans must be approved by all applicable
county reviewing agencies and a site development permit must be issued prior to
building permit approval.
         (b)   Model homes shall comply with minimum setback standards of the
underlying zoning district. Setbacks from existing property lines and proposed
lot lines shall be shown on the required site plan.
         (c)   The maximum number of contractor’s model homes that may be
established prior to final plat approval shall not exceed 20% of the total
number of dwelling units proposed in the development, or five dwelling units,
whichever is less.
         (d)   Temporary occupancy permits for the model homes shall not be
issued until:
            1.   Final plat approval is obtained; and
            2.   Roads, appropriate means of sewage disposal, storm sewers,
stormwater management, and other required public improvements are substantially
completed in that area of the development where the model homes have been
constructed.
         (e)   A temporary use permit shall be valid for one year and may be
renewed.
   (K)   Events of public interest. Events of public interest, including but
not limited to picnics, races for motorized vehicles, water craft or air craft
races, fishing derbies, dinner dances, fundraisers, survival games, haunted
houses, outdoor concerts, auctions, tent meetings, farm-to-table events, and
supervised public display of fireworks shall be subject to the following
standards.
 
COMMENTARY:
Private, non-commercial events on the sponsor’s property such as home owners’
associations picnics at the subdivision park, corporate picnics on the corporate
campus, private weddings at a private residence or subdivision clubhouse, and the
like, are not considered events of public interest.
 
      (1)   Unless otherwise expressly approved, all uses and activities shall
be limited to specified hours and a maximum of 15 days per calendar year (per
zoning lot).
      (2)   All activities and uses shall be limited to the dates and hours of
operation specified in the permit.
      (3)   Events of public interest shall be permitted in residential
districts only when located on the site of a permitted nonresidential use. Any
temporary event of public interest in a residential zoning district must be
directly related to an approved nonresidential, institutional, or agricultural
use.
      (4)   Traffic control shall be arranged by the operators of the event
with the Lake County Sheriff’s Office.
      (5)   Water-based events of public interest shall require 60-day advanced
notification to and coordination with all applicable governmental agencies
having jurisdiction, the approval of any applicable agency permits, and the
payment of any applicable agency fees prior to the issuance of a temporary use
permit.
      (6)   Public parking for the exclusive use of the facility/event shall be
provided and a stabilized drive to the parking area shall be maintained. It is
the responsibility of the operators to guide traffic to these areas. No parking
shall be permitted on any road or public right-of-way.
      (7)   Noise levels associated with events of public interest, except for
supervised display of fireworks, shall not exceed 60 dB(A) (SLOW meter
response) at the property line of any abutting property zoned and used for
residential purposes.
      (8)   The site shall be cleared of all debris within 24 hours of the end
of the event and cleared of all temporary structures within seven days after
closing of the event. A cash bond or other assurance may be required by the
Planning, Building and Development Director to ensure cleanup. Bond amounts
shall be based on the estimated costs of cleanup and site restoration.
      (9)   If liquor will be used, sold, or consumed on the property, a liquor
permit shall be obtained from the Chair of the Liquor Control Commission, as
required by the Liquor Control Ordinance (see
Chapter 111).
      (10)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be
authorized to require proof of insurance to ensure public safety and
protection.
      (11)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to see that the
area used for the event is maintained in a condition that provides for the
public health, safety, and welfare for event attendees and neighbors alike. In
the event that authorized personnel from the Lake County Sheriff’s Office
determine that the activity is a threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare, the Lake County Sheriff’s Office shall have the right to close the
event to ensure the health, safety, or general welfare of attendees or
neighbors.
      (12)   In addition to the conditions listed above, a temporary use permit
for supervised public displays of fireworks shall only be issued subject to the
terms and conditions of the Fireworks Ordinance of the county (see
Chapter 92).
      (13)   In addition to the conditions listed above, a temporary food
service permit for farm-to-table events must be obtained from the Lake County
Health Department prior to issuance of a temporary use permit.
   (L)   Material stockpiling and processing of dredged materials. Temporary
material stockpiling and processing shall be subject to the following
standards:
      (1)   Permitting and public outreach. The use shall be subject to both
site development and temporary use permit processes. Following application
submittal, staff will determine whether public information meeting would be
required. A staff administered meeting may be held to gather information and
feedback, as well as offer an opportunity for the public to learn about the
use.
      (2)   Director approval. Approval of the temporary use permit is
contingent on the Planning, Building, and Development Department Director’s
approval. If a specific proposed site requiring a temporary use permit presents
an unreasonable risk to public health, safety or welfare, the Director shall
have the authority to deny the request.
      (3)   Maximum length of permit. Temporary use permits shall be limited to
a maximum two-year period of time. However, the permit may be renewed in
increments of up to two years in the absence of a pattern of credible
complaints. In consideration of any such permit renewal, the Director may
require a public information meeting to obtain additional input, as
appropriate.
      (4)   Access.
         (a)   For properties without an approved access location, evidence
that an access permit can be obtained, for the proposed use, from the highway
authority having jurisdiction. For properties with a previously approved access
location, evidence from the highway authority having jurisdiction that the
existing access point is sufficient to serve the proposed use; if the existing
access is insufficient, evidence that a new access permit can be obtained, for
the proposed use, from the highway authority having jurisdiction.
         (b)   For properties with an access location onto a private road,
evidence that permission can be obtained, for the proposed use from: 1)
homeowners’ association having responsibility for maintenance of the private
road, or 2) a majority of the property owners fronting the access road in the
absence of an active association. Applicants must also show that they have or
can obtain access permits from the highway authority which has jurisdiction
over the road onto which the private road terminates, as outlined in subsection
(L)(4)(a).
      (5)   Permission to use property. The application must include a signed,
written permission from the owner of, or the agency having jurisdiction over,
the subject property or properties.
      (6)   Site restoration plan.
         (a)   A site restoration plan must be submitted to and approved by the
county.
         (b)   The exact termination date for the completion of operations and
the restoration of the site shall be established in the temporary use permit
review process and imposed at the time of approval based upon the estimated
length of time the operation will be conducted.
      (7)   Operating standards. The applicant shall provide an operating plan.
The operating plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following information:
         (a)   Number of employees anticipated at the facility.
         (b)   Proposed hours of operations for receipt of material.
         (c)   Proposed daily average/maximum volume (in tons) of material to
be received at the facility.
         (d)   Identification of the maximum number of vehicles (by vehicle
type) proposed to utilize the facility on a daily basis.
         (e)   Description of any equipment proposed to be utilized to prepare
the material for stockpiling or shipment and the location and design of any
noise-buffering elements, sheltering and operating controls to minimize noise
impacts.
         (f)   Description of operating methods employed to control odor,
accidental combustion of material, disease vectors, dust, and litter.
         (g)   Description of the method and equipment utilized to load
recyclable and non-recyclable general construction or demolition for shipment
from the facility.
         (h)   Specification of typical and maximum anticipated height of
stockpiled dredging material and debris. Identification of the buffering and/or
screening measures employed to minimize the visual impact of the proposed
stockpiles from surrounding land uses.
      (8)   Other conditions. The temporary use permit may establish, as
necessary, reasonable conditions that regulate activity on the site including
but not limited to:
         (a)   Hours and days of operation.
         (b)   Vehicle trips generated per day.
         (c)   Noise and dust emissions.
   (M)   Public safety training structure. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to approve the use of temporary
structures for public safety training conducted by or on behalf of a
governmental public safety entity to conduct training to fulfill the statutory
purpose of that entity. The temporary structure permit shall not exceed a
period of more than one year.
   (N)   Real estate sales office.
      (1)   Real estate sales offices shall be allowed in any zoning district
for any new development approved in accordance with this chapter. Unless
otherwise expressly approved by the Planning, Building and Development
Director, the real estate sales office shall be located on the site of a new
development. The office shall not be used as a residence, provided that a model
home may be used as a temporary sales office.
      (2)   The maximum length of the permit shall be one year. The permit may
be renewed throughout the sales period of the development.
      (3)   Applications to establish temporary real estate sales offices prior
to final plat approval shall be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the
builder and property owner acknowledging that the builder/owners will remove
any structures, including model homes, if the preliminary plat lapses prior to
approval of the final plat. The affidavit shall be in a form specified by the
Planning, Building and Development Director.
   (O)   Temporary sales. The standards of this subsection (O) shall apply to
farm produce sales, retail nursery sales associated with wholesale nurseries,
Christmas tree sales, garage sales, farmers’ markets, and food sales.
      (1)   Farm produce sales (seasonal).
         (a)   Seasonal sales of farm produce and value added agricultural
products may be allowed by temporary use permit in all zoning districts for a
period not to exceed eight months per calendar year. In residential zoning
districts, seasonal sale of farm produce and value added agricultural products
shall only be allowed on parcels having a minimum area of 80,000 square feet
and a minimum road frontage of 190 feet and further provided that the majority
of the produce and primary ingredients of products are grown on-site.
         (b)   Temporary sales shall be allowed only during daylight hours,
with specific hours of operation specified in the temporary use permit.
         (c)   All sales shall be conducted at least 30 feet from all streets
and public rights-of-way.
         (d)   A minimum of 30-foot setback shall be maintained from property
used or zoned for residential purpose.
         (e)   The property shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate
off-street parking in addition to required parking for any existing use on the
property.
         (f)   Sales shall be conducted in such a manner so as not to interfere
with traffic or cause a nuisance.
         (g)   The access drive to the site shall be located at least 150 feet
from the right-of-way of any public road intersection or other major access
drive unless there is an existing access within 150 feet of the intersection
and the highway authority having jurisdiction grants approval to use the
existing access.
      (2)   Retail nursery stock sales associated with wholesale nurseries.
         (a)   Retail nursery stock sales events associated with wholesale
nurseries may be allowed by temporary use permits and shall be limited to 30
days per calendar year.
         (b)   Retail nursery stock sales shall be allowed only during daylight
hours, with specific hours of operation specified in the temporary use permit.
         (c)   All sales shall be conducted at least 30 feet from all streets
and public rights-of-way.
         (d)   A minimum of 30-foot setback shall be maintained from property
used or zoned for residential purposes.
         (e)   The property shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate
off-street parking in addition to required parking for any existing use on the
property.
         (f)   All sales on the property shall be limited to stock grown on-
site.
         (g)   The retail nursery stock sales associated with wholesale
nurseries shall comply with §
151.112(W).
      (3)   Christmas tree sales.
         (a)   Christmas tree sales may be allowed by temporary use permit in
all zoning districts for a period not to exceed 45 days per calendar year.
Christmas tree sales shall be allowed in residential zoning districts only when
located on the site of a permitted nonresidential use. If the principal use of
the property is a Christmas tree farm on a property containing a minimum of
200,000 square feet or is a retail greenhouse/nursery or garden center, no
temporary use permit shall be required.
         (b)   All sales shall be conducted at least 30 feet from the right-of-
way of any street.
         (c)   A minimum of 30-foot setback shall be maintained from property
used or zoned for residential purpose.
         (d)   The property shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate
off-street parking in addition to required parking for any existing use on the
property.
         (e)   Sales shall be conducted in such a manner so as not to interfere
with traffic or cause a nuisance.
         (f)   The access drive to the site shall be located at least 150 feet
from the right-of-way of any public road intersection or other major access
drive unless there is an existing access within 150 feet of the intersection
and the highway authority having jurisdiction grants approval to use the
existing access.
      (4)   Garage sales.
         (a)   Garage sales shall be allowed in all zoning districts without a
permit, provided that no more than two garage sales shall be conducted on a
zoning lot in any calendar year.
         (b)   No garage sale shall be conducted for longer than three
consecutive days duration.
         (c)   Sales events may be conducted during daylight hours only.
         (d)   No more than two signs may be used to advertise a permitted
garage sale event. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in area and must
be located within the boundaries of the zoning lot on which the sale takes
place or on other private property, with the consent of the owner.
      (5)   Food sales.
         (a)   Temporary food stands may be allowed by temporary use permit in
the General Commercial (GC) Zoning District for a period not to exceed six
months per calendar year.
         (b)   Temporary food stands shall be allowed only during daylight
hours, with specific hours of operation specified in the temporary use permit.
         (c)   All sales shall be conducted at least 30 feet from all public
rights-of-way.
         (d)   A minimum 30-foot setback shall be maintained from adjoining
property used or zoned for residential purposes.
         (e)   The property shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate
off-street parking in addition to required parking for any other use on the
subject property.
         (f)   Sales shall be conducted so as not to interfere with traffic or
cause a nuisance.
         (g)   The access drive shall be located at least 150 feet from the
right-of-way of any public road intersection or other major access drive unless
there is an existing access within 150 feet of the intersection and the highway
authority having jurisdiction grants approval to use the existing access.
      (6)   Farmers’ markets.
         (a)    Farmers' markets , defined as an area for farmers and gardeners
to sell agricultural produce and products to the public, may be allowed by
temporary use permit in all zoning districts for a maximum of 24 days per
calendar year. In residential zoning districts, farmers’ markets shall be
allowed only when located on parcels with a permitted nonresidential use having
a minimum area of 80,000 square feet and a minimum road frontage of 190 feet.
         (b)   Sales may be conducted from trucks, open booths, or temporary
structures. At least 75% of the vendors must sell products obtained from local
food production or a cottage food operation.
         (c)   Farmers’ markets shall be allowed only during daylight hours,
with specific hours of operation specified in the temporary use permit.
         (d)   All sales booths, temporary structures, and trucks being used to
sell produce and products must maintain a minimum of 30-foot setback from all
property lines, streets, and public rights-of-way.
         (e)   The property shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate
off-street parking in addition to required parking for any existing use on the
property. There shall be no parking permitted in a right-of-way.
         (f)   Sales shall be conducted in such a manner so as not to interfere
with traffic or cause a nuisance.
         (g)   The access drive to the site shall be located at least 150 feet
from the right-of-way of any public road intersection or other major access
drive unless there is an existing access point within 150 feet of the
intersection and the highway authority having jurisdiction grants approval to
use the existing access.
         (h)   The operator and/or vendors must operate in compliance with all
applicable state and federal laws and obtain all permits and registrations as
required by Lake County and State of Illinois Health Departments prior to
issuance of a temporary use permit.
 
COMMENTARY:
Either a “temporary food service permit” or a “seasonal food service permit” must be
obtained from the Lake County Health Department prior to issuance of a temporary use
permit.
 
   (P)   Temporary shelter. When fire or natural disaster has rendered a
residence unfit for human habitation, the temporary use of a single mobile home
or recreational vehicle located on the parcel during rehabilitation of the
original residence or construction of a new residence is permitted subject to
the following additional regulations.
      (1)   Required water and sanitary facilities must be provided.
      (2)   The maximum length of a permit shall be six months, but the
Planning, Building and Development Director may extend the permit for a period
or periods not to exceed 60 days provided reasonable construction progress has
been made and the construction is being diligently pursued. Application for the
extension shall be made at least 15 days prior to expiration of the original
permit.
      (3)   The mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be removed from the
property upon issuance of any occupancy permit for the new or rehabilitated
residence. The applicant shall be required to provide express consent and
authorization to the county to remove the shelter at the owner’s expense upon
termination of the permit, if the applicant has not done so voluntarily.
   (Q)   Temporary structures for farm housing. Temporary structures for farm
housing that are associated with an exempt agricultural use shall be subject to
the following standards.
      (1)   A temporary use permit shall be required.
      (2)   Lake County Health Department approval shall be required.
      (3)   All structures used for temporary farm housing shall be subject to
the (principal structure) setback standards of the underlying zoning district.
      (4)   There shall be no limit on the number of structures allowed.
   (R)   Temporary structures for classrooms. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to approve the use of temporary
structures for portable classrooms, when the Planning, Building and Development
Director determines that the structures are necessary to accommodate uses and
activities of immediate necessity within the county.
   (S)   Temporary structures during construction.
      (1)   Upon application of a building permit for a nonresidential
principal structure, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall be
authorized to issue a temporary use permit for temporary structures to be used
on-site during the period of construction.
      (2)   The temporary structures shall be used only in furtherance of the
purpose for which the principal structure is being constructed and may remain
on the site only for the life of the building permit or a maximum of two years,
whichever is less.
   (T)   Temporary structures for scientific research and testing. The
Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized to approve the
use of temporary structures for scientific research and testing and ancillary
to an existing permitted principal manufacturing and production use on the
subject property, provided that the structures meet all applicable density and
dimensional requirements of this chapter.
(Ord., § 6.5, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed - -; Ord.
15-0701, passed 7-14-2015; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 22-1356, passed
10-11-2022; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024)
DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
§ 151.125 DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS TABLES.
   The following tables (
151.125(1) through
151.125(5)) establish standards for development in all base zoning districts.
 
COMMENTARY:
The residential and non-residential density and dimensional standards of this
section are not a “guarantee” of development intensities. Other factors such as
public facility availability, infrastructure capacity, building layout, and parking
configuration may have the effect of limiting development intensity more than the
stated standards. The inability to attain allowed development intensities shall not
serve as justification for adjusting other standards.
 
Table 151.125(1): Agricultural and Residential District Density and Dimensional Standards, Conventional Residential Development
                                                                                    Minimum Setbacks
                                               Min. Lot Size                        [3][4] (Ft.) (§
Zoning   Maximum Density (Units per Acre) (§                                       151.131(C))        Max. ISR (§  Max. Height (Ft.) (§
District 151.131 (F))                          Area (Sq. Ft.) (§  Width (Ft.) (§         Side        151.131 (D))  151.131 (E))
                                               151.131 (A))        151.131 (B))     Street (Min/  Rear
                                                                                           Total)
Table 151.125(1): Agricultural and Residential District Density and Dimensional Standards, Conventional Residential Development
                                                                                    Minimum Setbacks
                                               Min. Lot Size                        [3][4] (Ft.) (§
Zoning   Maximum Density (Units per Acre) (§                                       151.131(C))        Max. ISR (§  Max. Height (Ft.) (§
District 151.131 (F))                          Area (Sq. Ft.) (§  Width (Ft.) (§         Side        151.131 (D))  151.131 (E))
                                               151.131 (A))        151.131 (B))     Street (Min/  Rear
                                                                                           Total)
AG       0.20                                  200,000             300              30     30/60  50   0.10[2]       40[1]
RE       0.20                                  200,000             300              30     30/60  50   0.10[2]       40[1]
E        0.45                                  80,000              190              30     19/48  30   0.15[2]       40[1]
R1       0.80                                  40,000              130              30     13/33  30   0.20[2]       40
R2       1.33                                  20,000              90               30     9/23   15   0.30[2]       40
R3       2.00                                  12,000              60               30     7/17   15   0.30[2]       40
R4       2.50                                  8,500               60               30     6/15   15   0.40[2]       40
R-4A     5.00                                  See                                                15   0.50[2]       40
                                               Table 151.125(2)
R5       8.00                                  See                                                15   0.50[2]       40
                                               Table 151.125(2)
R6       12.00                                 See                                                15   0.50[2]       45
                                               Table 151.125(2)
RR       12.00                                 8,500               50               30     6/15   15   0.50[2]       40
Notes: Setbacks from alleys shall be the same as otherwise applicable side or rear setbacks
[1] Single-family dwellings  in the AG, RE, and E Zoning Districts may exceed the 40-foot building height limit by providing additional
setbacks, as follows: for each 1 foot of additional height above 40 feet, structures shall be set back from all front, side, and rear
property lines by two feet more than the otherwise required minimum setback. Structures in the AG, RE, or E Districts shall not exceed 50
feet in height.
[2] ISR shall be calculated by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on the site by the site’s base site area.
[3] A transition yard may also be required, which may increase the minimum setback shown in this table. See §
151.167(J).
[4] Any setback from a railroad right-of-way need not exceed 5 feet. A transition yard shall not be required in this instance.
 
Table 151.125(2): R-4A, R5, and R6 District Lot Size and Setback Standards
(Conventional Residential Development)
               Min. Lot Size       Minimum Setbacks[1][2] (Ft.) (§
Structure Type                     151.131(C))
               Area (Sq. Ft.) (§  Width (Ft.) (§  Street Side (Min/ Rear
               151.131(A))         151.131(B))             total)
Table 151.125(2): R-4A, R5, and R6 District Lot Size and Setback Standards
(Conventional Residential Development)
                        Min. Lot Size       Minimum Setbacks[1][2] (Ft.) (§
                                            151.131(C))
Structure Type          Area (Sq. Ft.) (§  Width (Ft.) (§         Side
                        151.131(A))         151.131(B))      Street (Min/  Rear
                                                                    total)
Detached house          8,500               60               30     6/15   15
Duplex                  12,500              85               30     10/23  15
Lot line               8,500               60               30     0/15   15
           First
Multi-     dwelling     8,500               60               30     6/15   15
dwelling   unit
[3],       Second
multiplex, dwelling     +5,000              +25              00     +4/08  0
townhouse  unit
           each add’l +3,000              +5               00     +1/02  0
           unit
Twinhouse              6,250               42.5             30     0/12   15
Note: Setbacks from alleys shall be the same as otherwise applicable side or
rear setbacks
[1] A transition yard may also be required, which may increase the minimum
setback shown in this table. See §
151.167(J).
[2] Any setback from a railroad right-of-way need not exceed 5 feet. A
transition yard shall not be required in this instance.
[3] Not applicable in the R-4A District.
 
Table 151.125(3): Agricultural and Residential District Density and Dimensional
Standards (Conservation Residential Development)
                                                                             Cluster
                                                                             Bonus [1]
                                                                             (% over
Zoning   Maximum Density (Units per Acre) (§  Minimum Open Space Ratio (§  max.
District 151.131(F))                           151.131(G))                   density)
                                                                             Min. Open
                                                                             Space
                                                                             50% 60% 70%
Table 151.125(3): Agricultural and Residential District Density and Dimensional
Standards (Conservation Residential Development)
                                                                             Cluster
                                                                             Bonus [1]
                                                                             (% over
Zoning   Maximum Density (Units per Acre) (§  Minimum Open Space Ratio (§  max.
District 151.131(F))                           151.131(G))                   density)
                                                                             Min. Open
                                                                             Space
                                                                             50% 60% 70%
AG       0.20                                  0.40                          5   10  15
RE       NA                                    N/A                           NA  NA  NA
E        0.45                                  0.40                          5   10  15
R1       0.80                                  0.30                          5   10  15
R2       1.33                                  0.30                          5   10  15
R3       2.00                                  0.30                          5   10  15
R4       2.50                                  0.30                          NA  NA  NA
R-4A     5.00                                  0.30                          NA  NA  NA
R5       8.00                                  0.30                          NA  NA  NA
R6       12.00                                 0.30                          NA  NA  NA
RR       12.00                                 0.30                          NA  NA  NA
[1] Cluster bonuses shall be given to developments in the AG, E, R-1, R-2, and R-
3 Districts that set aside open space above the minimum requirements. A 5% density bonus
(above the maximum number of units permitted by applicable density standards) is given
to developments that provide at least 50% open space; a 10% density bonus is given to
projects with a minimum of 60% open space; and 15% density bonus is given to projects
with at least 70% open space.
 
   COMMENTARY:
Sample Density Calculations under Conservation Residential Development Option
         Gross   Floodplains, Net             Maximum Number of Dwelling Units
Zoning   Land    Wetlands,    Site    Maximum By Open Space Amount
District Area    Water Bodies Area    Density 30%  40%  50%
         (Acres) and ROW      (Acres)         O.S. O.S. O.S. 60% O.S. 70% O.S.
                 (Acres)
Sample Density Calculations under Conservation Residential Development Option
         Gross   Floodplains, Net             Maximum Number of Dwelling Units
Zoning   Land    Wetlands,    Site    Maximum By Open Space Amount
District Area    Water Bodies Area    Density 30%   40%   50%   60%
         (Acres) and ROW      (Acres)         O.S.  O.S.  O.S.  O.S.  70% O.S.
                 (Acres)
AG       100     16           84      0.2     NA    16.8  17.64 18.48 19.32
AG       100     28.5         71.5    0.2     NA    14.3  15.02 15.73 16.45
E        100     16           84      0.45    NA    37.8  39.69 41.58 43.47
E        100     28.5         71.5    0.45    NA    32.18 33.78 35.39 37
R-1      100     16           84      0.8     67.2  67.2  70.56 73.92 77.28
R-1      100     28.5         71.5    0.8     57.2  57.2  60.06 62.92 65.78
R-2      100     16           84      1.33    111.7 111.7 117.3 122.9 128.5
R-2      100     28.5         71.5    1.33    95.1  95.1  99.85 104.6 109.4
R-3      100     16           84      2       168   168   176.4 184.8 193.2
R-3      100     28.5         71.5    2       143   143   150.2 157.3 164.5
 
Table 151.125(4): Residential District Density and Dimensional Standards
Non-Residential Development Allowed in Agricultural and Residential Districts
                                                     Setbacks[2][3]
         Floor  Minimum Size                         (Ft.) (§                              Height (§
Zoning   Area                                        151.131(C)         ISR (Each Lot) (§  151.131
District Factor Area (Sq. Ft.) (§  Width (Ft.) (§         Side        151.131 (D))        (E))
                151.131 (A))        151.131 (B))     Street (Min/  Rear
                                                            Total)
Table 151.125(4): Residential District Density and Dimensional Standards
Non-Residential Development Allowed in Agricultural and Residential Districts
                                                     Setbacks[2][3]
         Floor  Minimum Size                         (Ft.) (§                              Height (§
Zoning   Area                                        151.131(C)         ISR (Each Lot) (§  151.131
District Factor Area (Sq. Ft.) (§  Width (Ft.) (§         Side        151.131 (D))        (E))
                151.131 (A))        151.131 (B))     Street (Min/  Rear
                                                            Total)
AG       0.10   200,000             300              30     30/60  50   0.20                40[1]
RE       0.10   200,000             300              30     30/60  50   0.20                40[1]
E        0.15   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.30                40[1]
R1       0.20   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.35                40
R2       0.30   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.45                40
R3       0.30   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.50                40
R4       0.30   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.50                40
R-4A     0.30   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.50                40
R5       0.30   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.50                40
R6       0.30   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.50                45
RR       0.30   80,000              190              30     19/48  19   0.50                40
Setbacks from alleys shall be the same as otherwise applicable side or rear setbacks
[1] Structures in the AG, RE, and E Zoning Districts may exceed the 40-foot building height limit by
providing additional setbacks, as follows: for each 1 foot of additional height above 40 feet,
structures shall be set back from all front, side, and rear property lines by 2 feet more than the
otherwise required minimum setback. Structures in the AG, RE, or E Districts shall not exceed 50 feet
in height.
[2] A transition yard may also be required, which may increase the minimum setback shown in this table.
See §
151.167(J).
[3] Any setback from a railroad right-of-way need not exceed 5 feet. A transition yard shall not be
required in this instance.
 
Table 151.125(5): Non-Residential District Density and Dimensional Standards
                                                     Minimum Setbacks
         Floor  Minimum Size                         [4][5] (Ft.) (§
Zoning   Area                                        151.131(C))        Max. ISR (Each Lot) (§  Max Height (Ft.) (§
District Factor Area (Sq. Ft.) (§  Width (Ft.) (§         Side        151.131 (D))             151.131 (E))
                151.131 (A))        151.131 (B))     Street (Min/  Rear
                                                            Total)
Table 151.125(5): Non-Residential District Density and Dimensional Standards
                                                     Minimum Setbacks
         Floor  Minimum Size                         [4][5] (Ft.) (§
Zoning   Area                                        151.131(C))        Max. ISR (Each Lot) (§  Max Height (Ft.) (§
District Factor Area (Sq. Ft.) (§  Width (Ft.) (§         Side        151.131 (D))             151.131 (E))
                151.131 (A))        151.131 (B))     Street (Min/  Rear
                                                            Total)
GO       0.45   40,000              130              50     12     12   0.50                     50 [1]
LC [3]   0.50   10,000              50               30     12 [2] 12   0.75                     35
RC       0.20   20,000              100              50     10 [2] 10   0.75                     35
GC       0.30   10,000              50               30     12 [2] 12   0.70 [6]                 35
LI       0.45   40,000              130              50     20     20   0.60 [6]                 50 [1]
II       0.45   40,000              130              50     20     20   0.60 [6]                 50 [1]
OS       0.07   200,000             300              30     30     30   0.15                     35
Setbacks from alleys shall be the same as otherwise applicable side or rear setbacks
[1] Structures in the GO, LI, and II Zoning Districts may exceed the 50-foot building height limit by providing
additional setbacks, as follows: for each 1 foot of additional height above 50 feet, structures shall be set back from
all front, side, and rear property lines by 2 feet more than the otherwise required minimum setback. Structures in the
G0, LI, and II Districts shall not exceed 95 feet in height.
[2] Any one interior side setback may be waived if: (a) the development complies with all applicable fire codes; (b)
adjacent to LC or less restrictive district; and (c) adequate access is provided to the rear of the property.
[3] The maximum gross floor area for any single use shall be 5,000 square feet. The maximum gross floor area for any
single building shall be 10,000 square feet.
[4] A transition yard may also be required, which may increase the minimum setback shown in this table. See §
151.167(J).
[5] Any setback from a railroad right-of-way need not exceed 5 feet. A transition yard shall not be required in this
instance.
[6] Consumer vehicle sales, truck sales, recreational vehicle sales, boat sales and other similar vehicle sales uses
containing outdoor display, due to the need for increased parking, shall be permitted a maximum impervious surface
ratio of 0.80.
 
(Ord., § 7.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-
10-2019)
§ 151.126 CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   A conventional residential development consists of attached or
detached dwelling units developed in accordance with the density and
dimensional standards of §
151.125 (
Table 151.125(1)).
   (B)   Conventional residential developments shall be permitted by right
within subdivisions or on unsubdivided parcels.
   (C)   Conventional residential development shall be subject to the density
and dimensional standards of §
151.125 and all other applicable standards of this chapter.
   (D)   No more than one principal structure shall be located on a single lot.
However, this provision shall not preclude the development of a permitted
nonresidential use (provided it meets all applicable standards of
Table 151.125(4)) on a lot containing an existing principal residential
structure.
(Ord., § 7.2, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.127 CONSERVATION RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   A conservation residential development consists of residential uses
and structures established pursuant to the maximum density standard and minimum
open space ratio established for those uses in §
151.125 (
Table 151.125(3)).
   (B)   Conservation residential developments shall be allowed in all
residential zoning districts, but cluster density bonuses (for providing open
space in excess of minimum district standards) shall be allowed only in the AG,
E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts.
   (C)   The minimum required area for a conservation residential development
shall be five acres.
   (D)   Conservation residential developments are subject to the maximum
density and minimum open space standards of §
151.125, the conservation residential housing standards of §
151.130 and all other applicable standards of this chapter.
   (E)   When abutting a conventional development, a perimeter buffer of at
least 30 feet in width shall be provided.
   (F)   All landscaping shall meet the landscaping standards of §
151.199.
(Ord., § 7.3, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.128 NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   A nonresidential development consists of nonresidential uses developed in
accordance with the density and dimensional standards of §
151.125 (
Table 151.125(4) or
Table 151.125(5)). Nonresidential development shall be allowed within
subdivisions or on unsubdivided parcels and shall be subject to the density and
dimensional standards of §
151.125 and all other applicable standards of this chapter. Where a parcel
contains an existing nonconforming residential structure, a new nonresidential
use may be established, provided both uses, in the aggregate, comply with all
density and dimensional standards, and other applicable regulations, of this
chapter.
(Ord., § 7.4, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.129 AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
 
COMMENTARY:
The County Board supports affordable housing where infrastructure, including
water, sewer, roads, and schools can support it.
 
(Ord., § 7.5, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.130 CONSERVATION RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE TYPES.
   (A)   Detached house. A detached house is a single family detached dwelling
unit located on its own lot with private yards on all sides of the house. The
following standards apply to detached houses in a conservation residential
development:
Table 151.130(A): Detached House Conservation Residential Development
Standards
Table 151.130(A): Detached House Conservation Residential Development
Standards
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit
   Area (sq. ft6,500 square feet
   Width (ft.) 50 feet
Minimum Setbacks (Feet)
   Street      25
   Interior sid8
   Rear        25
Maximum height    35 feet*
*Structures in the AG, RE, and E Zoning Districts may exceed the 35-foot
building height limit by providing additional setbacks, as follows: for each
one foot of additional height above 35 feet, structures shall be set back from
all property lines by two feet more than the otherwise required minimum
setback. Structures in the AG, RE, or E Districts shall not exceed 45 feet in
height.
Notwithstanding the method prescribed by this chapter for calculating building
height, in no case shall the roof peak of any single family dwelling exceed 40
feet above the mean elevation at finished grade along the front of the
structure.
 
   Detached House Site Plan (Typical)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3032.jpg]
   (B)   Lot-line (detached) house.
      (1)   A lot-line house is a single family detached dwelling unit located
on its own lot and set on or within five feet of the interior side lot line.
      (2)   Windows or other openings that allow for visibility into the side
yard of the adjacent lot are not allowed.
      (3)   Windows that do not allow visibility into the side yard of the
adjacent lot, such as a clerestory window or a translucent window, are allowed.
A maintenance easement shall be required when the eaves or side walls of lot
line houses are within five feet of the adjacent property line. The width of
the easements shall be adequate to provide at least five feet of unobstructed
space between the furthermost projection of the structure and the edge of the
easement.
      (4)   The following standards apply to lot-line houses in a conservation
residential development:
Table 151.130(B): Lot-Line House Conservation Residential Development
Standards
Table 151.130(B): Lot-Line House Conservation Residential Development
Standards
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit
   Area (sq. ft5,500 square feet
   Width (ft.) 45 feet
Minimum Setbacks (Feet)
   Street      20 [1]
   Interior sid15
   Rear        20
Maximum height    35 feet*
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets and freeways
 
   Lot Line House Site Plan (Typical)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3034.jpg]
   (C)   Village (detached) house.
      (1)   (a)   A village house is a single family detached dwelling unit
located on an individual lot and characterized by very shallow front and side
yards.
         (b)   The placement of dwelling units close to streets and side lot
lines requires special landscaping or architectural treatment.
         (c)   The required landscaping is a defining element of a village
house.
      (2)   Dimensional standards. The following standards apply to village
houses in a conservation residential development:
Table 151.130(C): Village House Conservation Residential Development Standards
Table 151.130(C): Village House Conservation Residential Development Standards
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit
Area (sq. ft.)   4,500 square feet
Width (ft.)      45 feet
Minimum Setbacks (Feet)
   Street     15[1][2]
   Interior si5e
   Rear       20
Maximum height   35 feet
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets, arterial streets and freeways
[2] Front-entry garages shall be set back at least 20 feet from all streets.
 
   Village House Site Plan (Typical)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3036.jpg]
      (2)   Landscaping. In addition to the landscaping requirements of §
151.167, the required street setback area on each village house lot shall be
landscaped with:
1 canopy tree, one understory tree, OR 1 evergreen tree, two understory trees,
and ten shrubs;                        and ten shrubs;
1 canopy tree, one understory tree, OR 1 evergreen tree, two understory trees,
and ten shrubs;                        and ten shrubs;
AND
A porch that is roofed but not enclosed and extends at least 75% of the width
of the front of the house and is at least seven feet in depth, and two
understory trees;
OR
Ornamental fence/wall, 24-36 inches in height extending at least 75% of lot
width + two understory trees;
OR
A hedge (shrubs 18 inches on center) extending at least 75% of the lot width +
two understory trees;
OR
A berm or raised area averaging 18 inches above the average grade of the rest
of the yard and covering at least 40% of the yard, and ten shrubs.
 
   (D)   Twinhouse. A twinhouse is a type of structure consisting of two
dwelling units that are attached to one another, with each unit having a
completely separate entrance. Each unit within a twinhouse structure is located
on its own individual lot, and the common wall between attached units creates
the plane of the common property line between adjoining lots. The following
standards apply to twinhouses in a conservation residential development:
Table 151.130(D): Twinhouse Conservation Residential Development Standards
Table 151.130(D): Twinhouse Conservation Residential Development Standards
Minimum Lot Size Per Dwelling Unit
   Area (sq. ft.)                   3,200 square feet
   Width (ft.)                      35 feet
Minimum Setbacks (Feet)
   Street                           20 [1]
   Interior side (“non-attached”10ide)
   Rear                             20
Maximum height                         35 feet
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets, arterial streets, and freeways
 
   Twinhouse Site Plan (Typical)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3038.jpg]
   (E)   Duplex. A duplex is a type of structure consisting of two dwelling
units that are attached to one another, with each unit having a completely
separate entrance. Both dwelling units within a duplex structure are located on
the same lot. The following standards apply to duplexes in a conservation
residential development:
Table 151.130(E): Duplex Conservation Residential Development Standards
Table 151.130(E): Duplex Conservation Residential Development Standards
Minimum Lot Size
   Area (sq. ft.)                   6,400 square feet
   Width (ft.)                      70 feet
Minimum Setbacks (Feet)
   Street                           20 [1]
   Interior side (“non-attached”10ide)
   Rear                             20
Maximum height                         35 feet
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets, arterial streets, and freeways
 
   Duplex Site Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3040.jpg]
   (F)   Patio house.
      (1)   A patio house is a single family dwelling unit located on its own
lot. It may be attached or detached. The lot on which a patio house sits shall
be fully enclosed by a solid masonry wall located at the lot line, broken only
by driveways and pedestrian access points, thus creating a private yard area
between the house and the wall. All the walls shall be at least six feet in
height. When a patio house is located on a lot line, that portion of the house
located on the lot line may be considered as part of the required patio wall.
No more than eight patio houses shall be allowed within any single attached
structure.
      (2)   The following table sets out the dimensional standards for patio
houses within a conservation residential development:
Table 151.130(F): Patio House Conservation Residential Development Standards
Table 151.130(F): Patio House Conservation Residential Development Standards
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit
   Area (sq. ft.)                    2,700 square feet
   Width (ft.)                       38 feet
Minimum Patio Size
   Area (sq. ft.)                    750 square feet
   Width (Ft.)                       25 feet
Minimum setback (streets and lot lines) 25 feet [1]
Maximum height                          25 feet
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets, arterial streets, and freeways
 
   Patio House Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3042.jpg]
   (G)   Atrium house.
      (1)   An atrium house is a single family attached, one-story dwelling
unit, located on its own lot, with private individual access. Each dwelling
unit shall have a private yard or atrium. The entire atrium area of the house
shall be enclosed by the house or a wall. Walls shall be at least seven feet in
height along the rear and sides of the lot and at least six feet in height
along the front. No more than eight atrium houses may be attached in any single
structure.
      (2)   The following standards apply to atrium houses within a
conservation residential development:
Table 151.130(G): Atrium House Conservation Residential Development Standards
Table 151.130(G): Atrium House Conservation Residential Development Standards
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit
   Area (sq. ft.)   2,400 square feet
   Width (ft.)      40 feet
Minimum Patio Size
   Area (sq. ft.)   500 square feet
   Width (ft.)      20 feet
Minimum street setback 10 feet [1]
Maximum height         25 feet
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets, arterial streets, and freeways
 
Atrium House Site Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3044.jpg]
   (H)   Townhouse.
      (1)   A townhouse is a single family dwelling unit, attached from ground
to roof, with each unit having an individual outside access.
      (2)   Each unit within a townhouse development is located on an
individual lot, and the common wall between attached units creates the plane of
the common property line between adjoining lots.
      (3)   Rows of attached townhouses shall contain no less than three and no
more than eight dwelling units.
      (4)   The following table sets out the dimensional standards for
townhouses within a conservation residential development.
Table 151.130(H): Townhouse Conservation Residential Development Standards
Table 151.130(H): Townhouse Conservation Residential Development Standards
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit
   Area (sq. ft.)          1,800 square feet
   Width (ft.)             20 feet
Minimum Setbacks (Feet)
   Street                  20 [1]
   Rear                    15
Minimum exterior side setback 10 feet
Maximum height                35 feet
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets, arterial streets, and freeways
 
   Townhouse Site Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3046.jpg]
   (I)   Multiplex.
      (1)   A multiplex is a structure containing at least three and no more
than eight attached dwelling units.
      (2)   Each unit may take direct access to a private yard or access point,
or units may share yards and access.
      (3)   The units may be arranged in a variety of configurations, including
back-to-back, side-to-side, or vertically.
      (4)   Each multiplex structure shall be located on an individual lot,
which shall be owned and maintained by the building or unit owners.
      (5)   The following standards apply to multiplexes in a conservation
residential development:
Table 151.130(I): Multiplex Conservation Residential Development Standards
Table 151.130(I): Multiplex Conservation Residential Development Standards
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit
   Area (sq. ft1,700 square feet
   Width (ft.) 70 feet (per structure)
Minimum Setbacks (Feet) (Per Structure)
   Street      20 [1]
   Interior sid5
   Rear        15
Maximum height    35 feet
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets, arterial streets, and freeways
 
   Multiplex Site Plan (Typical)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3048.jpg]
   (J)   Multi-dwelling structures.
      (1)   A multi-dwelling structure is a structure containing more than
eight and no more than 48 individual dwelling units that share common access
and yards.
      (2)   Each multi-dwelling structure shall be located on an individual lot
that is owned and maintained by the building or unit owners.
      (3)   The following standards apply to multi-dwelling structures within a
conservation residential development:
Table 151.130(J): Multi-Dwelling Conservation Residential Development
Standards
Table 151.130(J): Multi-Dwelling Conservation Residential Development
Standards
Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit
   Area (sq. ft1,400 square feet
   Width (ft.) 100 feet (per structure)
Minimum Setbacks (Feet) (per structure)
   Street      25 [1]
   Interior sid25
   Rear        25
Maximum height    35 feet
[1] 30 feet from all collector streets, arterial streets, and freeways
 
   Multi-Dwelling Site Plan (Typical)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3050.jpg]
(Ord., § 7.6, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.131 MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Lot size. Lot size refers to the amount of horizontal land area
contained within lot lines of a lot, excluding streets, easements for street
purposes, and street rights-of-way.
   (B)   Lot width. Lot width refers to the horizontal distance between side
lot lines. Lot width shall be measured between side lot lines at the minimum
required front setback line (see
Figure 151.131(B)). When a lot has more than one street lot line, lot width
shall be measured along the street lot line with the narrower width. In R-1 and
more restrictive zoning districts, the minimum average width of lots at the
terminus of a cul-de-sac and on curvilinear streets shall comply with the
minimum width requirements of the underlying zoning district, provided that the
width measured at the building setback line shall be at least 50% of the
specified lot width but not less than 45 feet.
Figure 151.131(B): Measuring Lot Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3052.jpg]
      (1)   Panhandle lot exception. Panhandle lots may be allowed in
subdivisions established pursuant to the standards of this chapter.
         (a)   Permitted use of panhandle lots.
            1.   A panhandle lot exception may be used to facilitate creation
of a two-lot subdivision out of a parcel that has sufficient area but
insufficient width to be subdivided.
            2.   A panhandle lot may be used to eliminate access to collector
or arterial roads (see
Figure 151.131(B)(1)(a)2.).
Figure 151.131(B)(1)(a)2.: Panhandle Lot Used to Avoid Access to Collector or
Arterial Road
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3054.jpg]
            3.   A panhandle lot may be used when the buildable area of a
parcel is restricted due to the presence of a natural resource or irregular
property shape (see
Figure 151.131(B)(1)(a)3.).
Figure 151.131(B)(1)(a)3.: Panhandle Lot Used Due to Presence of Natural
Resource
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3056.jpg]
         (b)   Prohibited use of panhandle lots.
            1.   Panhandle lots shall not be used to avoid the development of
publicly dedicated streets otherwise required by this chapter when the effect
of their use would be to increase the number of access points (driveways) on a
publicly dedicated road right-of-way (see
Figure 151.131(B)(1)(b)1.).
Figure 151.131(B)(1)(b)1.: Panhandle Lots May Not Be Used to Avoid Public
Street Creation
    If Their Effect Would Be to Place Additional Driveways on Public Roads
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3058.jpg]
            2.   A panhandle lot shall not be used when an adjoining parcel of
land also has sufficient area but insufficient width to otherwise be
subdivided. In these cases, in lieu of platting a panhandle lot, a half-width
road right-of-way shall be platted along the common property line to facilitate
the platting of a full-width road right-of-way if and when the adjoining
property is subdivided (see
Figure 151.131(B)(1)(b)2.).
Figure 151.131(B)(1)(b)2.: Half-width Right-of-way in Lieu of Panhandle Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3060.jpg]
         (c)   Standards for panhandle lots.
            1.   The panhandle of a panhandle lot shall take direct access to a
publicly dedicated street right-of-way.
            2.   The panhandle of a panhandle lot shall not be less than 15
feet in width at its narrowest point.
            3.   The minimum street setback on a panhandle lot shall be
established at a distance equal to the required street setback from the
property line that is most parallel to the street lot line (road right-of-way
line). The lot width at this minimum required setback shall not be less than as
otherwise required by this chapter.
            4.   The area within the panhandle of a panhandle lot shall not be
counted as lot area for the purpose of meeting the minimum lot area
requirements of this chapter.
            5.   If required by the highway authority having jurisdiction over
the road on which the panhandle lot will take access, the panhandle of the lot,
or portion thereof, shall contain an access easement to allow the adjoining lot
to share access to the road. In no case shall the panhandle of a panhandle lot
serve as any access easement for more than two dwelling units.
      (2)   Parking court exception. Parking courts shall be allowed in
subdivisions established pursuant to the standards of this chapter. Parking
courts are easements that serve as parking areas and access driveways for
conservation residential structure types. Through the use of parking courts,
structures obtain their required lot width from a parking court rather than a
publicly dedicated street right-of-way. Parking courts shall be owned and
maintained by the adjoining unit or property owners’ association and are
distinct in form and function from publicly dedicated road rights-of-way.
Parking courts shall comply with the following standards (see
Figure 151.131(B)(2)).
Figure 151.131(B)(2): Parking Court
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3062.jpg]
         (a)   No fewer than three and no more than 16 dwelling units may
obtain their required lot width from a single parking court.
         (b)   Dwelling units and structures gaining access from parking courts
shall provide the same lot width along a parking court and the same street
yards from the parking court as otherwise required along and from a publicly
dedicated road right-of-way by this chapter.
         (c)   Parking courts may be used to satisfy part or all of the off-
street parking requirements of §
151.165. Regardless of the number of off-street parking spaces required by §
151.165(B), at least one off-street parking space per dwelling unit shall be
provided in the parking court.
         (d)   Parking courts shall be located outside of public right-of-way.
         (e)   The design of parking courts shall conform to the following
engineering and geometric standards.
            1.   Access to a parking court from the adjoining publicly
dedicated road right-of-way shall be limited to one entry drive unless
otherwise approved by the appropriate highway authority. The entry drive shall
be a minimum of 18 feet in width. One-way drives may be reduced to 14 feet in
width.
            2.   A depressed curb section shall be provided at the intersection
of the entry drive pavement and the publicly dedicated road right-of-way
pavement.
            3.   The minimum size of a parking space within the court shall be
nine feet by 18 feet.
            4.   The required landscaping adjacent to the publicly dedicated
road right-of-way shall be broken only by the entry drive. No parking shall be
permitted within the required landscaping.
            5.   Parking courts shall contain no more than 75% impervious
coverage.
            6.   Parking courts shall be paved in conformance with the
following standards:
 
1.5-inch bituminous surface course Class I
1.5-inch bituminous binder course  Class I
8-inch aggregate base course       Class A or B
 
            7.   Adequate pavement drainage and snow storage areas shall be
provide within parking courts.
         (f)   Street landscaping shall not be required between a parking court
and the adjoining dwelling units or structures. However, parking courts shall
be landscaped with two canopy trees, three understory trees and nine shrubs for
every three dwelling units taking access from the parking court. Care shall be
taken in the selection and siting of landscape plant materials so as not to
create any site distance or other traffic and pedestrian hazards.
   (C)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Defined. Setbacks refer to the unobstructed, unoccupied open area
between the furthermost projection of a structure and the property line of the
lot on which the structure is located. Setbacks shall be unobstructed from the
ground to the sky except as expressly stated.
Figure 151.131(C): Irregular and Pie-Shaped Lots (See Also Definition of Lot
Line, Rear)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3064.jpg]
      (2)   Measurement from ultimate right-of-way. Street setbacks applicable
to subdivisions and site plans shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way
line as specified in §
151.169(A).
      (3)   Features allowed within setbacks. The following features may be
located within required setbacks to the extent indicated.
         (a)   Fences, walls, and other landscape features shall be allowed
within required setbacks, subject to the limitations of §
151.113(L).
         (b)   Architectural entrance features and subdivision entrance
features shall be allowed within required setbacks, provided the size and
location will not constitute a traffic hazard.
         (c)   Cantilevered bay windows and cantilevered building overhangs may
encroach into required front or rear setbacks, provided they do not encroach
more than two feet into a required front or rear setback and are located at
least four feet from all lot lines.
         (d)   Chimneys may encroach into required setbacks, provided they do
not encroach more than two feet into a required setback and are located at
least four feet from all lot lines.
         (e)   Clothesline posts shall be allowed within required setbacks,
provided they are located at least four feet from all lot lines.
         (f)   Driveways, curbs, and sidewalks shall be allowed within required
setbacks.
         (g)   Flagpoles with ropes or chains on interior of pole shall be
allowed within required setbacks, provided they are located at least four feet
from all lot lines.
         (h)   Garbage disposal and recycled material equipment (non-permanent)
shall be allowed within required setbacks, provided they are located at least
four feet from all lot lines.
         (i)   Guardhouses or gatehouses shall be allowed within required
setbacks, provided they are located at least four feet from all lot lines.
         (j)   Heating units, cooling units generators, and mechanical and
electrical storage systems associated with solar energy systems may encroach
into required setbacks, provided they do not encroach more than three feet into
a required setback and are located at least four feet from all lot lines.
         (k)    Mailboxes shall be allowed within required setbacks, provided
they are located at least four feet from all side lot lines.
         (l)   Overhanging roof, eave, cornice, awnings, or other architectural
features may encroach into required setbacks, provided they do not encroach
more than three feet into a required setback and are located at least four feet
from all lot lines.
         (m)   Individual sewage disposal systems, wells, and underground
utilities shall be allowed within required setbacks.
         (n)   Steps, stairs, stoops, and landings (non-enclosed with no walls
or screens, with or without a roof) to a dwelling may encroach into required
setbacks, provided they do not encroach more than four feet into a required
setback and are located at least four feet from all lot lines.
         (o)   In conventional developments, open terraces (second story or
above), decks, porches (non-enclosed with no walls or screens) swimming pool
aprons, pergolas, and at-grade patios or paved areas that function as decks may
encroach into required setbacks, provided they do not encroach more than four
feet into a required setback and are located at least four feet from all lot
lines.
         (p)   In conservation developments, terraces (above first floor,
open), decks, swimming pool aprons, pergolas, porches (non-enclosed, with no
walls or screens) and at-grade patios or paved areas that function as decks,
when proposed in conjunction with the single family detached house structure
type, may encroach into the required rear yard setback provided they do not
encroach more than ten feet into the required setback, the structure’s area
within the required setback does not exceed 200 square feet, and the lot abuts
permanent open space to the rear (no other exceptions shall be allowed for
terraces, decks, swimming pool aprons, pergolas, porches, and at-grade patios
in conservation developments).
         (q)   Wheelchair ramps or wheelchair platforms not to exceed four feet
in width of clearance (non-enclosed with no walls or screens, with or without
roof) to a dwelling may encroach into all required setbacks, provided they are
located at least four feet from side and rear lot lines.
         (r)   Wharfs, docks, piers, walkways not to exceed four feet in width,
or private boathouses (exempt only from water’s edge setbacks) shall be allowed
within required setbacks.
         (s)   Yard and service lighting poles and fixtures shall be allowed
within required setbacks, provided they are located at least four feet from all
lot lines.
         (t)   Window wells may encroach no more than three feet into required
setbacks, provided they are located at least four feet from all lot lines. The
Planning, Building and Development Director may approve window wells that are
covered with load-bearing materials at grade at less than four foot setback.
Window wells within regulatory floodplains shall be regulated by the provisions
of §§
151.145 through
151.154.
         (u)   Outdoor seating associated with a restaurant use, shall be
allowed within the required street setback, provided the space is at grade and
is separated from the right-of-way by landscaping or man-made barrier, subject
to the intersection visibility requirements of §
151.172.
   (D)   Impervious surface. Impervious surface is any hard-surfaced, man-made
area that does not readily absorb or retain water, including but not limited to
building roofs, parking and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks and paved
recreation areas. The impervious surface ratio is calculated by dividing the
total area of all impervious surfaces on the site by the site’s Net Site Area.
If approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director, all or a
portion of the area covered by pervious paving material may be excluded from
impervious area calculations (see
Figure 151.131(D)).
 
COMMENTARY:
Swimming pools accessory to a principal residential use, hot tubs, and other
similar man-made water-retaining structures containing freeboard, shall not be
included in calculating total impervious surface on residential parcels.
 
Figure 151.131(D): Impervious Surfaces
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3066.jpg]
   (E)   Height.  
      (1)   Building height. Building height refers to the vertical distance
between the mean elevation at finished grade along the portion of a structure
to the highest point of the roof.
      (2)   General exceptions to height limits. The following structures or
parts thereof are exempt from zoning district height limits:
         (a)   Agricultural buildings, but not dwellings;
         (b)   Bulk storage silos and towers;
         (c)   Chimneys and cupolas on residential dwelling units, not to
exceed six feet above the height of the building, or the minimum height
required to meet applicable building, fire, or environmental regulations;
         (d)   Roof-mounted solar energy systems are exempt from zoning
district height limits. However, roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not
exceed six feet above the height of the building, or the minimum height
required to meet applicable building or fire regulations.
         (e)   Elevator penthouses and mechanical equipment, provided the
structures do not occupy more than 33% of the area of the roof;
         (f)   Gravity feed apparatus;
         (g)   Flagpoles, radio/television antennae and towers, not to exceed
15 feet above the maximum height allowed in the underlying zoning district
without approval of a variation (see §
151.056);
         (h)   Steeples, not to exceed 25 feet above the maximum height allowed
in the underlying zoning district without approval of a variation (see §
151.056);
         (i)   Towers, fire, mechanical and smokestacks, not to exceed 16 feet
above the maximum height allowed in the underlying zoning district without
approval of a variation (see §
151.056);
         (j)   Water tanks and standpipes; and
         (k)   Emergency warning devices, not to exceed 60 feet in height.
   (F)   Maximum density. Maximum density refers to the maximum number of
dwelling units allowed per acre of site area, after subtracting land area in
regulatory floodplains, wetlands, water bodies, and public rights-of-way from
the base site area. To calculate the number of dwelling units allowed on a
parcel, first subtract from the base site area the total area of all regulatory
flood-plains, wetlands, water bodies, and public rights-of-way, then multiply
the resulting figure by the maximum density standard of the zoning district.
When density calculations result in fractions, fractions of one-half or greater
shall be rounded to the next highest whole number; fractions of less than one-
half shall be rounded down (see
Figure 151.131(F)).
Figure 151.131(F): Density Calculations (e.g., R-1)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3068.jpg]
Gross site area: 20.00 acres
Subtract ROW:    0.10 acres
Base site area:  19.90 acres
Subtract
Wetland:         00.75 acres
Floodplain       1.00 acres
Net site area:   18.15 acres x R1 density
18.15 x 0.80 = 14.52 (15) dwelling units
 
   (G)   Open space ratio. The minimum open space ratio is one measure of the
amount of open space required in a conservation development.
   (H)   Floor area factor. Floor area refers to the sum total floor area of a
building, measured from the exterior limits or faces of the structure. Parking
structures providing spaces to meet minimum off-street parking standards of §
151.165 shall not be counted as floor area. The maximum floor area factor
refers to the amount of floor area allowed per acre of Net Site Area, as
calculated under §
151.070(D). The maximum floor area factor is one of the key determinants of a
site’s nonresidential development capacity.
   (I)   Number of dwelling units. The Planning, Building and Development
Director shall be authorized to allow exceptions to the minimum and maximum
number of dwelling units per building for townhouse, multiplex, and multi-
dwelling structures, provided that the average number of dwelling units per
building within a development is neither fewer than the minimum nor more than
the maximum number of dwelling units permitted for the structure type.
   (J)   Walls. The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be
authorized to reduce side and rear wall requirements for patio and atrium
houses if the Planning, Building and Development Director determines that the
walls are only providing a separation from common open space.
(Ord., § 7.7, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed - - ; Ord.
19-1378, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 151.132 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDS).
   (A)   Description. The planned unit development (PUD) regulations of this
section are intended to encourage innovative land planning and site design that
achieve a high level of environmental protection, energy efficiency,
aesthetics, high-quality development, and other county goals by:
      (1)   Reducing or eliminating the inflexibility that sometimes results
from strict application of zoning standards that were designed primarily for
development on individual lots;
      (2)   Allowing greater freedom in selecting the means to provide access,
light, open space, and design amenities; and
      (3)   Promoting quality design and environmentally sensitive development
by allowing development to take advantage of special site characteristics,
locations, and land use arrangements.
   (B)   Intent. By allowing more flexibility than base zoning districts, a PUD
is intended to result in:
      (1)   Greater choice in the type of environment and living units
available to the public;
      (2)   More open space through conservation development practices;
      (3)   Open space resources that are connected to one another and to
residential and nonresidential areas;
      (4)   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
development;
      (5)   An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities
and streets and thereby lower housing costs; and
      (6)   Promotion of mixed use development.
   (C)   Zoning districts. A PUD may be approved in any base zoning district,
except the AG, RE, and OS Districts.
   (D)   Minimum site area. There is no minimum site area requirement for a
PUD. The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the surrounding existing
development in the area.
   (E)   Compliance with other regulations. Unless expressly authorized by the
regulations of this chapter and specifically approved as part of a PUD, none of
the otherwise applicable standards of this chapter may be waived or reduced as
part of a PUD approval.
   (F)   Approval procedures. PUDs shall be reviewed and approved in accordance
with the procedures of §
151.051. If the proposed PUD involves subdivision of land, the preliminary
plat, preliminary engineering, final plat, and final engineering shall be
subject to the procedures, standards and requirements of §§
151.185 through
151.204 unless specifically modified or waived by the conditional use permit.
   (G)   Allowed uses.
      (1)   Residential zoning districts.
         (a)   PUD approval. Residential uses and only those nonresidential
uses allowed in the GO and LC Zoning Districts (by right or by conditional use
permit) shall be allowed in PUDs located in residential zoning districts.
Nonresidential uses allowed in the GO and LC Zoning Districts by conditional
use permit must be specifically approved within the PUD by the County Board.
         (b)   Change of use. Upon PUD approval, any change of use to a use
allowed by right in the underlying zoning district or the GO and LC Zoning
Districts shall be allowed provided all applicable use and development
standards are met. Any change of use to a use allowed by conditional use permit
in the GO and LC Zoning Districts shall require a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Nonresidential zoning districts.
         (a)   PUD approval. Any use or mix of uses may be allowed within a PUD
in a nonresidential zoning district provided that those uses not allowed by
right in the underlying zoning district shall be specifically approved within
the PUD by the County Board.
         (b)   Change of use. Upon PUD approval, any change of use to a use
allowed by right in the underlying zoning district shall be allowed provided
all applicable use and development standards are met. Any change of use to a
use not allowed by right in the underlying zoning district shall require a
conditional use permit.
   (H)   Standards. Development within PUDs shall not be subject to the
dimensional and bulk standards (i.e., lot size, lot width, setback, height
standards, and building area) of the underlying zoning district. Dimensional
and bulk standards shall be established at the time of PUD approval. Similarly,
landscaping, lighting, parking, architectural and open space standards may also
be established, at the time of PUD approval.
   (I)   Density and intensity.
      (1)   Residential PUDs (residential uses only). The maximum density
(number of dwelling units) within a residential PUD in a residential zoning
district may exceed the conventional development density allowed in the
underlying zoning district by up to 15% if approved by the County Board as part
of the PUD preliminary plan approval. The maximum density (number of dwelling
units) within a residential PUD located in a nonresidential zoning district may
exceed the conventional development density allowed in the R-6 Zoning District
by up to 15% if approved by the County Board as part of the PUD preliminary
plan approval. PUDs shall be subject to the natural resource protection
standards of §§
151.070 through
151.072. No other density bonus may be used in combination with the PUD.
      (2)   Nonresidential PUDs (nonresidential uses only).
         (a)   The maximum intensity (amount of floor area and/or amount of
impervious surface) within a nonresidential PUD may exceed that allowed in the
underlying nonresidential zoning district by up to 15% if approved by the
County Board as part of the PUD preliminary plan approval.
         (b)   The maximum intensity (amount of floor area and/or amount of
impervious surface) within a nonresidential PUD in a residential zoning
district may exceed the intensity standards of the LC Zoning District by up to
15% if approved by the County Board as part of the PUD preliminary plan
approval.
         (c)   PUDs shall be subject to the natural resource protection
standards of §§
151.070 through
151.072.
      (3)   Mixed use PUDs (residential and nonresidential uses).
         (a)   Residential density and nonresidential intensity (impervious
surface ratio, floor area ratio) within mixed use PUDs shall be established at
the time of PUD approval, provided that nonresidential uses shall occupy at
least 30% of the total floor area within the PUD (residential and
nonresidential uses included). Conditions shall be imposed by the County Board
relating to the phasing of the residential and nonresidential components of a
mixed use PUD.
         (b)   PUDs shall be subject to the natural resource protection
standards of §§
151.070 through
151.072.
 
COMMENTARY:
The County Board may condition any density bonuses for a PUD on the site and
buildings thereupon meeting various environmentally sustainable goals,
including sustainable site development, pedestrian-orientation and reduced
vehicle trips, water savings, energy efficiency, sustainable construction
materials selection, and indoor air quality consistent with the U.S. Green
Building Council Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) building
and site certification program.
 
   (J)   Identification on zoning maps. Approved planned unit developments
shall be indicated on the Official Zoning Map.
   (K)   Road standards and specifications. All roads shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of §§
151.185 through
151.204.
   (L)   Public roads. All roads shall be public roads. No private roads shall
be permitted.
(Ord., § 7.8, passed 10-13-2009)
SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 151.145 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations of this subchapter are intended to accomplish
the following purposes:
      (1)   Meet the requirements of The Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act, 615
ILCS 5/18g;
      (2)   Prevent additional harm due to periodic flooding including loss of
life and property and threats and inconveniences to public health, safety, and
welfare;
      (3)   Assure that new development does not increase flood and drainage
hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
      (4)   Create no new financial burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and for
flood rescue and relief operations;
      (5)   Protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources;
      (6)   Protect buildings and improvements to buildings from flood damage
to the greatest extent possible;
      (7)   Conserve the natural hydrologic, hydraulic, water quality and other
beneficial functions of flood-prone areas, regulatory floodplains;
      (8)   Prevent additional disruption of the economy and governmental
services due to stormwater and flood drainage;
      (9)   Maintain eligibility for the county in the National Flood Insurance
Program by meeting or exceeding its requirements and thus make federally
subsidized flood insurance available at reduced rates. Comply with the rules
and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R.
parts 59 through 79, as amended; and
      (10)   Conserve the natural hydrologic, hydraulic, water quality and
other beneficial functions of wetlands by having, at a minimum, no net loss of
wetlands in the county, and further these beneficial functions wetlands by
having an objective of a net gain of wetland functions as specified in the
Wetland Preservation and Restoration Plan component of the Lake County
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan.
   (B)   Applicability. A site development permit is required for any
development that meets any one of the following criteria:
 
COMMENTARY:
In order to prevent “phasing” of development to circumvent the intent of these
regulations, when a proposed development activity will occur on a lot or parcel of
land that has contiguous lots or parcels of lands owned in whole or in part by the
same property owner, then the criteria as defined in the “Applicability” section
will be applied to the total land area compiled from aggregate ownership parcels.
If this aggregate ownership land area is greater than the minimum area requirements
defined in the “Applicability” section, then a site development permit will be
required.
 
      (1)   Is located on a property containing a regulatory floodplain;
      (2)   Is located in a flood-prone area with 100 acres of tributary
drainage area or more;
      (3)   Is located in a depressional storage area with a surface area of
one-fourth acre or more, or with a storage volume of 0.75 acre-feet or more for
the base flood;
      (4)   Creates a wetland impact within an area defined as waters of the
United States or isolated waters of Lake County;
      (5)   Modifies the flood-prone area of a water body where the tributary
drainage area is 20 or more acres;
      (6)   Includes the total land area of an ownership parcel that results
in:
         (a)   More than one acre of new impervious area; or
         (b)   More than three acres of hydrologically disturbed area, unless
the total new impervious surface area is less than one-half acre; or
         (c)   An impervious surface area ratio of 50% or greater, unless the
total new impervious surface area is less than one-half acre. The term “new”,
as used in this subsection (B)(6), refers to impervious or hydrologically
disturbed area created after the original effective date of the Watershed
Development Ordinance (October 13, 1992). Redevelopment of previously developed
sites shall maintain existing storage volume and shall not increase the rate of
runoff from the site. The applicant shall provide supporting data and
calculations to the satisfaction of the Planning, Building and Development
Director to ensure the site design either provides a watershed benefit or meets
the requirements of §
151.146(C)(2). New development on partially developed sites shall meet the
release rate criteria in §
151.146(C) for the new development, if the new development exceeds the
thresholds in subsections (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or (B)(6)(c) above.
      (7)   Any site disturbance on any undeveloped parcel, or the undeveloped
portion of any parcel that consists of any of the following:
         (a)   Any excavation, filling, or combination of excavation or filling
that will exceed 500 cubic yards;
         (b)   Any excavation, filling, or combination of excavation or filling
that will exceed three feet in vertical depth or height at its deepest point
measured from the natural ground surface; any excavation, filling, or
combination of excavation or filling that will exceed an area of 1,000 square
feet;
         (c)   Removal of plant cover from an area exceeding 1,000 square feet;
or
         (d)   Any development within an area previously identified by the
county as posing a unique drainage concern. For proposed developments within
those areas, an inspection of the site shall be conducted and the Planning,
Building and Development Director shall determine whether a site development
permit is required based on the site conditions.
      (8)   For all nonresidential development, with the exception of interior
alterations, a site development permit shall be required unless, following an
inspection of the site, the Planning, Building and Development Director
determines that, based on the site conditions, no permit is warranted.
      (9)   Any activity to a building in a special flood hazard area (SFHA) as
described in FEMA publication 480 National Flood Insurance Program Flood
Management Requirements.
   (C)   Exempted development.
      (1)   All development shall comply with minimum federal, state, and local
regulations. No development is exempt from the floodplain, floodway, wetland,
and soil erosion and sediment control provisions of this chapter. An exemption
request under subsection (C)(2) below shall be submitted in writing by the
applicant to the Planning, Building and Development Director for an exemption
from specific performance standards of this chapter. The applicant’s exemption
request shall itemize each chapter provision that is requested for exemption.
After review and verification by the Planning, Building and Development
Director that subsection (C)(2) below is met, the specific chapter provision
exemptions may be granted.
         (a)   Final plats, site development permits, or current building
permits approved prior to October 18, 1992 if the stormwater management
facilities are installed and functioning and in compliance with all applicable
stormwater regulations then in effect. This item is applicable to §
151.146(H)(5) (buffer areas) only.
         (b)   Final plats, planned unit developments, site development permits
or current building permits approved between October 18, 1992 and April 13,
2021, if the approved plans and designs are in conformance with the pre-October
13, 2020, ordinance provisions. That portion of any final plat, planned unit
development, site development permit, or current building permit which is
amended after the effective date of this chapter and which affects the
stormwater management system is not exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   Re-subdivision of commercial or industrial subdivisions
identified under subsection (C)(1)(a) above, provided that the stormwater
management facilities are installed and functioning and there is no increase in
impervious surface area permitted. Re-subdivision of commercial or industrial
subdivisions identified under subsection (C)(1)(b) above, provided there is no
increase in impervious surface area beyond that which was originally approved.
         (d)   Public road development on county highways and township roads,
provided that plans will be submitted to the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission to ensure compliance with applicable stormwater management, soil
erosion and sediment control and floodplain and wetland requirements.
         (e)   The maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as
resurfacing of roadways when the road elevation is not increased.
      (2)   If eligible under subsections (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b), or (C)(1)(c)
above, the applicant may submit a written request to the Planning, Building and
Development Director for an exemption from specific performance standards of
this chapter. The applicant’s exemption request shall itemize each ordinance
provision that is requested for exemption.
      (3)   A site development permit shall not be required for any of the
following:
         (a)   The maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as
resurfacing of roadways when the road elevation is not increased;
         (b)   Practices associated with local food gardens that do not involve
filling or grading;
         (c)   Fence installation, pole placement, drilling, or other minor
auxiliary construction as long as the development activity is not located in a
regulatory floodway, wetland, or water body.
   (D)   Classification of development. All activities requiring a site
development permit shall be classified as “major” or “minor” developments, in
accordance with the following definitions.
      (1)   Major development. A “major” development is any development subject
to site development permit requirements that meets any one of the following
criteria:
         (a)   Is located in any portion of a regulatory floodway or
floodplain, with compensatory storage requirement, is located in any
depressional storage area that has a surface area of one-fourth acre or more,
or that has a volume larger than 0.75 acre-feet;
         (b)   Creates a wetland impact to waters of the United States or
isolated waters of Lake County exceeding the isolated wetland impact mitigation
thresholds in §
151.146(M)(4);
         (c)   Modifies a water body where the tributary drainage area is
greater than 100 acres, with compensatory storage requirement; or
         (d)   Requires detention per §
151.146(C).
      (2)   Minor development. A “minor” development is any development subject
to site development permit requirements that is not a “major” development,
provided that the Planning, Building and Development Director may classify any
development as a “major” development if that the Planning, Building and
Development Director determines that the nature of the proposed work warrants
the “major” development classification.
   (E)   Review and approval procedure.
      (1)   Relationship to development review procedures of §§
151.045 through
151.058. The “general” procedural requirements and standards of §
151.045 shall apply to the review and approval procedures of this section.
      (2)   Application. Applications for site development permits shall be
made in person in the Planning, Building and Development Department.
      (3)   Staff review and action. Planning, Building and Development
Department staff shall review each site development permit application and,
within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, act to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the application. Failure of the Planning, Building and
Development Director to act within the 30-day period shall constitute a denial
of the application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time. If the
applicant fails to provide information requested by the Planning, Building and
Development Director within three months of the request, the application shall
be void, unless the time is extended by the Planning, Building and Development
Director.
      (4)   Other approvals required; permit issuance before final approval.
         (a)   No site development permit shall be issued by the Planning,
Building and Development Director unless the development, including but not
limited to subdivisions and planned unit developments, has been approved by all
applicable county agencies. However, in the following instances, a site
development permit may be issued prior to final approval provided that:
            1.   The final engineering plans are approved by the appropriate
county agencies, and the development demonstrates compliance with applicable
application requirements and performance standards; and
            2.   All applicable application requirements and performance
standards have been met, except for obtaining any required state and federal
approvals.
         (b)   A request for commencement of grading activities may be made for
a development site prior to the issuance of a site development permit. The
proposed grading activity may commence with written approval from the Planning,
Building and Development Director of the earth change approval plan that
delineates the activities specifically allowed including appropriate soil
erosion and sediment control measures. The written approval will be in the form
of a permit. The permit application will state the conditions and limitations
of the proposed grading activities. No permit may be issued and no development
activity may occur in a regulatory floodplain, except for excavations outside
of the regulatory floodway and which do not require an Illinois Department of
Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources permit, wetland, or in those
portions of the site for which this chapter requires that state and federal
permits be issued, except for Illinois Environmental Protection Agency sewer
and water extension permits. (See
Appendix G for a partial list of agencies from which permits may be required.)
      (5)   Financial assurances.  
         (a)   For nonresidential development that meets the criteria of §
151.145(B)(6) and for any development where the Planning, Building and
Development Director requires, the applicant shall file with the county a
performance assurance satisfactory to the Lake County State’s Attorney for an
amount equal to one 130% of the total cost of improvements including the cost
of landscaping, soil erosion and sediment control measures, and all engineering
costs and inspection fees, based upon the consulting engineer’s estimate of
cost. Government entities such as townships, schools, park districts, and the
like are exempt from this requirement.
         (b)   A maintenance assurance if required by the county, shall be
deposited with the county prior to the release of any performance assurance
held by the county for the time period and in the amount specified by the
Planning, Building and Development Director to cover the cost of failure or
repair of improvements installed on the site, including landscaping, wetland
restoration/mitigation, and soil erosion and sediment control measures.
         (c)   A letter certifying the as-built conditions shall be submitted
by the consulting engineer prior to the release of any performance assurance.
In addition, the Planning, Building and Development Director may require deed
restrictions, covenants, easements, or any other documents to ensure proper
enforcement of the site development regulations.
         (d)   The assurance may be drawn at any time the permittee fails to
comply with the requirements of this or any other county ordinance or with the
approved site development plans or with the approved timeframe for site
development activities.
      (6)   As-built drawings. As-built drawings, signed and sealed by a
Licensed Professional Engineer, shall be required for all major developments,
public road developments, and other types of development as determined by the
Planning. Building and Development Director (such as those developments that
affect stormwater runoff rates or volume, impact wetlands or wetland buffers,
or are adjacent to floodplains). As-built drawings and supporting information
shall clearly show all as-built conditions, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Topographic spot elevations and contours for overland flow
paths, detention ponds, storage facilities, and building pads;
         (b)   Detention pond restrictor size, invert elevation, emergency
overflow size, and elevation;
         (c)   Verification of required native vegetation planted (seed tags,
invoices);
         (d)   Storm sewer sizes, inverts;
         (e)   Drain tile information provided from the Subsurface Drainage
Inventory, or identified during construction as follows: location, connection,
size, material, and inverts for those drain tiles that are part of the
stormwater management system;
         (f)   Other information required under this chapter;
         (g)   Applicable calculations or other information verifying
conformance with the permitted plan set;
         (h)   Low floor and low opening elevations of structures. Low opening
sizes where vents are required; and
         (i)   Benchmark information.
         (j)   Elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member of a lowest floor, and whether the structure has a basement, for
structures located in a coastal high hazard area.
      (7)   Inspections. The Planning, Building and Development Director may
inspect site development at any stage in the construction process. For major
developments, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall conduct
site inspections, at a minimum, at the end of the construction stages (E)(7)
(a)1. through 7. listed below. Construction plans approved by the Planning,
Building and Development Director shall be maintained at the site during
progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the
following schedule, the permittee shall notify the Planning, Building and
Development Director at least two full working days before the inspection is to
be made. The Designated Erosion Control Inspector shall conduct inspections and
document as described below, at a minimum, at the intervals in subsections (E)
(7)(a)1. and (E)(7)(a)6. listed below, for those developments that require a
Designated Erosion Control Inspector, until permanent stabilization and
Planning, Building and Development Director approval of appropriate as-built
documentation and drawings.
         (a)   Recommended inspection intervals are listed below:
            1.   Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior to proceeding
with any other earth disturbance or grading;
            2.   After every seven calendar days or storm event with greater
than one-half inch of rainfall or liquid equivalent precipitation;
            3.   After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of
sediment and erosion controls;
            4.   After removal of erosion and sediment controls;
            5.   Designated Erosion Control Inspector inspections may be
performed at a reduced frequency, at the discretion of the Planning, Building
and Development Director, for projects with a valid Site Development Permit,
that are permanently stabilized, and are entering a prolonged period of
inactivity. Designated Erosion Control inspections shall only be required after
storm events with greater than 0.5 inch of rainfall or liquid equivalent
precipitation.
            6.   If a wetland mitigation area is constructed as part of the
site development permit, the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission or
Isolated Water of Lake County-Certified Community’s Certified Wetland
Specialist shall, at a minimum, perform the following inspections:
               a.    Inspection by a certified wetland specialist after
mitigation areas have been final graded and before seeding or plant
installation;
               b.    Inspection by a certified wetland specialist after seeding
or plant installation; and
               c.   At a minimum, annual inspections by a certified wetland
specialist during the five-year monitoring and maintenance period for wetland
mitigation areas.
         (b)   Minimum inspection documentation shall include: site
observations and a sufficient number of photos depicting the conditions of the
entire site, inspector’s name, date and time of the inspection, status of
perimeter control, and site outlet observations.
      (8)   Special precautions.
         (a)   If at any stage of the grading of any development site the
Planning, Building and Development Director determines that the nature of the
site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to
imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage structure,
the Planning, Building and Development Director may require, as a condition of
allowing the work to be done, that reasonable special precautions be taken as
is considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of the peril. “Special
precautions” may include but shall not be limited to a more level exposed
slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing,
compaction, cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and
recommendations of a Licensed Geotechnical Engineer and/or Licensed
Professional Geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
         (b)   Where the Planning, Building and Development Director determines
that storm damage may result or has resulted because the grading on any
development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee
required to install temporary structures or take any other measures as may be
required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the Planning, Building
and Development Director may require that the operations be conducted in
specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices
prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
         (c)   In the event that a stormwater detention or conveyance facility
fails to function as designed because of improper or inadequate maintenance,
the Planning, Building and Development Director shall inspect the facility and
compel corrective action. To compel corrective action, the Planning, Building
and Development Director shall provide written notification to the property
owner indicating: (1) corrective actions required to return the facility to
functional order; or (2) additional engineering plans, reports or calculations
required to identify the problem or engineer a solution, and that the plans,
reports, or calculations shall be submitted for review and approval.
      (9)   Permit expiration.
         (a)   A site development permit shall be issued for a time period of
not more than two years and shall expire by limitation. The Planning, Building
and Development Director may grant an extension of time, not to exceed one
year, if the Planning, Building and Development Director determines, based on
information provided by the permit holder, that unusual difficulties have
prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits. A
written extension request and permit extension fee (revised May 9, 2006) must
be filed by a permit holder before expiration of the permit. If the work
authorized by such permit has not been commenced within six months of permit
issuance, the permit shall lapse and be of no further effect unless a start
work extension request has been filed within six months of permit issuance
(revised May 9, 2006). If the permit expires, a new permit application review
and fees shall be required for the completion of the project and the applicant
shall comply with the current ordinance requirements.
         (b)   A permit that includes a structure located within the regulatory
floodplain, or will be located within the regulatory floodplain, shall be
terminated without the possibility of an extension, if the start of
construction is not commenced within 180 days of the permit issuance date
unless the structure is compliant with the following:
            1.   Any modification to National Flood Insurance Program
regulations after permit issuance; or
            2.   Any modification to a Federal Emergency Management Agency
Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study after permit issuance.
         (c)   For the purposes of this subsection, “start of construction”
means the commencement of any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or improvement of a structure; or the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways: nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
      (10)   Revocation of permit. In the event any person holding a site
development permit violates the terms of the permit, or conducts or carries on
the site development in a manner that adversely affects the health, welfare, or
safety of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the subject property,
or conducts or carries on the site development in a manner that is materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the vicinity, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall revoke or
suspend the site development permit in accordance with the provisions of §
151.253.
      (11)   Refunds. Refunds of site development application and permit fees
are granted in accordance with the Planning, Building and Development
Department fee refund policy. (County Board approved.)
      (12)   Retention of plans. Plans, specifications, and reports for all
site development permits shall be retained by the Planning, Building and
Development Department.
   (F)   Application requirements. The site development permit application
requirements of this section establish different application requirements for
major and minor developments.
      (1)   Applications for minor developments. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall determine what information is required to ensure
compliance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. This information may
include but shall not be limited to the following:
         (a)   A completed site development permit application signed by the
property owner or owner’s agent and, when required a licensed professional
engineer and certified wetland specialist.
         (b)   A topographic survey and/or grading plan showing proposed (min.
1% grade) and existing contours, and the limits of grading prepared, signed and
sealed by an Illinois Licensed Land Surveyor or Licensed Professional Engineer.
         (c)   A brief drainage report describing the characteristics of the
existing and proposed drainage systems including all discharge points,
collection, conveyance, and storage facilities, and any calculations used to
determine stormwater quantities, flow rates and/or storage volumes.
         (d)   A site drainage plan, which depicts drainage features, overland
flow paths, stormwater management system components, flood-prone areas,
regulatory floodplains, wetland boundaries, buffer areas, existing and proposed
septic systems and wells. A capacity analysis of the above stormwater system
components may be required by the Planning, Building and Development Director.
         (e)   An area drainage plan locating the proposed development in the
watershed.
         (f)   A description and depiction of measures to be taken to control
erosion (sedimentation and erosion control plan).
         (g)   Existing and proposed typical cross-sections and profiles of all
components of the stormwater management system including, but not limited to
swales, berms, and detention ponds.
         (h)   For all proposed temporary soil stockpiles, the location,
dimensions, and a schedule for removal.
         (i)   All plans and calculations that are prepared by a licensed
professional engineer pursuant to this section shall be signed and sealed by
the engineer.
         (j)   A description of the anticipated dates of initiation and
completion of activity.
         (k)   An exhibit for review that displays all deed or plat
restrictions of record or to be recorded for the stormwater management system.
         (l)   The federal, state, and local permit requirements of subsections
(F)(2)(h) and (F)(2)(i) are required when applicable to the development site
and subsections (F)(2)(f)3. and (F)(2)(g) shall be required when requested by
the Planning, Building and Development Director.
         (m)   A wetland submittal, if required, under §
151.146(M).
         (n)   For permits required only in accordance with subsection (B)(9)
above documentation shall be submitted towards the determination of a
substantial improvement. Other submittal requirements may be waived.
Figure 151.145(F): Typical Pond and Swale Cross-sections
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3070.jpg]
      (2)   Applications for major developments. The following application
requirements shall be met unless the Planning, Building and Development
Director determines that an item is unnecessary to ensure compliance with the
purpose and intent of this chapter:
         (a)   Name and legal address of the applicant. Common address, legal
description, and/or the parcel identification numbers for the property where
the development will take place. Mailing address of the property owner;
         (b)   The name, company name, title, address, phone and fax numbers of
all consultants involved in the design and engineering of the proposed
development;
         (c)   A vicinity map depicting the location of the subject development
in relation to major roads, natural features, municipalities, and the like
along with the parcel identification numbers of all parcels comprising the
proposed development;
         (d)   A map showing the location of the subject development in its
watershed as depicted on U.S. Geologic Survey maps. The extent and area of each
watershed affecting the design of stormwater detention and conveyance
facilities within the subject development;
         (e)   Site development plans: the information required by this
subsection (F)(2) shall be presented at any normal scale up to and including
one inch equals 100 feet (1:100) that is convenient to portray the required
information on a sheet size not to exceed 24 by 36 inches and shall be bound
into a package that includes the following sheets:
            1.   A topographic survey of the existing conditions of the
development site which includes the following information:
               a.   Existing contour lines at not greater than one-foot
intervals. The reference benchmark shall be cited on the plan. Spot elevations
shall be provided at all breaks in grade and where necessary to indicate grade
changes in areas of shallow topography. The source and/or preparer of the
topographic survey shall be recognized on the plan. All elevations shall be
referenced to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), which supersedes
the NGVD 29 datum used prior to September 18, 2013;
               b.   The existing layout of all lots, parcels, road rights-of-
way, and easements, including lot numbers and street names, on the subject site
and on all adjoining parcels;
               c.   The location of streams, drainageways, and other floodwater
runoff channels, their normal channels, and extent of the floodplains at the
established high-water elevation, and the limits of the floodway, all properly
identified;
               d.   The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins,
their easements, floodplains, and lines of inflow and outflow, if any;
               e.   The location, size, and flowline elevation of all existing
storm and sanitary sewers, and water mains, if any, of record;
               f.   The location of field tiles and their sizes which are on
file with the Soil and Water Conservation District of Lake County or are known
by the developer;
               g.   The location of all existing individual sewage disposal
systems, if any, of record;
               h.   The location of all existing wells, if any, of record;
               i.   Natural and other groundwater sources such as seeps,
springs, flowing, and other artesian wells, that are visible or are of record;
               j.   The soil conditions as indicated in the Soil Survey, Lake
County, Illinois, or as determined by an on-site soil survey. The soil
boundaries shall be drawn on the plan and the soil designation numbers shall be
shown in the area where each soil mapping unit exists; and
               k.   The location, boundaries and type of predominate vegetation
on the development site.
            2.   A drainage plan prepared as an overlay of the topographic
survey described above, and including the following information:
               a.   Proposed contour lines at not greater than one-foot
intervals. Proposed spot elevations shall be provided at all breaks in grade
and where necessary to indicate grade changes in areas of low relief;
               b.   The limits of all watershed boundaries, drainage areas,
points of discharge, velocity of flow, and flow quantities;
               c.   An indication of the direction of water flow in all
proposed and existing swales and drainageways, including the slope of channel
and existing and proposed typical cross-sections and profiles;
               d.   The location of all existing streams and floodplains to be
maintained, and proposed channels to be constructed, including specification
and dimensions of proposed channel modifications, locations and orientation or
cross-sections and profiles;
               e.   (i)   Typical cross-sections of all existing detention
basins to be maintained, enlarged, or otherwise altered and proposed basins and
their design, showing the following:
                     (I)   Length, width, dimension;
                     (II)   Berm elevation;
                     (III)   Water elevation - normal and high;
                     (IV)   Bottom slope elevation; and
                     (V)   Control structure details (outlets, restrictors,
spillways, and the like).
                  (ii)   The typical cross-sections also shall show the
elevation of the existing land surface and the proposed changes thereto,
together with the calculated high water elevations expected from stormwater
overland flow depth and path, and the relationship of structures, streets, and
other utilities.
               f.   Plans and profiles of all proposed street storm sewers and
other storm drains including their slope, type, size, outfall and outlet
locations, and elevations, receiving streams or channels and their high water
elevations;
               g.   Proposed culverts and bridges to be built, their materials,
elevations, waterway openings; and
               h.   Cross-sections of all existing and proposed channels or
other open drainage facilities, showing the elevation of the existing land and
the proposed changes thereto, together with the calculated high water
elevations expected from stormwater overland flow depth and path, and the
relationship of structures, streets, and other utilities. The elevations of
lowest floor or lowest adjacent grade for structures shall be included on the
development plan as applicable. Refer to the UDO sections on overland flow
paths (§
151.146(H)(3)), floodplain building protection requirements (§
151.149(H)) and flood table land development (§
151.153), for elevation requirements of structures within or adjacent to
floodprone areas.
            3.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan showing all measures
appropriate for the development as approved by the Planning, Building and
Development Director, to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all
phases of construction and permanently after completion of development of the
site, including:
               a.   Location and description, including standard details, of
all sediment control measures and design specifics of sediment basins and
traps, including outlet details. The drainage area tributary to each sediment
control measure shall be delineated on the soil erosion and sediment control
plan;
               b.   Location and description of all soil stabilization and
erosion control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod,
method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime
and fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures, and types of non-vegetative
stabilization measures;
               c.   Location and description of all runoff control measures,
including diversions, waterways, and outlets;
               d.   Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of
sediment off-site, including construction entrance details, as appropriate;
               e.   Description of dust and traffic control measures;
               f.   Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization
methods;
               g.   Description of off-site fill or borrow volumes, locations,
and methods of stabilization;
               h.   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including
type and frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance;
               i.   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person
(s) or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of erosion
control structures and measures during development and after development is
completed; and
               j.   A written narrative description of the proposed phasing
(construction sequencing) of development of the site, including stripping and
clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and landscaping.
Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the
estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of
installation of temporary sediment control measures (including perimeter
controls), clearing and grading, installation of temporary soil stabilization
measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas,
final grading and the establishment of permanent vegetative cover, and the
removal of temporary measures. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to notify the Planning, Building and Development Director of any significant
changes which occur in the site development schedule after the initial erosion
and sediment control plan has been approved.
         (f)   Site development report: the information required by this
subsection (F)(2) shall be presented on eight and one-half by 11-inch paper and
shall be bound into a report which includes the following:
            1.   A drainage report describing the hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed for the subject development, which includes the following
information:
               a.   A brief description of the proposed development including
the purpose of the proposed development activities and the anticipated
initiation and completion dates of proposed activities;
               b.   A brief description of the methodology, assumptions, and
sources used in the hydrologic and hydraulic analyses of site drainage;
               c.   The extent and area of each tributary watershed to the
drainage channels in the development, and the names of all streams and other
bodies of water affected by the development;
               d.   A section in the hydrologic and hydraulic analysis report
describing how the Runoff Volume Reduction requirements (as described in §
151.146(D)) are incorporated into the development site plan. The section shall
include the rationale for not selecting approaches with higher preference. The
section shall also provide supporting calculations for meeting the runoff
volume reduction requirements;
               e.   The percentages of existing and proposed areas of
impervious surface, the existing and proposed amount of runoff, and the
existing rate of stormwater release. This shall include documentation of the
design volumes and rates of the proposed runoff for each portion of the
tributary watershed to the drainage system and the effects the improvements
will have upon the receiving channel and high water elevations. Runoff
calculations shall include all discharges entering the site from upstream
areas;
               f.   For detention facilities, a section that includes a plot or
tabulation of storage volumes and water surface areas with corresponding water
surface elevations, stage-discharge or outlet rating curves, and design
hydrographs of inflow and outflow for the two-year, 24-hour and the 100-year,
24-hour storm events under existing and developed conditions; and
               g.   If the soil mapping submitted for the development indicates
the soils classified as a hydric soil (USDA/NRCS Soil Classification), then the
applicant shall provide site- specific soil mapping performed by a certified
soil classifier or geotechnical investigation for the development. No buildings
or parking lots shall be constructed on these soils unless appropriate building
methods, such as pilings, caissons or removal and replacement of unsuitable
soils, as approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director, are used
to provide and protect a suitable building foundation.
               Development that is exempted from this requirement is any
development activity not resulting in the construction of a building or parking
lots.
            2.   A soil erosion and sediment control report which includes the
following information:
               a.   A statement which names the party legally responsible for
maintenance of erosion control measures during and after construction. The
statement shall include the responsible party’s name, address and telephone
number;
               b.   A narrative description of the sequencing of grading and
soil disturbance and construction activities, the temporary and permanent
sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate any
negative effects of grading including: supporting calculations; estimated
schedule for installing, maintaining and removing both temporary and permanent
structures; and the final stabilization and re-vegetation measures;
               c.   A construction schedule which indicates the start and
finish dates for:
                  (i)   Installation and maintenance of erosion control
measures;
                  (ii)   The clearing of vegetation and stripping and
stockpiling of topsoil;
                  (iii)   Rough grading and construction of stormwater
detention and conveyance facilities;
                  (iv)   Topsoil respreading, final grading and site
restoration; and
                  (v)   Maintenance of improvements.
               d.   A schedule for the removal of all proposed temporary soil
stockpiles.
            3.   A maintenance plan for the ongoing maintenance of all
stormwater management system components, including wetlands, is required prior
to plan approval. The plan shall be referenced in the recorded deed or plat
restriction document associated with the stormwater management system. The plan
shall include:
               a.   Maintenance tasks and the type and frequency of maintenance
of all components of the stormwater management system, including existing and
replaced drain tiles within the ownership parcel which are part of the
stormwater management system;
               b.   The party responsible for performing the maintenance tasks;
               c.   A description of all permanent public or private access
deed- or plat-restricted areas for all stormwater management system components
for the development;
               d.   A description of dedicated sources of funding for the
required maintenance; and
               e.   Measures to prohibit the dumping, depositing, dropping,
throwing, discarding, or leaving of construction material debris and all other
illicit discharges into the stormwater management system and measures to be in
continued compliance with IEPA NPDES Permit No. ILR40.
         (g)   The application form, development plans, and stormwater reports
shall meet the requirements of this section. All plans, calculations and other
documentation shall be signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer.
Additionally, the engineer shall provide a letter, bearing his or her seal and
signature, which certifies that all plans, calculations and other documentation
submitted by him or her have been prepared and are in full compliance with all
applicable county ordinances. However, public trail and park facility projects
that do not involve the placement of structures or fill can be submitted
without the certification or seal of a licensed professional engineer;
         (h)   A copy of a Natural Resource Inventory (NRI) shall be submitted
by the applicant to the Planning, Building and Development Director for
development that is required to obtain a NRI performed by the McHenry-Lake
County Soil and Water Conservation District pursuant to state statute 70 ILCS
405/22.02a;
         (i)   For all development sites requiring a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit, the applicant shall submit a notice of
intent (NOI) to the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency to comply with the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Permit. The approved
erosion control plan created pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and
the Watershed Development Ordinance shall fulfill the plan requirements in the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit;
         (j)   A copy of the consultation application to the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Planning, Building and Development Director for development that is required to
comply with the consultant process of the Illinois Endangered Species
Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/11) and the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act
(525 ILCS 30/17);
         (k)   A wetland submittal, if required, under §
151.146(M); and
         (l)   A copy of the building plans and cost estimates in accordance
with Federal Emergency Management Agency National Flood Insurance Program
standards shall be submitted for modifications to existing structures in the
Regulatory Floodplain.
            1.   A copy of building plans shall be submitted for modifications
to existing structures in the Regulatory Floodplain: the building plans shall
include a comprehensive materials list of all items directly associated with
the structure. At the discretion of the Planning, Building and Development
Director, the building plans and comprehensive materials list shall be signed
and sealed by an Illinois Licensed Architect or Licensed Professional Engineer.
            2.   A minimum of two cost estimates shall be submitted for
modifications to existing structures in the regulatory floodplain, The cost
estimates shall reflect the fair market value of all materials and labor
directly associated with the structure, including construction management,
overhead, and profit costs: the estimates shall correlate with the
comprehensive materials list and building plans. At the discretion of the
Planning, Building and Development Director, additional supporting cost
estimate information shall be submitted.
      (3)   Dam safety permits. The applicant shall obtain and provide, when
applicable to the proposed development, a copy of an Illinois Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR), Office of Water Resources (OWR), dam safety permit or
a letter stating that a dam safety permit is not required before the applicant
requests or obtains a site development permit (see
Appendix H for dam safety permit requirements).
      (4)   Federal, state, and local permits and approvals.
         (a)   The applicant shall obtain and provide copies of any and all
required federal, state, and local permits for development in the regulatory
floodplain before the applicant requests or obtains a site development permit.
(See
Appendix G for a partial list of agencies from which permits may be required.)
         (b)   Lake County Division of Transportation approval is required
prior to the issuance of a site development permit when the property’s access
is proposed or existing from a collector or arterial road. (See
Appendix B for collector and arterial roads.)
      (5)   Proposed revisions to base flood elevation or regulatory floodplain
boundary. The applicant shall submit, to the Planning, Building and Development
Department, the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission, and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, the data required for proposed revisions to the
base flood elevation of a regulatory floodplain study or relocation of a
regulatory floodway boundary. The applicant shall also submit this data to
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources, when the
tributary area is greater than one square mile.
      (6)   Ground elevations. The applicant shall provide, when applicable to
the development an affidavit or documentation to prove the location of the
development relative to the base flood elevation prior to the effective date of
the first regulatory floodplain map; and certification that the current ground
elevation existed prior to the effective date of the first regulatory
floodplain map.
      (7)   Subsurface drainage tiles. The applicant shall submit a subsurface
drainage inventory. The inventory shall include locations of existing farm and
storm drainage tiles by means of silt trenching and other appropriate methods
performed by a qualified subsurface drainage consultant. All existing drain
tile lines damaged during the investigation shall be repaired to their previous
working status.
         (a)   The applicant shall provide a topographical map of the
development site showing:
            1.   Location and depth of each trench and identified to correspond
with the tile investigation report and surveyed points where the tile was field
staked at approximately 50-foot intervals;
            2.   Location of each drain tile with a flow direction arrow, tile
size, and any connection to adjoining properties;
            3.   A summary of the tile investigation report showing trench
identification number, tile size, material and quality, percentage of the tile
filled with water, percentage of restrictions caused by silting, depth of
groundwater, and working status; and
            4.   Name, address, and phone number of person or firm conducting
tile location investigation.
         (b)   Information collected during the Subsurface Drainage Inventory
shall be used as part of the design and construction of a stormwater management
system that meets the requirements of this chapter.
 
COMMENTARY:
The Technical Reference Manual prepared by the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission and the “Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control” prepared by the Northeastern Illinois Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Steering Committee are references to be used in the
preparation of the documents required for submission.
 
(Ord., § 8.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. passed - - ; Ord.
22-1060, passed 8-9-2022; Ord. 23-1056, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed
3-12-2024)
§ 151.146 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT.
   Development subject to the site development regulations shall comply with
all applicable performance standards of this section. The performance standards
for all development shall be considered in site planning and appropriately
addressed in the drainage plan component of subdivisions, annexation
agreements, preliminary plats, final plats, re-plats, manufactured home parks
and planned unit developments. All plans, reports, and calculations required
pursuant to these regulations shall fully demonstrate a proposed development’s
compliance with the following performance standards.
   (A)   Plat and site plans.
      (1)   To address the runoff volume reduction requirements of subsection
(D), all streets, blocks, lots, deed- or plat-restricted areas, parks, and
other public grounds shall be located and designed in such a manner as to
preserve and utilize natural wetlands, flood-prone areas, channels, and best
management practices and undisturbed native soil/plant areas utilized to meet
the runoff volume reduction requirements.
      (2)   All plats and engineering plans shall show the base flood elevation
and regulatory floodway limits, if applicable. They shall also include a signed
statement by a licensed professional engineer that accounts for changes in the
drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
      (3)   All plats and site plans that border on or include public bodies of
water as defined by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources and listed in
Appendix I shall be submitted by the applicant to the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources for review and approval.
      (4)   Soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities shall be functional before general construction begins.
Where development of a site is to proceed in phases, the soil erosion and
sediment control measures needed for each phase shall be functional before the
construction of that phase begins.
      (5)   All stormwater management systems within the ownership parcel shall
be contained within an appropriately sized and located deed restriction or plat
restriction. Stormwater management systems that service a single parcel or two
parcels of property may be exempted from this requirement upon approval of the
Planning, Building and Development Director.
      (6)   Modifications to a deed or plat restriction for the stormwater
management system shall be approved by the Planning, Building and Development
Director. Lot line modifications shall require Plat Committee approval.
      (7)   Pursuant to state law, a property owner of a parcel being
subdivided adjacent to a state or county road right-of-way shall notify the
proper highway authority in writing of the proposed subdivision, and request
that the proper highway authority provide the amount of additional capacity in
any stormwater detention facility to be constructed in the subdivision for the
future availability of the highway authority for meeting stormwater detention
requirements of any future public construction on the highway.
   (B)   Runoff calculations.
      (1)   For tributary drainage areas of 100 acres or more in area and for
the determination of detention and depressional storage requirements, a Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission-approved hydrograph-producing runoff
calculation method shall be used.
Appendix J also may be used, when appropriate and upon approval of the
Planning, Building and Development Director, for determination of detention
storage volumes.
      (2)   The Rational Method may be used to calculate discharges for areas
of less than 100 acres. The Rational Method shall not be used to determine
detention or depressional storage requirements.
      (3)   Rainfall data obtained from the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission (presented in
Appendix K) shall be used for rainfall volume, storm distribution, return
frequency, and event duration.
      (4)   Runoff calculations for all off-site drainage areas shall be based
on anticipated future land use conditions or existing land use conditions,
whichever yields the greater runoff. Anticipated future land use conditions
will be based on future land use and existing storage facilities. Future
detention facilities may be used for anticipated future land use conditions if
approved by the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission Chief Engineer or,
for tributary drainage areas less than 100 acres if approved by the Planning,
Building and Development Director. Existing land use conditions will be based
on existing land use and existing storage facilities. For each frequency storm
event, runoff calculations will be based on the critical duration, for all
durations presented in
Appendix K.
      (5)   Existing depressional storage volume shall be maintained and the
volume of detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this chapter
shall be in addition to the existing storage.
      (6)   For determination of soil runoff characteristics, areas of the
development that are hydrologically disturbed and compacted shall be changed to
the next higher hydrologic soil classification e.g., B to C, C to D, or as
approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director. Soil groups that
are not hydrologically disturbed will retain their current runoff
characteristics.
      (7)   Areas that are deed or plat restricted for native planting areas
may be determined to have lower runoff characteristics, and may be taken into
account when meeting the runoff volume reduction requirements of this chapter.
The Planning, Building and Development Director may determine these areas can
be excluded from the required detention volume calculation.
   (C)   Release rates and discharges.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in a county-adopted basin plan,
floodplain study, or
Appendix L, the detention volume required shall be calculated using a rating
curve based on maximum release rates of 0.04 cubic feet per second, per acre
for the two-year, 24-hour storm event, nor 0.15 cubic feet per second, per acre
for the 100-year, 24-hour storm event. The release rate requirements shall
apply to the hydrologically disturbed area of the ownership parcel unless the
Planning, Building and Development Director determines that specific locations
of the ownership parcel have unique circumstances such that the release rate
shall apply to a broader or smaller area. The release rate requirements shall
only apply to the developments listed in §
151.145(B)(6).
      (2)   All concentrated stormwater discharges must be conveyed into a
maintainable outlet with adequate downstream stormwater capacity (as defined in
§
151.271) and will not result in increased flood and drainage hazard. An
existing channel, storm sewer or overland flow path is said to have adequate
downstream capacity when it can be shown to accommodate up to and including the
100-year stormwater runoff without increasing property damage to the adjacent
property or to a point downstream known to be a restriction causing significant
backwater.
      (3)   The design of stormwater drainage systems shall not result in the
interbasin transfer of drainage, unless no reasonably feasible alternative
exists. The Planning, Building and Development Director may also allow
interbasin transfer if the transfer relieves a known drainage hazard and there
is adequate downstream stormwater capacity.
      (4)   There shall be a minimum of one foot of freeboard above the base
flood elevation on all detention/retention basins.
      (5)   Watershed-specific release rates are tabulated in
Appendix L.
      (6)   The combined release from the detention facility outlet and the
outlet designed to meet wetland hydrology requirements of subsection (M)(7)
shall not exceed either the two- or 100-year allowable release rates,
respectively. The wetland hydrology requirement or minimum outlet restrictor
size may take precedence over the allowed release rate, provided there is
adequate downstream capacity as determined by the Planning, Building and
Development Director.
      (7)   The applicant shall prohibit illicit discharges generated during
the development process from entering into the stormwater management system.
Discharges of stormwater from a development site shall be in conformance with
the soil erosion and sediment control practices contained in §§
151.145 through
151.154 of this chapter.
   (D)   Runoff volume reduction (RVR).
      (1)   Applicants shall choose a strategies that minimize stormwater
runoff volumes and addresses water quality impairments. The site development
plan shall incorporate stormwater infiltration, evapotranspiration, reuse, or
other methods, into the project. The applicant shall use appropriate green
infrastructure techniques and best management practices to reduce runoff
volume, according to the following hierarchy, in order of preference, in
preparing a stormwater management plan:
         (a)   Preservation and enforcement of the stormwater management
benefits of the natural resource features of the development site (e.g., areas
of Hydrologic Soil Groups A and B, floodplains, waters of the United States,
isolated waters of Lake County, channels, drainageways, prairies, savannas, and
woodlands);
         (b)   Minimization or disconnection of impervious surfaces;
         (c)   Enhancement of the infiltration and storage characteristics of
the development site using appropriate best management practices;
         (d)   The use of open channels with native vegetation to convey
stormwater runoff;
         (e)   Structural measures that provide water quality and volume
reduction;
         (f)   Structural measures that provide only volume reduction or other
rainwater harvesting practices;
         (g)   Measures that provide water quality and quantity control; and
         (h)   Measures that provide only quantity control.
      (2)   (a)   Runoff volume reduction (RVR), Quantitative Standard. The
minimum RVR quantitative standard shall be the volume achieved utilizing
applicable RVR Credits, as determined by the applicant and approved by the
Planning, Building and Development Director, based on the maximum extent
practicable, for the following development. The term “new” for the RVR
Quantitative Standard refers to impervious surface created after April 1, 2009.
         (b)   Minor and Major Development that result in at least one acre
hydrologic disturbance and more than 0.5 acre of new impervious surface area;
Redevelopment of previously developed sites that result in at least one acre
hydrologic disturbance:
            1.   RVR implementation criteria.
               a.   Runoff volume reduction quantity shall be implemented with
appropriate methods, as approved by the Planning. Building and Development
Director, which may include the following: best management practices: green
infrastructure: detention facilities: and preservation or enhancement of
natural streams, wetlands, and areas with deed restricted native vegetation.
               b.   Best management practices, and the portion of the detention
facility designed to meet this provision, shall be designed to dewater the RVR
quantity in no greater than 96 hours. The applicant shall provide infiltration
rate information for each RVR practice. The use of an under drain system may be
incorporated into the design in order to achieve the required draw down time.
Under drain systems shall be designed to dewater the RVR quantity in not less
than 48 hours.
            2.   RVR credits. The following credits may be used alone or in
combination to meet the RVR quantity requirement:
               a.   Detention facility credit. Up to 50% of the RVR quantity
may be provided within the portion of the detention facilities that have been
designed to meet this standard. The volume provided to meet this provision
shall be below the elevation of the primary outlet for the RVR portion of the
facility.
               b.   Native vegetation cover credit. Up to 100% of the reduced
two-year, 24-hour runoff volume achieved with native vegetation in deed or plat
restricted areas (e.g., compensatory storage and buffer areas) as described in
Soil Runoff Characteristics (subsection (B)(6) above) and Linear Water Bodies
(subsection (H)(6) below).
               c.   Isolated wetland hydrology credit. A maximum of 100% of the
existing two-year. 24-hour runoff volume to a preserved IWLC if the Wetland
Hydrology (subsection (M)(7) below) and Water Quality Treatment (subsection (H)
(4) below) requirements are met.
               d.   Water quality treatment credit. Up to 100% of the volume
utilized to meet the Water Quality Treatment Volume (subsection (H)(4) below).
               e.   Off-site RVR credit. RVR practices may be provided on off-
site, localized properties that are within the same basin. Deed or plat
restrictions shall be obtained and recorded on off-site properties to assure
perpetual operation and maintenance of RVR facilities.
               f.   Best management practice and green infrastructure credits.
Up to 100% of the volume within the practices designed to meet this standard.
   (E)   New stormwater facilities. The design of all new stormwater facilities
shall comply with the following standards:
      (1)   All new stormwater infiltration, retention and detention basins
shall be provided with an emergency overflow structure capable of passing the
critical duration base flood inflow rate without damages to downstream
structures or property;
      (2)   (a)   New stormwater infiltration, retention and detention basins
required to meet a development’s discharge requirements shall be designed to
bypass off-site tributary flow from channels unless approved by the Planning,
Building and Development Director;
         (b)   All parcels within the established flood table land’s elevation
criteria of a detention facility design high water level shall be protected
from flooding as follows:
            1.   For detention facilities with less than 100 acres of tributary
area, all structures in parcels containing or adjoining the facility shall have
a lowest adjacent grade a minimum of one foot above the design high water
elevation within the emergency overflow structure.
            2.   For detention facilities with greater than or equal to 100
acres of tributary area, all structures in parcels containing or adjoining the
facility shall meet the requirements of §
151.149(H) at an elevation two feet above the design high water elevation
within the emergency overflow structure. New residential structures may have
the lowest floor below this elevation if structurally dry flood-proofed to at
least two feet above the design high-water elevation within the emergency
overflow structure.
      (3)   Single pipe outlets shall have a minimum inside diameter of 12
inches. If design release rates call for smaller outlets, a design that
minimizes the possibility of clogging shall be used. Minimum outlet restrictor
size shall be four inches, provided there is adequate downstream capacity.
Detention volumes and corresponding high water level required for a development
shall be determined by using the appropriate release rates specified in
subsection (C) regardless of a minimum outlet restrictor size;
      (4)   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible
and shall operate automatically. They will be designed to limit discharges into
existing or planned downstream channels or conduits so as not to exceed
predetermined safe capacities and not in excess of flows which would have
occurred with the land in its natural, undeveloped condition.
      (5)   The approach slopes of the basin shall conform as closely as
possible to natural land contours. Regrading is preferable if necessary to keep
the slopes under 10%. Erosion control measures shall be provided as well as
devices or measures to ensure public safety;
      (6)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam as defined in 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall
obtain an Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources
Dam Safety permit, or a letter stating that a permit is not required, prior to
the start of the activity;
      (7)   With the approval of the Planning, Building and Development
Director, stormwater retention and detention basins may be constructed in the
regulatory floodplain. Lost floodplain storage volume due to fill, structures,
and detention storage shall be replaced with compensatory storage in accordance
with §
151.149. No credit may be taken for storage volume below the base flood
elevation. (See also §
151.147.);
      (8)   No new stormwater detention or retention basin shall be located
closer than ten feet plus one and one-half times the depth of the basin to the
ultimate right-of-way of any public road, without the written permission of the
highway authority having jurisdiction over the right-of-way. Likewise, the toe
of any berm used to create a basin shall be a minimum of ten feet from the
ultimate right-of-way;
 
COMMENTARY:
Best management practices are presented in the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission’s Technical Reference Manual.
 
      (9)   For basins designed without permanent pools (dry bottom type),
provisions must be incorporated to facilitate interior drainage, to include
positive grades to outlet structures (bottom of basins must be a minimum of 2%
grade), longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage facilities, or
the installation of sub-surface drains. Wherever practical the interior
drainage shall be provided over non-erosive vegetative surfaces. When
vegetation cannot be established, a rip-rap or concrete swale or underdrain
shall be provided from the inlet structure to the outlet structure. Multi-
purpose features may be designed as part of dry bottom detention facilities;
however, the features must be designed to serve only secondary purposes for
recreation, open space, or other uses which will not be adversely affected by
occasional or intermittent flooding;
      (10)   For basins designed with permanent pools (wet bottom type):
         (a)   The minimum normal depth of water before the introduction of
excess stormwater shall be four feet;
         (b)   If fish are stocked, at least one-fourth of the area of the
permanent pool must have a minimum depth of 12 feet;
         (c)   For emergency purposes, cleaning or shoreline/buffer
maintenance, facilities shall be provided or plans prepared for the use of
auxiliary equipment to permit emptying and drainage;
         (d)   Approach slopes shall be at least 6:1 but not more than 3:1 and
shall be at least four feet wide and shall slope towards the basin. A minimum
eight-foot wide safety shelf with a maximum depth of three feet below normal
water level sloped back towards the shoreline. The side slopes shall be of non-
eroding material with a slope of 1:1 or less. Alternate designs for side slopes
may be considered under special circumstances and when approved by the
Planning, Building and Development Director; and
         (e)   Sediment storage shall be provided in all detention/retention
basins. The amount of sediment storage capacity shall be determined by the
Planning, Building and Development Director based on size of the development,
soil types, construction methods, basin design, and other relevant factors.
      (11)   For basins designed as a wetland type basin, provisions must be
incorporated to facilitate interior drainage, to include positive grades to
outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage
facilities, or the installation of sub-surface drains. A basin plan shall be
prepared for the establishment and maintenance of the wetland vegetation.
Multi-purpose features may be designed as part of dry bottom detention
facilities; however, the features must be designed to serve only secondary
purposes for recreation, open space, or other uses which will not be adversely
affected by occasional or intermittent flooding;
      (12)   Detention storage may be met in total or in part by detention on
flat roofs. Details of designs to be included in the building permit
application shall include the depth and volume of storage, details of outlet
devices and downdrains, elevation of overflow scuppers, design loadings for the
roof structure and emergency overflow provisions. Direct connection of roof
drains to sanitary sewers is prohibited;
      (13)   Paved parking lots may be designed to provide temporary detention
storage of stormwater on all or a portion of their surfaces. Outlets will be
designed so as to slowly empty the stored waters, and the depth of storage must
be limited to not greater than six inches so as to prevent damage to parked
vehicles;
      (14)   All or a portion of the required detention storage may be provided
in underground facilities with the approval of the Planning, Building and
Development Director. No detention storage may be provided in or under the
ultimate right-of-way of any public road;
      (15)   On-stream detention.
         (a)   All on-stream detention shall provide a Detention Volume Safety
Factor as follows:
            1.   The Detention Volume Safety Factor is applied to the volume of
on-stream detention necessary to meet the Watershed Development Ordinance site
requirements.
            2.   The Detention Volume Safety Factor is equal to one plus 0.05
times the ratio of off-site tributary area to on-site tributary area.
            3.   The maximum Detention Volume Safety Factor shall be 1.5.
         (b)   No on-stream detention shall be allowed with an off-site to on-
site tributary area greater than 10:1 except for development providing a
watershed benefit.
         (c)   On-stream detention shall not be permissible if the tributary
drainage area is greater than 640 acres except for detention that provides a
watershed benefit.
         (d)   The release rate shall be 0.04 cubic feet per second per acre of
the total tributary (on-site and off-site) at the elevation created by
impoundment of the on-site two-year storm volume plus the Detention Volume
Safety Factor, and 0.15 cubic feet per second per acre of the total tributary
area (on-site and off-site) at the elevation created by impoundment of the on-
site 100-year storm volume plus the Detention Volume Safety Factor. The release
rate shall be calculated using the 24-hour storm event. This release rate
calculation shall be used unless other site conditions warrant further analysis
and modification from this standard or unless watershed specific release rates
have been adopted as listed in
Appendix L.
         (e)   On-stream detention shall provide water quality treatment. One
of the following two methods shall be used:
            1.   A wet detention facility with a minimum permanent pool volume
equal to the calculated sediment volume accumulated over a one-year period for
the entire upstream watershed and an average normal water depth of at least
four feet. The facility shall also have a live storage volume that, at a
minimum, equals the water quality treatment standards of subsection (H)(4) for
the development site; or
            2.   A separate off-line siltation basin with a volume meeting the
water quality treatment standards of subsection (H)(4) for the tributary
drainage area to the sediment basin.
         (f)   Impoundment of the stream as part of on-stream detention shall
be designed to allow the migration and movement of present or potentially
present indigenous species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle. The impoundment shall not cause or contribute to the
degradation of water quality or stream aquatic habitat.
         (g)   Compensatory storage require-ments shall be satisfied.
         (h)   No on-stream detention shall be allowed in areas designated as
an exceptional functional value wetland.
      (16)   Fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage.
         (a)   The Planning, Building and Development Department may require,
as part of an adopted basin plan or floodplain study, the payment of a fee-in-
lieu of on-site stormwater storage to fulfill all or part of the on-site
stormwater storage requirement for development. The adoption of a floodplain
study or basin plan is per §
151.032(A)(17)(c) of this chapter.
         (b)   The following fee-in- lieu of on-site stormwater storage
procedures apply:
            1.   The Planning, Building and Development Director may require,
or the applicant may submit, a written request for the payment of a fee-in-lieu
of on-site stormwater storage to fulfill all or part of the on-site detention
requirement below the detention threshold minimum limit set by this chapter in
division (B)(6) of this section and for compensatory storage requirements for
streambank and shoreline restoration fills of less than 200 cubic yards. A
request for fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage shall be either rejected
or approved within 45 days of the written request unless additional engineering
studies are required.
            2.   Approval of a request for fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater
storage on a development site below the detention threshold in division (B)(6)
of this section and for compensatory storage requirements for streambank and
shoreline restoration fills of less than 200 cubic yards shall be determined by
the Planning, Building and Development Director.
            3.   Fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage shall be the lesser
of:
               A.   The fee computed for each acre-foot or cubic yard or part
thereof of stormwater storage; or
               B.   The estimated construction cost of the applicant’s proposed
and approved on-site stormwater storage, including land costs.
            4.   A fund will be maintained for each of the four major Lake
County watersheds for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues
and expenditures resulting from fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage
approvals. All fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage revenues received from
each watershed shall be deposited in these funds for use within that watershed.
            5.   The following requirements must be met before a fee-in-lieu of
on-site stormwater storage will be approved:
               A.   The downstream stormwater management system has adequate
downstream stormwater capacity (see §
151.271 Terms Defined); and
               B.   The Planning, Building and Development Department has an
adopted fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage program.
            6.   Fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage revenues may be used
to plan, design, or construct an upgrade to existing or future stormwater
management systems if the upgrade is consistent with a basin plan, floodplain
study, or stormwater system improvement.
         (c)   The following fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage
procedures shall be authorized for all developments permitted after October 13,
2020:
            1.   The Planning, Building and Development Director may require,
or the applicant may submit, a written request for the payment of a fee-in-lieu
of on-site stormwater storage to fulfill all or part of the on-site detention
requirement above the 50-year, 24-hour detention volume using Appendix K:
Rainfall Depth Duration Frequency Tables for Lake County. A request for fee-in-
lieu of on-site stormwater storage shall be either rejected or approved within
45 days of the written request unless additional engineering studies are
required.
            2.   Approval of a request for fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater
storage on a development site above the 50-year, 24-hour detention volume shall
be determined by the Lake County Planning, Building and Development Director.
            3.   Fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage shall be the fee
computed for each acre-foot or part thereof of stormwater storage.
            4.   A fund will be maintained for each of the four major Lake
County watersheds for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues
and expenditures resulting from fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage
approvals. All fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage revenues received from
each watershed shall be deposited in these funds for use within that watershed.
            5.   The following requirements must be met before a fee-in-lieu of
on-site stormwater storage will be approved:
               A.   The downstream stormwater management system has adequate
downstream stormwater capacity (see §
151.271 Terms Defined); and
               B.   The Planning, Building and Development Department has an
adopted fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage program.
            6.   Fee-in-lieu of on-site stormwater storage revenues shall be
used to design, maintain, or construct an upgrade to existing or future
stormwater management systems if the upgrade is consistent with a basin plan,
floodplain study, or stormwater system improvement.
      (17)   An access easement wide enough to allow the passage of
construction traffic must be provided to any detention basin not adjacent to a
public right-of-way;
      (18)   Impounding berms or walls for stormwater retention and detention
facilities shall be designed and constructed to withstand all expected forces,
including but not limited to erosion, pressure and uplift. The applicant shall
submit material and compaction design specifications for earthen impoundments
and provide as-built information verifying that the construction condition
meets the design requirements. Impounding berms or walls shall be represented
on the design plans and signed and sealed by a licensed professional or
structural engineer;
      (19)   The top of the impounding structure shall be a minimum of one foot
above the design high water level within the emergency overflow structure based
on subsection (E)(1) above; and
      (20)   All stormwater facilities, when determined applicable by the
Planning, Building and Development Director, shall be provided with features
for maintenance and emergency ingress and egress capability.
   (F)   Existing stormwater facilities.
      (1)   Existing lakes, ponds or stormwater basins may be utilized to
provide for the stormwater detention required by this section, provided that
the storage capacity of the existing basin and its ability to function to
provide for the intent of the regulations of this section shall be verified to
the satisfaction of the Planning, Building and Development Director. In these
cases, the existing basin shall comply with all of the design and engineering
standards for new stormwater basins, as established in subsection (E), except
when the Planning, Building and Development Director finds that the
modification of the existing basin to comply with the standards of this section
would not be practical nor desirable, and provided that the deviation from the
standards of this section will not serve to compromise the overall intent of
this section.
      (2)   Wetlands may be utilized to provide for the stormwater detention
required by this section, provided that the existing depressional storage
volume of the wetland is maintained and that the volume of detention storage
provided to meet the requirements of this section is in addition to the
existing storage volume. The use of wetlands for stormwater detention purposes
is subject to the following standards.
         (a)   If the wetland will be excavated or if the proposed outlet
structure elevation is set above the existing normal water elevation of the
wetland, the proposed basin shall comply with all of the design and engineering
standards for new stormwater basins established in subsection (E) (except when
the Planning, Building and Development Director finds that the modification of
the wetland to comply with the standards of this section would not be practical
nor desirable, and provided that the deviation from the standards of this
section will not serve to compromise the overall intent of this section). The
use of wetlands for stormwater detention purposes may require U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers approval (see subsection (M)(1) below).
         (b)   If the wetland will not be excavated and if the proposed outlet
structure elevation is set at the existing normal water elevation of the
wetland, the proposed basin shall not be required to comply with the design and
engineering standards for new stormwater basins, as established in subsection
(E) above. The use of wetlands in this manner may require U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers approval.
         (c)   A management plan for maintaining the existing storage volume
shall be prepared.
   (G)   Joint development/use of stormwater management facilities.
      (1)   Stormwater management facilities may be planned in coordination by
two or more developments or land owners as long as flood and/or stormwater
hazards are not increased at intervening locations, and shall be encouraged by
the county wherever feasible. In these cases, a maintenance agreement, approved
by the Planning, Building and Development Director, shall be established
between the developments or land owners and recorded with the Lake County
Recorder (see subsection (I) below).
      (2)   In the event that an existing stormwater management facility is, in
whole or in part, under the sole and exclusive control of a separate individual
or governmental agency, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall
not permit the use of the existing facility unless the individual or
governmental agency having the sole and exclusive control grants its permission
for the use of the existing facility. Permission granting the use of the
stormwater management facility shall be in writing and must be presented to the
Planning, Building and Development Director.
   (H)   Stormwater conveyance systems.
      (1)   Storm sewers and swales.
         (a)   The ten-year design storm shall be used as a minimum for the
design of storm sewers, swales, and appurtenances. Storm sewers shall have a
minimum diameter of 12 inches, with the exception that storm sewers servicing a
single parcel may be excused from this requirement upon approval of the
Planning, Building and Development Director. Storm sewer design analysis shall
be calculated under full flow conditions, unless prior approval from the
Planning, Building and Development Director is received for an alternate flow
condition (e.g., pressure flow).
         (b)   The development shall not connect to sanitary sewers or to
existing agricultural stormwater management systems (tiles) as an outflow for
the stormwater management system. Field tile systems disturbed during the
process of land development must be reconnected by those responsible for their
disturbance unless the approved drainage plan includes provisions for their
relocation.
         (c)   All storm sewers shall be located in a public road right-of-way
or drainage easement of sufficient size to maintain or reconstruct the sewer. A
covenant, running with the land, shall be recorded with the easements
describing the maintenance responsibilities in the easements (see subsection
(I) below). Prior to the construction of any storm sewer within an existing
public road right-of-way, written permission must be obtained from the highway
authority having jurisdiction over the right-of-way.
         (d)   All on-site stormwater management systems shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected velocity of flow from all events up to
the base flood without erosion. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion shall
be provided at the inlets and outlets of all pipe transitions and paved
channels.
         (e)   All swales utilized as part of the stormwater management system
for a development shall be located within a deed-restricted or plat-restricted
area of sufficient size to maintain or reconstruct the swale.
         (f)   All swales must be a minimum 2% grade unless the Planning,
Building and Development Director determines that the existing site conditions
will prohibit that grade.
         (g)   Surface outflows onto adjoining properties shall be designed to
release as sheet flow using level spreader trenches unless alternative designs
are approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director.
         (h)   For agricultural drain tiles (tiles) the following provisions
shall apply.
            1.   Field tile systems disturbed during the process of development
shall be reconnected by those responsible for their disturbance unless the
approved drainage plan includes provisions for these.
            2.   Observation structures, or similar maintenance and inspection
access structures, shall be installed within the development at the suitable
points of ingress and egress.
            3.   The applicant shall notify adjoining downstream property
owners in writing of any proposed stormwater facility outlet location and
design. The development design shall utilize, where practical and approved by
the Planning, Building and Development Director, outflow locations that have an
existing tile leaving the development site. A subsurface connection to the tile
shall be constructed as a low flow outlet. A surface outlet shall be designed
for the development site outflows based on the assumption the downstream tile
will cease to function.
            4.   Drain tiles within the disturbed portions of the ownership
parcel shall be replaced or intercepted and connected into the proposed
stormwater management system or a bypass. The system or bypass shall be of an
equivalent size.
            5.   Drain tiles located within an ownership parcel may be removed
or disabled provided that a maintainable outlet exists or is installed to
prevent flood damages to off-site properties.
            6.   If the development stormwater management system depends on
existing drain tiles for stormwater conveyance or water surface elevation
control, a maintainable outlet is required.
            7.   The locations for existing drain tiles within the ownership
parcel shall be defined using the Subsurface Drainage Inventory. Recorded deed
or plat restrictions shall be provided for all existing and replaced drain
tiles within the ownership parcel which are part of the stormwater management
system. Drain tiles that service a single parcel of property may be excused
from this requirement upon approval of the Planning. Building and Development
Director.
            8.   The maintenance plan per §
151.145(F)(2)(f)3. shall include the type and frequency of maintenance for all
existing and replaced drain tiles within the ownership parcel which are part of
the stormwater management system.
      (2)   Sump pump and drain tile discharges.
         (a)   The connection of sump pumps, roof drain tile systems or any
other new drain tile line, or the discharge of groundwater or stormwater into
sanitary sewers shall not be permitted.
         (b)   Sump pumps, roof drain tile systems or any other new drain tile
line shall discharge into any channel that has adequate downstream capacity,
other than the open drainage system (e.g., a roadside ditch) of a public road
right-of-way. When there exists no channel with adequate downstream capacity,
other than the open drainage system of a public road right-of-way, sump pumps,
roof drain tile systems, or any other new drain tile line may discharge into
the open drainage system of a public road right-of-way. When existing
conditions permit, however, the discharge point shall be no closer than 20 feet
from the road right-of-way and water from the discharge point shall flow to the
right-of-way via a non-channelized, non-erosive, non-impervious surface (i.e.,
sheet flow over grass). The discharge from a sump pump, roof drain tile system,
or any other new drain tile line shall be conveyed in a manner which does not
impact adjoining property owners.
         (c)   The direct connection of sump pumps, roof drain tile systems, or
any other new drain tile line into a closed drainage system (e.g., a storm
sewer), designed to accommodate the stormwater or groundwater discharges, is
encouraged within new developments. The connection of sump pumps, roof drain
tile systems, or any other new drain tile line into an existing closed drainage
system shall only be permitted when the ability of the existing drainage system
to accommodate the stormwater or groundwater discharges is verified by the
applicant.
      (3)   Overland flow paths.
         (a)   Generally. All areas of development must provide an overland
flow path that will pass the base flood flow without damage to structures or
property. If the upstream drainage area is less than 20 acres, a storm sewer
pipe and inlet systems sized for the base flood can be constructed in lieu of
providing an overland flow path.
         (b)   Flow rate. The flow rate for the base flood shall establish
overland flow path limits, and it shall include all on-site and off-site
tributary areas in accordance with subsection (B) above.
         (c)   Deed of plat - restricted area. All proposed overland flow paths
shall be located within a deed-restricted or plat-restricted area of sufficient
size to maintain or reconstruct the overland flow path. The overland flow path
shall be protected from any activity, such as fencing, landscaping, or storage
shed placement, which could impair its function. This protection shall be
established through a properly recorded deed or plat restriction.
         (d)   Less than 20 acres. For overland flow paths with less than 20
acres tributary area, all structures on a parcel containing or adjoining to an
overland flow path or other high water level designation shall have a lowest
adjacent grade a minimum of one-half foot above the design high water.
         (e)   Over 20 acres.  For overland flow paths with greater than or
equal to 20 acres tributary drainage area but less than 100 acres, all
structures on parcels containing or adjoining to an overland flow path or other
high water level designation shall have a lowest adjacent grade a minimum of
one foot above the design high water elevation.
         (f)   Public health protection.
            1.   No development in or adjacent to an overland flow path shall
include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal
wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic
materials below one foot above the design high water elevation of the overland
flow path.
            2.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, and sanitary
sewer lines may be permitted providing all manholes or other above-ground
openings located below the design high water elevation of the overland flow
path are watertight.
            3.   On-site individual sewage disposal systems in or adjacent to
an overland flow path shall be designed to avoid inundation by the base flood.
      (4)   Water quality treatment. Water quality treatment standards can be
achieved by combining the Runoff Volume Reduction requirements in subsection
(D) above and the following requirements. The following water quality
requirements apply to developments that result in at least 0.5 acre of new
impervious surface area, where “new” is defined in §
151.145(B)(6). The volume of runoff kept on-site to meet the Runoff Volume
Reduction requirements of this chapter (subsection (D)(1) above) may be
deducted from the required water quality treatment volume.
 
COMMENTARY:
Best management practices are presented in the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission’s Technical Reference Manual.
 
         (a)   Prior to discharging to waters of the United States, isolated
waters of Lake County or adjoining property, development shall divert and
detain at least the first 0.01 inch of runoff for every 1% of impervious
surface for the “development with a minimum volume equal to 0.2 inches of
runoff (e.g., 20% or less impervious = 0.2, 50% impervious = 0.5, 90%
impervious = 0.9); or provide a similar level of treatment of runoff as
approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director and consistent with
best management practices.
         (b)   Where practical, stormwater shall discharge into the buffer area
of a wetland, or water body rather than directly into the wetland, lake, or
pond. The discharges shall enter the buffer as unconcentrated flow with
appropriate energy dissipation measures to prevent erosion.
         (c)   A buffer shall be established between design normal and high
water levels around stormwater management facilities constructed for water
quality treatment to enhance treatment effectiveness. The buffer area planting
plan shall use the Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in
Northeastern Illinois, NRCS, et al., (as amended) as a minimum standard.
         (d)   Hydrocarbon (e.g., oil and grease) removal technology shall be
required using a volume of one-half inch of runoff for the new impervious
surface tributary area to each treatment device and meeting a minimum 70%
removal rate for all development classified as follows:
            1.   Vehicle fueling and servicing facilities; and
            2.   Parking lots with more than 25 new stalls.
      (5)   Buffer areas.
         (a)   Buffer areas shall be required for all areas defined as either
“waters of the United States” or “isolated waters of Lake County”. Buffer areas
are divided into two types, linear buffers and water body buffers.
            1.   Linear buffers shall be designated along both sides of all
linear water bodies meeting the definition of “waters of the United States”.
               a.   When the linear water body has a watershed greater than 20
acres but less than one square mile, the minimum buffer width shall be 50 feet
on each side of the linear water body.
               b.   When the linear water body has a watershed greater than one
square mile, the minimum buffer width shall be 30 feet on each side of the
linear water body.
               c.   Linear exceptional functional value wetlands and streams
with an Index of Biotic Integrity greater than 40 shall have a minimum buffer
width of 100 feet on each side of the linear water body. (Initial IBI based on
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency’s Illinois Water Quality Report,
biannual. A site specific IBI assessment may override this report.)
            2.   Water body buffers shall encompass all nonlinear bodies of
water meeting the definition of either waters of the United States or isolated
waters of Lake County. The buffer width shall be determined as follows:
               a.   For all water bodies or wetlands with a total surface area
greater than one-third acre but less than one acre, a minimum buffer width of
30 feet shall be established;
               b.   For all water bodies or wetlands with a total surface area
greater than or equal to one acre but less than two and one–half acres, a
minimum buffer width of 40 feet shall be established; and
               c.   For all water bodies or wetlands with a total surface area
greater than or equal to two and one-half acres, a minimum buffer width of 50
feet shall be established.
            3.   A buffer shall be established between design normal and high
water levels around stormwater management facilities constructed for water
quality treatment to enhance treatment effectiveness. The buffer area planting
plan shall use the Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in
Northeastern Illinois, NRCS, et al. (as amended) as a minimum standard.
         (b)   Nonlinear high-quality aquatic resources shall have a minimum
buffer width of 100 feet.
         (c)   Areas having state or federal threatened and endangered species
present or for Illinois Natural Area Inventory Sites, buffer widths may be
modified upon approval of the Planning, Building and Development Director, to
meet the terms and conditions specified during consultation with the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources or United States Fish and Wildlife Service
pursuant to state and federal laws and regulations.
         (d)   The buffer area for all water bodies meeting the definition of
waters of the United States or isolated waters of Lake County shall extend from
the ordinary high water mark. The buffer area for wetlands shall extend from
the edge of the delineated wetland. A property may contain a buffer area that
originates from waters of the United States or isolated waters of Lake County
on another property.
         (e)   Features of the stormwater management system approved by the
Planning, Building and Development Director may be within the buffer area of a
development.
         (f)   Access through buffer areas shall be provided, when necessary,
for maintenance purposes.
         (g)   All roadside drainage ditches, and excavated detention
facilities in existence on August 10, 1999, borrow pits, quarries, and
improvements to existing public road developments or alignments are exempt from
buffer requirements.
         (h)   Stormwater discharges that enter a buffer shall have appropriate
energy dissipation measure to prevent erosion and scour.
         (i)   All buffer areas shall be maintained free from development
including disturbance of the soil, dumping or filling, erection of structures
and placement of impervious surfaces except as follows.
            1.   A buffer area may be used for passive recreation (e.g.,
birdwatching, walking, jogging, bicycling, horseback riding and picnicking) and
it may contain pedestrian, bicycle, or equestrian trails.
            2.   Structures and impervious surfaces (including trails, paths)
may occupy a maximum of 20% of the buffer area, provided the runoff from the
facilities is diverted away from the waters of the United States or Isolated
Waters of Lake county or the runoff is directed to enter the buffer area as
unconcentrated flow.
            3.   Utility maintenance, construction of stormwater facilities,
and maintenance of stormwater facilities shall be allowed.
            4.   Boat docks, boathouses, and piers may be allowed and the
provisions of subsection (H)(5)(i)2. above shall not apply.
            5.   Buffer areas hydrologically disturbed by allowed construction
or as part of a re-vegetation plan shall be re-vegetated using the Native Plant
Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illinois, NRCS et
al. (as amended), as a minimum standard.
         (j)   A minimum of a one-foot temporary construction buffer from the
limits of the waters of the United States or isolated waters of Lake County
shall be required unless the adjacent wetland is considered impacted or
enhanced. The one-foot temporary construction buffer shall be marked by
construction fencing (Illinois Department of Transportation Standard) and
installed prior to the start of all other construction activities. All other
construction activities, including soil erosion and sediment control features,
shall take place on the non-wetland side of the construction fencing.
         (k)   Buffer averaging: the buffer width for a development site may be
varied to a minimum of one-half of the buffer width required, upon approval of
the Planning, Building and Development Director, provided that the total buffer
area required is achieved adjacent to the waters of the United States or
isolated waters of Lake County being buffered. The consultation process of the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service may
override the ability to average buffer areas upon approval of the Planning,
Building and Development Director.
         (l)   Preservation of buffer areas shall be provided by deed or plat
restriction.
         (m)   The buffer area of a development site may be subtracted from the
water quality volume required.
      (6)   Linear water bodies.
         (a)   Linear water bodies are to be conserved (see §
151.071(G)).
         (b)   Appropriate uses:
            1.   For linear water bodies with a tributary drainage area of less
than 20 acres, the establishment of any use permitted by the underlying zoning
district is permitted in the linear water body, provided that provisions are
made to pass the base flood flow without damage to structures or property.
            2.   For linear water bodies with a tributary drainage area of 20
acres or more, only the construction, modification, repair, or replacement of
the uses listed below will be allowed in the linear water body, and provided
that the uses will not cause an increase in flood heights for all flood events
up to and including the base flood. The placement of any new structures, fill,
building additions, fencing (including landscaping or plantings designed to act
as a fence), and storage of materials is not permitted in the linear water body
except as specifically permitted for the following uses:
               a.   Public flood control structures and private improvements
relating to the control of drainage and flooding of existing buildings,
erosion, water quality, or habitat for fish and wildlife;
               b.   Structures or facilities relating to functionally water
dependent uses such as facilities and improvements relating to recreational
boating, and as modifications or additions to existing wastewater treatment
facilities;
               c.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
               d.   Underground and overhead utilities if sufficiently flood-
proofed;
               e.   Bridges, culverts, and associated roadways, sidewalks, and
railways, necessary for crossing over the linear water body; and
               f.   Linear water body regrading, without fill, to create a
positive non-erosive slope toward a linear water body.
         (c)   Linear water body modification:
            1.   All development or modification of a linear water body with a
tributary drainage area of 640 acres or more is subject to compliance with the
standards for regulatory floodway development contained in §
151.147. All development or modification of a linear water body with a
tributary drainage area of 100 acres or more is subject to compliance with the
standards for flood-prone area development contained in §
151.147.
            2.   All linear water body modification is subject to compliance
with the following standards.
               a.   Stormwater velocities at the discharge point of a modified
linear water body shall not exceed those of the existing linear water body at
the same point.
               b.   If a stream or linear water body meeting the definition of
waters of the United States or isolated waters of Lake County is modified, a
stream or linear water body mitigation plan shall be submitted for review and
approval to the Planning, Building and Development Director. The plan shall
show how the physical characteristics of the modified linear water body shall,
at a minimum, meet the existing linear water body in length, cross-section,
slope, sinuosity, and carrying capacity of the original linear water body. The
plan shall also reestablish vegetation within the stream and overbanks using
the Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern
Illinois, NRCS, et al. (as amended), as a minimum standard for the re-
vegetation plan.
               c.   All disturbed areas associated with a linear water body
modification, including the buffer or setback area, shall be seeded or
otherwise stabilized in accordance with subsection (J) below.
               d.   Prior to the commence-ment of linear water body
modification, an approved and effective means to reduce sedimentation and
degradation of downstream water quality shall be installed. The measures and
practices utilized to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality shall be maintained throughout the construction period.
               e.   New or relocated linear water bodies shall be built in the
dry. All items of construction, including vegetation, shall be completed prior
to diversion of water into the new linear water body.
               f.   New or relocated linear water bodies with a tributary
drainage area of 20 acres or more shall be built no closer than 30 feet to the
ultimate rights-of-way of any public collectors, arterials, or freeways;
buildings; structures or other impervious surface areas (e.g., driveways and
parking areas) except when the Planning, Building and Development Director
finds that existing conditions, such as the exceptional narrowness of a platted
lot, will prohibit the reasonable use of a property if the 30-foot setback is
imposed. The buffer requirements of subsection (H)(5) above shall also be met.
In no event shall relocated water bodies be located closer than ten feet to the
ultimate right-of-way of public roads.
               g.   Linear water bodies shall be expected to withstand all
flood events up to the base flood without increased erosion. The use of
armoring of banks using bulkheads, rip-rap and other materials shall be
avoided. Armoring shall only be used where erosion cannot be prevented in any
other way such as use of vegetation or gradual slopes. The armoring shall have
minimal impact on other properties, linear water bodies, and the existing land
configuration.
               h.   All new or relocated linear water bodies shall be located
within a drainage easement. For new or relocated linear water bodies draining
20 or more acres, the drainage easement shall extend at least 12 feet from top
of bank along at least one side of the linear water body. All drainage
easements shall be accessible to vehicular equipment. No drainage easement
shall be on or within the ultimate right-of-way of any public road.
               i.   Construction vehicles shall cross linear water bodies by
means of existing bridges or culverts. Where an existing crossing is not
available, a temporary crossing shall be constructed that complies with all of
the following standards:
                  (i)   The approach roads will be six inches or less above
natural grade;
                  (ii)   The crossing will allow linear water body flow to pass
without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any
drainage tile or outfall;
                  (iii)   The top of the roadway fill in the linear water body
will be at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the
linear water body shall be non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel;
                  (iv)   All disturbed linear water body banks will be seeded
or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible, in accordance with subsection (J),
upon installation and again upon removal of construction; and
                  (v)   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed
within one year after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by
the Planning, Building and Development Director.
         (d)   1.   All proposed public road rights-of-way, buildings,
structures, driveways, and parking areas shall be set back at least 30 feet
from the ordinary high water mark with a tributary drainage area of 20 acres or
more except for the following:
               a.   Fences that are a maximum of four feet in height and that
are at least 50% open (e.g., chain link, split rail, picket, and the like) in
subdivisions approved prior to October 12, 1992, are exempt from setback
requirements. (Note: fences may begin at the shoreline.);
               b.   The setback for decks shall not be less than 20 feet in
subdivisions approved prior to October 12, 1992; and
               c.   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be
authorized to reduce these required setbacks when it is determined that
existing conditions, such as the exceptional narrowness of a platted lot, will
prohibit the reasonable use of the property if the setback is imposed. The
determinations shall be reported to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
in accordance with the provisions of §
151.032(A)(16).
            2.   The buffer requirements of subsection (H)(5) above shall also
be met for all subdivisions approved after August 1999.
         (e)   Public health protection standards:
            1.   No development in a linear water body shall include locating
or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes,
fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic
materials below the flood protection elevation.
            2.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, and sanitary
sewer lines may be permitted, providing all manholes or other above-ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation are watertight.
            3.   On-site individual sewage disposal systems shall be designed
to avoid inundation by the base flood.
   (I)   Maintenance of stormwater management systems. All improvements
required by this section shall be maintained in perpetuity and cannot be
developed for any other use which would limit or cause to limit the intended
function and/or use of the improvements. To ensure continued maintenance of all
stormwater management systems all development shall comply with the following
standards.
      (1)   For new developments not involving a plat of subdivision or plat of
condominium, but for which the provisions of this section are applicable,
maintenance responsibilities assigned by this section shall be those of the
property owner. In these cases, a covenant approved by the Planning, Building
and Development Director providing for perpetual maintenance of required
facilities shall be recorded with the Lake County Recorder prior to issuance of
any certificate of occupancy for the development.
      (2)   For new developments that involve a plat of subdivision or plat of
condominium, a property owners’ association or condominium association shall be
formed in perpetuity for the maintenance of the improvements required by this
section. Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all owners.
Articles of agreement of and providing for the association must be approved by
the Planning, Building and Development Director before recording of a plat.
Furthermore, the association shall be chartered by this state prior to the
release of any final maintenance guarantee held by the county for the relevant
development.
      (3)   Improvements required by this section shall be maintained by the
association of the development and each owner shall bear his or her
proportionate responsibility for continued maintenance. A special note shall
appear on any final plat of subdivision or any plat of condominium and their
declarations.
      (4)   However, the developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all improvements until the time that 80% of the lots or units in the
development have been sold. The developer shall not transfer these improvements
for the purpose of maintenance until all maintenance assurances held for
required improvements have been released by the county.
      (5)   In new residential developments consisting of five or fewer
dwelling units, the provision of an association may be waived, provided that
other parts of this section have been met, and that covenants providing for
shared maintenance responsibilities have been approved by the Planning,
Building and Development Director and recorded with the Lake County Recorder.
   (J)   Soil erosion and sediment control. Soil erosion and sediment control
related measures are required to be constructed and maintained for any
regulated land disturbance activity, in accordance with the standards of this
section. All temporary measures and permanent erosion and sediment control
shall be maintained continuously in an effective, working condition.
      (1)   Soil disturbance shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize
erosion. Areas of the development site that are not to be graded shall be
protected from construction traffic or other disturbance until final seeding is
performed. Soil stabilization shall consider the time of year, site conditions,
and the use of temporary or permanent measures.
      (2)   Properties and linear and nonlinear water bodies adjoining
development sites shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation. At points
where concentrated flow leaves a development site, energy dissipation devices
shall be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall
channel as necessary to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow from the
structure to the watercourse so that the natural physical and biological
characteristics and functions are maintained and protected.
      (3)   Sediment control measures shall be constructed prior to the
commencement of hydrologic disturbance of upland areas.
      (4)   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent
measures within seven calendar days following the end of active hydrologic
disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria or using
an appropriate measure as approved by the Planning, Building and Development
Director:
         (a)   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall
include seeding, mulching, sodding, and/or non-vegetative measures.
         (b)   Disturbance to areas or embankments having slopes equal to or
steeper than 3H:1V shall be minimized; disturbed slopes shall be stabilized
with staked-in-place sod, appropriately specified mat, or blanket, or other
appropriate measure(s) in combination with seeding.
         (c)   Erosion control blanket shall be required on all interior
detention basin side slopes between normal water level and high water level.
The seven calendar day stabilization requirement may be precluded by snow cover
or where land disturbing activities will resume within 14 calendar days from
when the active hydrologic disturbance ceased, provided that the disturbed
portion of the development site has appropriate erosion and sediment controls.
      (5)   Land disturbance activities in streams shall be avoided, where
possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following requirements
shall be met:
         (a)   Where stream construction crossings are necessary, temporary
crossings shall be constructed of non-erosive material; and
         (b)   The time and area of disturbance of a stream shall be kept to a
minimum. The stream, including bed and banks, shall be restabilized within 48
hours after channel disturbance is completed or interrupted.
      (6)   Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be appropriate
with regard to the amount of tributary area to the measure as follows.
         (a)   Disturbed areas draining greater than 1,000 square feet but less
than one acre shall, at
a minimum, be protected by a filter barrier (including filter fences, which at
a minimum, meet the applicable sections of the AASHTO Standard Specification to
288-00, or equivalent control measures) to control all off-site runoff.
Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of 25 feet, in the direction of
flow, may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is
expected.
         (b)   Disturbed areas draining more than one but fewer than five acres
shall, at a minimum, be protected by a sediment trap or equivalent control
measure at a point downslope of the disturbed area.
         (c)   Disturbed areas draining more than five acres, shall, at a
minimum, be protected by a sediment basin with a perforated filtered riser pipe
or equivalent control measure at a point downslope of the disturbed area.
         (d)   Sediment basins shall have both a permanent pool (dead storage)
and additional volume (active storage) with each volume equal to the runoff
amount of a two-year, 24-hour event over the on-site hydrologically disturbed
tributary area to the sediment basin. Two-year storm runoff volumes vs. site
runoff curve numbers are shown in
Appendix J. The available sediment volume below normal water level, in addition
to the dead storage, shall be sized to store the estimated sediment load
generated from the site over the duration of the construction period. For
construction periods exceeding one year, the one-year sediment load and a
sediment removal schedule may be substituted. If the detention basin for the
proposed developed condition of the site is used for sediment basin, the above
volume requirements will be explicitly met. Until the site is finally
stabilized, the basin permanent pool of water shall meet the above volume
requirements and have a filtered perforated riser protecting the outflow pipe.
      (7)   All storm sewers that are or will be functioning during
construction shall be protected by an appropriate sediment control measure.
      (8)   If dewatering services are used, adjoining properties and discharge
locations shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation. Discharges shall
be routed through an approved anionic polymer dewatering system or similar
measure as approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director. The
Planning, Building and Development Director, or approved representative, must
be present at the commencement of dewatering activities.
      (9)   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
removed within 30 days after final site stabilization is achieved or after the
temporary measures are no longer needed. Trapped sediment and other disturbed
soil areas shall be permanently stabilized with a uniform (e.g., evenly
distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a
minimum density of 70% or higher, at the discretion of the Planning, Building
and Development Director, on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures or equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
      (10)   A stabilized mat of crushed stone meeting Illinois Department of
Transportation gradation CA-1 underlain with filter fabric and in accordance
with the Illinois Urban Manual, or other measure(s) as approved by the
Planning, Building and Development Director shall be located at any point where
traffic will be entering or leaving a development site to or from a public
right-of-way, street, alley, or parking area. Pollutants from equipment and
vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters shall be treated in a
sediment basin or other appropriate measure(s) designed to minimize the
discharge of pollutants, as approved by the Planning, Building and Development
Director. Any sediment or soil reaching an improved public right-of-way,
street, alley, or parking area shall be removed by scraping or street cleaning
as accumulations warrant and transported to a controlled sediment disposal
area. The Planning, Building and Development Director may require additional
stabilized construction entrance methods.
      (11)   The applicant shall minimize the discharge of pollutants from the
exposure of building materials, building products, landscape materials (e.g.
fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides), detergents, sanitary waste, and other on-
site materials to precipitation and stormwater runoff.
      (12)   If the installed soil erosion and sediment controls do not
minimize sediment leaving the development site, additional measures such as
anionic polymers or filtration systems may be required by the Planning,
Building and Development Director.
      (13)   If stripping, clearing, grading, or landscaping are to be done in
phases, the permitee shall plan for appropriate erosion control measures to be
in place after each stage listed in §
151.145(E)(7).
      (14)   Earthen embankments shall be constructed with side slopes no
steeper than 3H:1V. Steeper slopes may be constructed with appropriate
stabilization as approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director.
      (15)   Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and
diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the ten-year frequency
storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized
within 48 hours.
      (16)   Temporary diversions shall be constructed as necessary to direct
all runoff from hydrologically disturbed areas to the appropriate sediment trap
or basin.
      (17)   Soil stockpiles shall not be located in a flood-prone area or
designated buffer protecting waters of the United States or isolated waters of
Lake County. Soil stockpiles are defined as having greater than 100 cubic yards
of soil and will remain in place for more than seven days. Soil stockpile
locations shall be shown on the soil erosion and sediment control plan and
shall have the appropriate measures to prevent erosion of the stockpile.
      (18)   Standards and specifications contained in the Illinois Urban
Manual, as amended, and the planning and procedures sections of the Illinois
Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, as
amended, provide guidance for presenting soil erosion and sediment control plan
specifications and delineating procedures and methods of operation under site
development for sediment and erosion control. In the event of conflict between
provisions of the manuals and of this chapter, this chapter shall govern.
      (19)   The applicant shall provide adequate receptacles for the
deposition of all construction material debris generated during the development
process. The applicant shall not cause or permit the dumping, depositing,
dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of construction material debris upon
or into any development site, channel, waters of the United States, or isolated
waters of Lake County. The applicant shall maintain the development site free
of construction material debris.
      (20)   Designated Erosion Control Program standards and Inspector
requirements.
         (a)   Standards.
            1.   A Designated Erosion Control Inspector, hired or employed by
the applicant, shall be required for development in (a) and (b), and may be
required by the Planning, Building and Development Director for (c):
               a.   Exceeds ten acres of hydrologic disturbance; or
               b.   Exceeds one acre of hydrologic disturbance and has a
regulatory floodplain, isolated waters of Lake County or waters of the United
States on-site or on a downstream adjoining property; or
               c.   Is less than or equal to one acre of hydrologic disturbance
and has a regulatory floodplain, isolated waters of Lake County, or waters of
the United States on-site or on a downstream adjoining property.
            2.   Subsection (J)(20)(b) and §
151.145(E)(7) contains inspection requirements for development meeting the
above thresholds for program inclusion and Designated Erosion Control Inspector
requirements.
            3.   Subsection (J)(17)(b) below contains inspection requirements
for development meeting the above threshold for program inclusion and
Designated Erosion Control Inspector requirements.
            4.   The applicant shall submit the name of the Designated Erosion
Control Inspector to the Planning, Building and Development Director before
issuance of site development permit.
         (b)   Designated Erosion Control Inspector requirements. The
Designated Erosion Control Inspector shall inspect the development site as
specified below and, at a minimum, perform the following:
            1.   Keep a copy of the Planning, Building and Development
Director-approved soil erosion and sediment control plans at the development
site at all times;
            2.   Keep a written log of all inspections that shall contain, at a
minimum, conditions of the soil erosion and sediment control measures and any
corrective actions that need to be taken. The Designated Erosion Control
Inspector log shall be kept at the development site at all times and shall be
made available for inspection upon request of the Planning, Building and
Development Director;
            3.   Notify the Planning, Building and Development Director within
24 hours when the development site is determined to be not in compliance with
this chapter or the approved soil erosion and sediment control plans and the
proposed corrective measures to be taken; and
            4.   Recommend to the applicant additional soil erosion and
sediment control prevention measures, if necessary, to reduce sediment leaving
a development.
   (K)   Landscape features. All permanent landscape features including, berms,
planters, walls, fences and the like shall be placed or constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere with the natural drainage pattern, so as not to
obstruct a clear view at street intersections (see § 151.172), and so that the
features do not cause a drainage nuisance. In addition, the placement and
construction of all permanent landscape berms shall conform to all of the
following standards:
      (1)   The slope of any berm embankment shall not exceed, at its steepest
point, a slope of 3:1;
      (2)   The height of any berm embankment, measured from the toe to the
top, shall not exceed 20 feet;
 
COMMENTARY:
For purposes of measuring the height of a berm in instances involving grade
changes on both sides of a berm, the berm height shall be measured on the side
of the berm whose toe is located at a higher elevation.
 
      (3)   The toe of any berm embankment shall be no closer than ten feet
from any property line or ultimate right-of-way line;
      (4)   The top of all berms shall be graded to be smoothly convex and the
toe of all berms shall be graded to be smoothly concave;
      (5)   All erosive surfaces on any berm shall be permanently stabilized in
accordance with subsection (J) above;
      (6)   In addition to meeting the erosion control standards contained in
subsection (J) above, all berms not required in a perimeter landscape
transition area shall comply with the berm landscaping requirements of §
151.167(E)(2)(f);
      (7)   A conceptual land use plan shall be submitted in conjunction with
an application for any berm in excess of ten feet in height; and
      (8)   Berms involving imported fill material shall also comply with the
standards of §
151.112(JJ) and §
151.113(W). The more restrictive standards shall control.
   (L)   Temporary soil stockpiles.
      (1)   Temporary soil stockpiles shall be placed no closer than ten feet
from any property line, road right-of-way and no closer than 30 feet from
natural resource protection areas (e.g., buffers, woodlands). Temporary soil
stockpiles shall not be located within the regulatory floodplain, regulatory
floodway, flood-prone area, linear water body, overland flow path, or any other
natural resource protection area.
      (2)   The location and size of a temporary soil stockpile shall not
interfere with the natural drainage pattern or obstruct a clear view at street
intersections (see §
151.172).
      (3)   Temporary soil stockpiles shall be removed completely and the soil
surface permanently stabilized within two years of establishment, except when
otherwise approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director.
      (4)   Adequate measures and practices shall be utilized to control
erosion of the stockpile (see subsection (J) above).
      (5)   Temporary soil stockpiles shall not exceed a maximum height of 20
feet.
   (M)   Wetlands.
      (1)   Applicability. The standards of this subsection (M) apply when
waters of the Unites States or isolated waters of Lake County are located
wholly or partially within the development site.
      (2)   Wetland submittal requirements. In addition to all other Watershed
Development Ordinance provisions of this chapter, wetland permit submittal
requirements depend upon whether the development site contains waters of the
United States or isolated waters of Lake County as provided below.
         (a)   The applicant shall provide a valid written jurisdictional
determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or a Corps-approved agency
as to which wetlands on the development site are isolated waters of Lake County
or waters of the United States. A copy of the jurisdictional determination
shall be included with the wetland submittal.
         (b)   For development containing waters of the United States or
isolated waters of Lake County, but with no proposed impacts, the following
information is required for a Letter of No Impact (LONI):
            1.   A cover letter describing the proposed activity:
            2.   Development plan(s) as specified in §
151.145(F);
            3.   A wetland hydrology analysis meeting the requirements of
subsection (M)(7) when there is a modification of tributary drainage area or
surface runoff volume to isolated waters of Lake County;
            4.   A letter from the U.S. Army Corps stating that the proposed
development will not impact waters of the United States, if required by the
Lake County Stormwater Management Commission or the isolated wetland certified
community.
         (c)   For wetland impacts to waters of the United States, the
following information is required:
            1.   Wetland delineation and wetland determination report as
specified in subsection (M)(3) of this section;
            2.   A U.S. Army Corps permit for the proposed development or a
letter from the Corps stating that the proposed development does not require
Corps authorization;
            3.   Buffer area requirements as specified in subsection (H)(5) of
this section; and
            4.   All wetland impacts occurring in county that exceed the
mitigation threshold of the Corps regulatory program shall be mitigated for in
county at the mitigation ratio specified by the Corps for that development
impact.
         (d)   For wetland impacts to isolated waters of Lake County, the
following information is required:
            1.   A cover letter signed by a certified wetland specialist, that
provides a clear project purpose and need statement, a description of the
proposed activity, area (in acres) of wetland impact and a statement on the
category to be used as follows:
               a.   Category I: Wetland impacts less than or equal to one acre
and does not impact high-quality aquatic resources;
               b.   Category II: Wetland impacts greater than one acre and less
than two acres and does not impact high-quality aquatic resources;
               c.    Category III: Wetland impacts greater than or equal to two
acres or impacts high-quality aquatic resources; and
               d.   Category IV: Wetland impacts for the restoration, creation,
and enhancement of wetlands, provided that there are net gains in aquatic
resource function. Category IV activities include shoreline and streambank
erosion restoration described in §
151.149(E)(3).
            2.   A completed watershed development permit application form
signed by a certified wetland specialist;
            3.   A delineation of the wetlands consistent with the requirements
provided in subsection (M)(3) of this chapter;
            4.   Development site plan(s) meeting the requirements of §
151.145(F) showing the boundaries of all existing wetlands or water bodies on
the ownership parcel, including the development site and the areas of proposed
wetland impacts.
            5.   Current documentation on the occurrence of any high-quality
aquatic resource on or adjoining the development;
            6.   For developments involving state funding or pass-through
funding, documentation that the development is in compliance with the intra-
agency Wetland Policy Act of 1989 [20 ILCS 830] as administered by the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources;
            7.   Documentation that the development is in compliance with the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s consultation program under the Endangered
Species Act;
            8.   A mitigation plan meeting the requirements of subsection (M)
(4);
            9.   A copy of the natural resources information report (NRI) for
development that is required to obtain a NRI performed by the McHenry-Lake
County Soil and Water Conservation District pursuant to state statute 70 ILCS
405/22.02a;
            10.   A narrative of the alternative measures taken to avoid,
minimize, or mitigate for wetland impacts to isolated waters of Lake County
(Category II requirement only);
            11.   Category III wetland impacts:
               a.   A narrative of the measures taken, in sequence, to avoid
and minimize wetland impacts to isolated waters of Lake County before
mitigation is considered;
               b.   Upon concurrence of the Planning, Building and Development
Director, and the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission or the Isolated
Waters of Lake County-Certified Community’s Certified Wetland Specialist that a
site development permit application meets all other wetland submittal
requirements of this chapter, the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission
or the Isolated Waters of Lake County-Certified Community’s Certified Wetland
Specialist shall issue a technical notification to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission requesting comments with respect to the
proposed wetland impacts within 15 working days. The Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission or the Isolated Waters of Lake County-Certified
Community’s Certified Wetland Specialist shall receive the comments and copies
of the comments shall be forwarded to the applicant for response. Full
consideration of the comments and applicant’s response shall be evaluated by
the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission or the Isolated Waters of Lake
County-Certified Community’s Certified Wetland Specialist for compliance with §
151.145(A)(10) prior to approval of wetland provisions and permit issuance; and
               c.   The Lake County Stormwater Management Commission shall
review and issue Category III wetland authorizations for development sites
occurring in more than one local unit of government jurisdiction.
            12.   Category IV wetland impacts:
               a.   A narrative on the benefits to the aquatic environment of
the proposed development.
               b.   Shoreline and streambank erosion restoration that meet the
requirements contained in §
151.149(E)(3) are exempt from submittal requirements contained in this section.
               c.    isolated waters of Lake County that are used for detention
and not for mitigation credit per subsection (M)(6) shall be exempt from the
submittal requirements of subsection (M)(2)(d)8. above.
      (3)   Requirements for wetland delineation.
         (a)   The applicant shall identify the boundaries, extent, function,
and quality of all wetland areas on the development site and prepare a wetland
determination report. The presence and extent of wetland areas shall be
determined by, or under the supervision of, a certified wetland specialist
using an on-site wetland procedure within three years of the initial permit
application date in accordance with the methodology contained in the 1987 Corps
of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual (as amended, including applicable
supplements) or as otherwise noted below.
         (b)   Wetland determination report. The following are minimum
requirements for the wetland determination report:
            1.   A plan showing the location of wetlands within the development
site and the approximate boundaries of offsite wetlands per subsection (M)(3)
(b)6 below. The wetland boundary within the development site shall be flagged
in the field and surveyed;
            2.   An aerial photograph delineating the wetland and the
development boundary;
            3.   A copy of the following maps (most recent) delineating the
development boundary;
               a.   U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle map;
               b.   Lake County wetland inventory map (including ADID sites);
               c.   Federal Emergency Management Agency floodplain map;
               d.   Lake County soil survey; and
               e.   Hydrologic atlas (U.S.G.S. Flood of Record map).
            4.   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers data sheets (Midwest Region, most
recent version) with color photographs provided for representative upland and
wetland data points;
            5.   A written description of the wetland(s) that includes a
floristic quality assessment as determined using the Chicago Region Floristic
Quality Assessment Calculator (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Chicago District,
most recent version). Floristic quality assessments shall generally be
conducted between May 15 and October 1 which approximates the growing season.
Non-growing season assessments may require additional sampling during the
growing season to satisfy this requirement;
            6.   The approximate location, extent, and relative quality of off-
site wetlands on properties within the maximum buffer requirements adjoining
the development shall be identified by using the first of the following
documents or procedures pertaining at the time of development:
               a.   Site-specific delineation according to the 1987 federal
wetland delineation manual. If this delineation is not available, use
subsection (M)(3)(b)6.b. below; or
               b.   Wetlands identified in county wetland inventory maps (most
current Lake County Wetland Inventory map).
            7.   A farmed wetland determination for development sites in
accordance with the current U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service
methodology. The farmed wetland boundaries shall be shown on the plan and
aerial photograph in subsections (M)(3)(b)1. and (M)(3)(b)2. above. A report
for the development site indicating the presence of cropland wetlands as
defined by the National Food Security Act Manual (most recent edition).
      (4)   Isolated Waters of Lake County mitigation requirements.
         (a)   Mitigation is required within the county for:
            1.   Wetland impacts greater than one-tenth acre of isolated waters
of Lake County including those that are high-quality aquatic resources.
            2.   For single-lot, single-family residences provided the activity
is a single and complete project: wetland impacts greater than 0.25 acre of
isolated waters of Lake County or 0.10 acre of isolated waters of Lake County
that are high-quality aquatic resources.
         (b)   Mitigation shall provide for the replacement of the wetland
environment lost to development at the following proportional rates (i.e.,
creation acreage to wetland impact acreage):
            1.   For wetland impacts to areas that are not high quality aquatic
resources under Categories I, II, and III, a minimum of 1.5:1 mitigation ratio
shall be required or a minimum 1:1 mitigation ratio for fully certified wetland
mitigation bank credits;
            2.   A minimum of 3:1 for wetland impacts that are high-quality
aquatic resources;
            3.   A minimum of 6:1 for wetland impacts that are high-quality
forested wetlands as defined in
Appendix N; and
            4.   For wetland impacts to open waters that are not high-quality
aquatic resources under Categories I, II, and III, a minimum of 1:1 mitigation
ratio shall be required.
         (c)   Mitigated isolated waters of Lake County shall be designed to
duplicate or improve the hydrologic and biologic features of the original
wetland impact area.
         (d)   A project mitigation document (PMD) shall be submitted for all
mitigation projects in conformance with
Appendix S.
Appendix S contains requirements for performance standards, monitoring, and
completion standards.
         (e)   Creation of wetlands for the mitigation of wetland impacts shall
not take place within detention facilities. Enhancement of farmed wetlands
meeting the size criterion in subsection (M)(5)(a) may be used for up to 80% of
the mitigation requirement.
         (f)   Enhancement of existing non-farmed wetlands may be credited at
up to 25% of the enhanced wetland acreage completed, provided that the wetland
impact acreage created is at a minimum 1:1 ratio and the mitigation hierarchy
in §§
151.145 through
151.154 is followed.
         (g)   A five-year wetland mitigation surety for 110% of mitigation
cost shall be submitted prior to obtaining a permit. The mitigation surety
shall include the costs for construction, monitoring, and management activities
during the five-year performance period.
         (h)   A wetland mitigation management and monitoring plan indicating
the legally responsible parties for long-term operation and maintenance and
dedicated funding sources.
         (i)   The developer shall provide annual monitoring reports on the
status of the constructed mitigation measures. The developer shall undertake
all necessary remedial action to bring the area into compliance with the
wetland mitigation plan.
         (j)   Wetland impacts occurring prior to issuance of a Watershed
Development Ordinance permit shall presume the wetland disturbed was a high-
quality aquatic resource requiring mitigation at a minimum rate of 3:1, except
6:1 for wetland impacts that are forested wetlands as defined in
Appendix N.
         (k)   Mitigation areas shall have the same buffer area requirements
and mitigation credit for established buffer areas as described in
Appendix S for Lake County Stormwater Management Commission-approved wetland
mitigation banks.
         (l)   Mitigation areas shall be protected by a deed or plat
restriction for that purpose.
      (5)   Mitigation hierarchy.
         (a)   Size requirements. If the required mitigation acreage is less
than one and one-half acres, mitigation requirements shall follow the
mitigation hierarchy (b)1. through 4. below. If on-site mitigation increases an
existing on-site wetland size to greater than or equal to one and one-half
acres, the applicant may use mitigation hierarchy (b)1. If the required
mitigation acreage is one and one-half acres or greater, mitigation
requirements shall follow mitigation hierarchy (b)1. through 4.
         (b)   Hierarchy. All mitigation shall occur in the county. Mitigation
shall use the following hierarchy. Allowance to the next lower step is
permitted only when justified through sequencing specified in subsections (M)
(2)(d)10. and (M)(2)(d)11. or when the higher step is not available or as
specified in subsection (M)(5)(b)4. below:
            1.   On-site wetland mitigation meeting the requirements of the
project mitigation document;
            2.   In the same watershed as wetland impact: a U.S. Army Corps
approved wetland mitigation bank; or a Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission approved wetland mitigation bank; or off-site wetland mitigation
meeting the requirements of the project mitigation document;
            3.   Outside of the watershed (at double the required mitigation
acreage): a U.S. Army Corps approved wetland mitigation bank; or a Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission approved wetland mitigation bank; or off-site
wetland mitigation meeting the requirements of the project mitigation document;
or
            4.   Lake County Stormwater Management Commission Wetland
Restoration Fund. This mitigation option may only be used for wetland impacts
where there are no available mitigation credits within the watershed and the
corresponding fees and mitigation ratios shall be charged at the in-watershed
rate.
      (6)   Detention in isolated waters of Lake County.
         (a)   Detention shall only be allowed in the following isolated waters
of Lake County and may not be considered a wetland impact, subject to
provisions of subsections (M)(6)(b) and (M)(6)(c):
            1.   Farmed wetlands;
            2.   Non-farmed wetlands that are not high quality aquatic
resources when the existing vegetated wetland acreage (not including open water
area) is either:
               a.   Covered by a minimum of 85% of one or more of the following
species:
                  i.   Reed canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea);
                  ii.   Purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria);
                  iii.   Common reed (Phragmites australis); or
                  iv.   Buckthorn (Rhamnus spp.).
               b.   Has an FQI of seven or less.
            3.   An isolated waters of Lake County comprised of open water that
is not a high quality aquatic resources;
            4.   Non-farmed wetlands not meeting subsection (M)(6)(a)2. that
are not high quality aquatic resources and wholly located within a deed or plat
restriction may be utilized for detention greater than the required two-year,
24-hour volume. The outlet design shall maintain or replicate the existing
hydrologic condition of the wetland, unless changes are proposed to enhance the
wetland function. Excavation or grading shall be considered an impact under the
appropriate impact Category I, II, or III.
         (b)   The following shall apply when using isolated waters of Lake
County for detention and not for wetland enhancement mitigation credit:
            1.   The applicant shall use a “wetland detention basin” design,
and shall reestablish vegetation within the detention basin using the Native
Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illinois,
NRCS, et al. (as amended) as a minimum standard for the re-vegetation plan.
            2.   Reduction of wetland area within the existing delineated
wetland boundary from existing to proposed conditions shall be reviewed as an
impact under the appropriate impact Category I, II, or III.
            3.   Excavation of existing wetland as part of the proposed wetland
detention basin design shall be reviewed under Category IV meeting the criteria
of subsections (M)(6)(a)1., (M)(6)(a)2., and (M)(6)(a)3.
            4.   The wetland hydrology thresholds of subsection (M)(7) shall
apply for isolated waters of Lake County meeting the criteria of subsections
(M)(6)(a)1. and (M)(6)(a)4.
            5.   The requirements for water quality treatment of subsection (H)
(4) shall apply upstream of the isolated waters of Lake County.
            6.   The maintainable outlet requirements of subsection (C)(2)
shall apply.
         (c)   The following shall apply when using isolated waters of Lake
County for detention and for wetland enhancement mitigation credit:
            1.   Isolated waters of Lake County meeting the criteria of
subsection (M)(6)(a) may be used for wetland enhancement mitigation credit.
            2.   Wetland enhancement within the proposed detention basin shall
be reviewed under Category IV requirements, and the performance standards
listed in
Appendix S, Section H, shall apply.
            3.   Reduction of wetland area within the existing delineated
wetland boundary from existing to proposed conditions shall be reviewed as an
impact under the appropriate impact Category I, II, or III.
            4.   The mitigation requirements of subsection (M)(4) shall apply.
            5.   The wetland hydrology thresholds of subsection (M)(7) shall
apply.
            6.   The requirements for water quality treatment of subsection (H)
(4) shall apply upstream of the isolated waters of Lake County.
      (7)   Wetland hydrology requirement. The following hydrology requirement
applies to isolated waters of Lake County located wholly or partially within
the ownership parcel, including the development site. The runoff volume
reduction requirements (subsection (D)(2)) may be modified to satisfy the
wetland hydrology requirement for the portion of the development site tributary
to the wetland.
         (a)   The development design shall maintain between 80% and 150% of
the existing condition, two-year, 24-hour storm event runoff volumes from the
on-site tributary drainage area to the preserved isolated water of Lake County.
The following minimum information shall be submitted to address this provision:
            1.   An exhibit illustrating the existing condition and with-
project drainage areas;
            2.   Existing condition and with-project runoff volume calculations
(including land use and soil type documentation);
            3.   Existing condition and with-project runoff volume
determination. For proposed development that will change the size of an
isolated waters of Lake County, the proposed to existing conditions runoff
volume ratio shall be adjusted according to the change in wetland size, to
determine if the hydrology threshold has been met; and
            4.   The development shall include a design for the stormwater
management system that maintains or replicates the existing hydrologic
condition of the wetland, unless changes are proposed to enhance the wetland
function.
         (b)   A wetland impact to isolated waters of Lake County shall be
assumed and the mitigation requirements of subsection (M)(4) shall apply if the
development does not meet provisions of subsection (M)(7)(a) above. The
hydrologic wetland impact shall be in addition to other wetland impacts to
isolated waters of Lake County (e.g., filling, excavation, drainage, and the
like). The amount of wetland impact shall be determined as follows:
            1.   For isolated waters of Lake County wholly on-site: the total
area of the impacted isolated waters of Lake County not meeting the above
provisions; and
            2.   For isolated waters of Lake County located partially on-site:
the ratio of on-site tributary drainage area to total tributary drainage area
multiplied by the with project area of the impacted isolated waters of Lake
County.
      (8)   Resource protected area. Wetlands shall be protected and set aside
as open space in accordance with §
151.072.
      (9)   Wetland development or disturbance. Development or disturbance of
wetlands shall be allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the
wetland development standards of division (M) above and with the following
standards:
         (a)   A permit approving the proposed wetland development shall be
received from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers;
         (b)   The establishment of any permitted use, construction of any
permitted structure, excavation or filling of any wetland may be permitted only
if:
            1.   The parcel, use, and/or structure would conform to all other
standards of this chapter if the wetland were not present; and
            2.   The location, amount, or configuration of a site’s buildable
area precludes the construction of any permitted principal structure or
establishment of any reasonable permitted use of land.
         (c)   In addition to the above standards, all applications for the
development of exceptional functional value wetlands shall demonstrate that the
proposed use is so location dependent that it can not practically be
established outside of the wetland.
(Ord., § 8.2, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 22-1060, passed 8-
9-2022; Ord. 23-1056, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024)
§ 151.147 REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY FLOODWAY, FLOOD TABLE LAND AND
FLOOD-PRONE AREAS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all man-made changes to
improved or unimproved real estate lying in the regulatory floodplain, the
regulatory floodway or on flood table land and flood-prone area, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. This section shall not
apply to normal maintenance activities undertaken on existing structures and
facilities.
   (B)   Regulatory floodplain.
      (1)   Determination and delineation. The elevation and location of the
regulatory floodplain shall be determined as follows.
 
COMMENTARY:
Current Federal Emergency Management Agency maps can be obtained from the
Planning, Building and Development Department or online (http://
maps.lakecountyil.gov/mapsonline).
 
         (a)   The regulatory floodplain is delineated within a development by
projecting the base flood elevation onto the site topography, unless the area
is shown to be within a coastal high hazard area.
         (b)   The base flood elevation shall be obtained from the 100-year
flood profiles, as indicated in the floodplain studies listed below:
            1.   Lake County Stormwater Management Commission regulatory
floodplain profiles;
            2.   Should no Lake County Stormwater Management Commission-
approved regulatory floodplain profile exist for the subject site, the “Flood
Insurance Study, County of Lake, Illinois, Unincorporated Areas”, including all
flood profiles and elevations contained therein, published by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, including the Federal Insurance Rate Map (see
Appendix M, as may be amended by FEMA);
            3.   In the case of Federal Emergency Management Agency-delineated
“AH Zones”, the elevation noted on the map shall be the base flood elevation.
In the case of Federal Emergency Management Agency-delineated “AO Zones”, the
base flood elevation shall be the depth number shown on the map added to the
highest adjacent grade, or at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade
if no depth number is provided; or
            4.   When no base flood elevation information exists, the base
flood elevation shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using
an appropriate model or technique as approved by the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission or Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources. For riverine flood-prone areas with greater than 100 acres of
tributary drainage area, non-riverine flood-prone areas with greater than 20
acres of tributary drainage area, and all mapped Special Flood Hazard Areas
regardless of drainage area, the base flood elevation determination shall be
submitted to the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission for approval
prior to issuance of a watershed development permit. The base flood elevation
determination for non-riverine depressional floodplains with less than 20 acres
of tributary drainage area shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning,
Building and Development Director. Base flood elevation determinations shall be
based on the critical duration event.
               a.   Where a linear water body has a tributary drainage area of
640 acres or more, the above analyses shall be submitted to the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission for approval by the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources.
               b.   For a non-riverine regulatory floodplain, the historic
flood of record (as determined by the Planning, Building and Development
Director according to subsection (B)(1)(b)4. above plus three feet), may be
used for the base flood elevation instead of performing a detailed hydrologic
and hydraulic study. However, a detailed hydrologic and hydraulic study may
result in a lower base flood elevation. This Base Flood Elevation option cannot
be used within a FEMA mapped SFHA for proposed development greater than 50 lots
or 5 acres.
               c.    Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the application of
these regulations to land that can be demonstrated by engineering survey to lie
within any regulatory floodplain. Conversely, any lands (except for those
located in a regulatory floodway) that can be demonstrated by a topographic
survey certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
to lie beyond the regulatory floodplain, and to the satisfaction of the
Planning, Building and Development Director, to have been higher than the base
flood elevation as of the date of the first floodplain mapping denoting the
site to be in a Special Flood Hazard Area and as of the date of the current
effective map shall not be considered to be located in the SFHA.
            5.   The base flood elevation for a Regulatory Floodplain subject
to flooding effects from Lake Michigan shall be the elevation (or in zone AO,
the depth) identified on the FIRM for the site, or the 1% annual chance still
water elevation of Lake Michigan identified in the Flood Insurance Study,
whichever elevation is higher.
      (2)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Only those uses listed in §
151.148 are permitted by right within a regulatory floodplain regardless of the
regulations of any zoning district. All uses permitted by §
151.148 are permitted subject to compliance with the all applicable performance
standards of §
151.149.
         (b)   All other structures and uses that are permitted by the
underlying zoning district but are not listed in §
151.148 may be permitted in the regulatory floodplain only pursuant to §
151.148(B).
         (c)   Nothing herein shall prevent the rebuilding or extension of any
existing structures permitted by the underlying zoning district, provided that
the rebuilding or extension complies with all applicable performance standards
of §
151.149.
      (3)   Additional application requirements. In addition to other submittal
requirements, all of the following additional information shall be provided for
all development in the regulatory floodplain:
         (a)   Site location of the property, drawn to scale on the regulatory
floodplain map;
         (b)   Plans, cross-sections and profiles of the project showing all of
the following:
            1.   The regulatory floodplain limit, including if applicable, the
navigation channels for work in public bodies of water as defined by the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources;
            2.   Cross-section views of the project for the impacted reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            3.   A copy of the regulatory floodplain map with the project site
delineated and marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory
floodplain location; and
            4.   All changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or
filling; the location and dimension of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   Engineering calculations and supporting data showing that the
proposed work will meet the performance standards outlined in §
151.149;
         (d)   Elevation certificates of the lowest floor (elevation including
basements) for all existing buildings in the regulatory floodplain;
         (e)   Flood-proofing certificates for all existing buildings, or
portions thereof, located below the flood protection elevation; and
         (f)   Evidence that all required federal, state, and local permits
have been obtained. (See
Appendix G for a partial list of permits that may be required.)
   (C)   Regulatory floodways. 
      (1)   Determination and delineation. The location of the regulatory
floodway and the location of the Coastal High Hazard Area shall be as
delineated on the maps listed in
Appendix M, as may be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory
floodway boundary, the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources shall be contacted. A site located in the regulatory floodway
that is higher than the base flood elevation is subject to the regulations of §
151.150 until such time as a Letter of Map Amendment or Letter of Map Revision
is received from the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency.
 
COMMENTARY:
Current Federal Emergency Management Agency maps can be obtained from the
Planning, Building and Development Department or online (http://
maps.lakecountyil.gov/mapsonline).
 
      (2)   Permitted uses. No encroachment shall be allowed in the regulatory
floodway, except as explicitly permitted by §
151.150.
      (3)   Additional application requirements. In addition to other submittal
requirements, the following additional information shall be provided for all
development in the regulatory floodway:
         (a)   Site location of the property, drawn to scale on the regulatory
floodway map;
         (b)   Plans, cross-sections, and profiles of the project showing:
            1.   The regulatory floodway limit and, if applicable, the
navigation channels for work in public bodies of water as defined by the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources;
            2.   Cross-section views of the project for the impacted reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            3.   A copy of the regulatory floodway map with the project site
delineated and marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway
location; and
            4.   All changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or
filling; the location and dimension of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   Engineering calculations and supporting data showing that the
proposed work will meet the performance standards outlined in §
151.150, and if applicable, §
151.151 and §
151.152;
         (d)   Elevation certificates of the lowest floor (elevation including
basements) for all existing buildings in the regulatory floodway; and
         (e)   Evidence that all required federal, state, and local permits
have been obtained. (See
Appendix G for a partial list of permits that may be required.)
   (D)   Flood table lands.
      (1)   Determination and delineation. Flood table land is that land area
contiguous to the floodplain, the elevation of which is greater than the base
flood elevation by two feet or less.
      (2)   Permitted uses. All uses permitted by the underlying zoning
district shall be permitted by right on flood table lands subject to compliance
with the standards of §
151.153.
   (E)   Flood-prone areas.
      (1)   Determination and delineation. Flood-prone areas are delineated by
projecting the base flood elevation onto the best available topographic
information.
      (2)   Permitted uses. All uses permitted by the underlying zoning
district shall be permitted by right in flood-prone areas subject to compliance
with the standards of §
151.154.
   (F)   Other regulations to apply. In addition to the provisions of this
section that apply to regulatory floodplain, regulatory floodway, flood table
land and flood-prone areas, the regulations of the Zoning District in which
land is located shall continue in full force and effect. Likewise, nothing in
this section shall relieve the developer of any responsibility for fully
complying with all requirements of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources, Office of Water Resources, the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or any other federal, state, or local agency
having jurisdiction over the filling or development of regulatory floodplain or
regulatory floodway lands.
(Ord., § 8.3, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. passed - - ; Ord.
23-1056, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 151.148 USES AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN.
   (A)   Uses. The following uses shall be allowed in the regulatory floodplain
if allowed by the underlying zoning district regulations:
      (1)   Arboretum or botanical garden;
      (2)   Archery range, outdoor;
      (3)   Boat docks/piers;
      (4)   Boathouse;
      (5)   Boat launching ramp;
      (6)   Boat sales, rental, storage/service;
      (7)   Boat works, custom build/repair;
      (8)   Bridges/bridge approaches;
      (9)   Camp;
      (10)   Carnival or circus;
      (11)   Christmas tree sales;
      (12)   Garage, detached [permitted in the regulatory floodplain only as
accessory uses to existing detached house (single family) residences, and are
subject to the regulations contained in §
151.149 (building protection requirements);
      (13)   Golf course;
      (14)   Golf driving range;
      (15)   Lakes;
      (16)   Marina;
      (17)   Nursery, non-retail;
      (18)   Parking lot, commercial;
      (19)   Picnic shelter;
      (20)   Ponds;
      (21)   Public park, open refuge/preserve;
      (22)   Pump station/lift station;
      (23)   Recreational uses, outdoor;
      (24)   Roads;
      (25)   Seasonal sale of farm produce;
      (26)   Storage sheds [permitted in the regulatory floodplain only as
accessory uses to existing detached house (single family) residences, and are
subject to the regulations contained in §
151.149 (building protection requirements);
      (27)   Stormwater basins [stormwater detention basins are permitted in
the floodplain only with the approval of the Planning, Building and Development
Director and are subject to compliance with the regulations of §
151.146(E)];
      (28)   Swimming pools [permitted in the regulatory floodplain only as
accessory uses to existing detached house (single family) residences, and are
subject to the regulations contained in §
151.149 (building protection requirements);
      (29)   Tent meeting or tent theater; and
      (30)   All other structures and uses that are permitted by the underlying
zoning district may be permitted in the regulatory floodplain pursuant to §
151.148(B).
   (B)   Development. Any structure or use, including the placement of “deep
fill” permitted by the underlying district may be established in a regulatory
floodplain pursuant to the following standards.
      (1)   The application shall be accompanied with all reports, plans, and
calculations necessary to demonstrate compliance with all of the application,
performance standard, and other regulations of this subchapter.
      (2)   The establishment of any permitted use, construction of any
permitted structure, or filling of any parcel shall be permitted only if the
applicant demonstrates that:
         (a)   The parcel, use, or structure would conform to all other
standards of this chapter if the floodplain were not present; and
         (b)   The location, amount or configuration of a site’s buildable area
precludes the construction of any permitted principal structure or
establishment of any reasonable permitted use of the land.
(Ord., § 8.4, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.149 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT.
   The standards of this section apply to all regulatory floodplain development
except when superseded by more stringent requirements.
   (A)   Modification and disturbance. Modification and disturbance of natural
riverine regulatory floodplains shall be avoided to protect existing hydrologic
and environmental functions. The disturbances shall be minimized and all
negative impacts mitigated as described in a mitigation plan.
   (B)   Prohibited development. No development shall be allowed in the
regulatory floodplain that, singularly or cumulatively, creates a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity, or threat to public
health, safety, and welfare, or impairs the natural hydrologic functions of the
regulatory floodplain and linear/nonlinear water bodies.
   (C)   Maintenance of flood carrying capacity. For all projects involving
linear water body modification or maintenance, fill, or levees, the flood-
carrying capacity of the regulatory floodplain shall be maintained.
   (D)   Public flood control projects. For public flood control projects, the
permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant
can demonstrate to the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed
project will not, singularly or cumulatively, result in increased flood heights
outside the project right-of-way or in easements for all flood events up to and
including the base flood event.
   (E)   Compensatory storage capacity. When compensatory storage is required
for storage lost or displaced in a regulatory floodplain the following
standards shall apply.
      (1)   Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage requirements for
development activity in a riverine regulatory floodplain shall be at least
equal to 1.2 times the volume of regulatory floodplain storage lost or
displaced. The compensation areas shall be designed to drain freely and openly
to the channel and located opposite or adjacent to fill areas. A restrictive
covenant or deed or plat restriction running with the land shall be recorded to
prohibit any future modification to the compensation area.
      (2)   (a)   Hydraulically equivalent com-pensatory storage requirements
for development activity in a non-riverine regulatory floodplain shall be at
least equal to one times the volume of regulatory floodplain storage lost or
displaced. Compensation areas shall be designed to access the required volume.
A restrictive covenant or deed or plat restriction is required to prohibit any
modification to the compensation area. Upon approval of the Planning, Building
and Development Director, hydraulic equivalency for non-riverine compensatory
storage may be altered, provided that the storage is replaced at or below the
existing elevation at which storage is lost or displaced but not below the
proposed normal water level.
         (b)   Hydraulically equivalent com-pensatory storage requirements for
development activity in a non-riverine regulatory floodplain, that is located
partially on-site, with more than 10% of the BFE surface located on-site, shall
be at least equal to 1.2 times the volume of regulatory floodplain storage lost
or displaced. Such compensation areas shall be designed to access the required
volume. A restrictive covenant or deed or plat restriction is required to
prohibit any modification to the compensation area. Upon approval of the
Planning. Building and Development Director, hydraulic equivalency for non-
riverine compensatory storage may be altered, provided that the storage is
replaced at or below the existing elevation at which storage is lost or
displaced but not below the proposed normal water level.
      (3)   Upon approval of the Planning, Building and Development Director,
shorelines or streambanks that have experienced erosion may be restored to
their condition as of the current effective date of the first Flood Insurance
Rate Map in that community without the need to provide compensatory storage or
pay fee-in-lieu-of for the fill used to restore the eroded area according to
the following criteria.
         (a)   The restoration fill shall meet existing grades and within
riverine areas the current effective regulatory floodplain base flood elevation
shall not be increased and the regulatory floodway conveyance shall be
maintained.
         (b)   The amount of eroded property being restored shall be documented
and submitted by the applicant as part of the permit process. Proper
documentation shall be either field survey information or photo documentation
of the erosion that has occurred for the property being restored.
         (c)   For rivers, lakes, and streams where no floodway has been
designated, no documentation of past shoreline erosion is required if the
applicant does not exceed one cubic yard of fill per lineal foot for a maximum
of 200 feet. In this case the placing of the fill shall not significantly alter
the alignment of the shoreline with adjoining properties as determined by the
Enforcement Officer. Non-documentable fills are a one-time allowance on a per
property basis and all fills exceeding 200 cubic yards shall be regulated as
specified in subsection (E).
         (d)   Shoreline protection measures (e.g., sea wall, rip-rap, deep-
rooted vegetation) shall be implemented in conjunction with all shoreline
filling conducted under this provision.
      (4)   An above-ground swimming pool shall not be required to provide
compensatory storage for the volume displaced within the regulatory floodplain.
The pool shall be anchored to resist flotation. No backfilling of the pool
walls will be allowed and any material excavated for the installation shall be
removed from floodplain limits.
      (5)   Compensatory storage is not required in Coastal High Hazard Areas.
   (F)   Public health protection standards.
      (1)   For property located within the regulatory floodplain, no
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal waste, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials shall be placed or
stored below the flood protection elevation.
      (2)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, and sanitary sewer
lines may be permitted, providing all manholes or other above-ground openings
located below the flood protection elevation are watertight.
      (3)   On-site individual sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
avoid inundation by the base flood.
      (4)   If required to repair an existing individual sewage disposal system
serving an existing
structure, either shallow or deep filling shall be permitted as a matter of
right to the minimum extent necessary to comply with Lake County Health
Department requirements for the repair. Compensatory storage shall be provided
to the greatest extent possible.
   (G)   Filling.
      (1)   Four types of filling of the regulatory floodplain are regulated by
this section: shallow filling, deep filling, topdressing erosion, and
topdressing subsidence.
         (a)   Shallow filling is filling to realign contours, protect
seawalls, or make yards or lands more useful which does not raise the land
surface elevation above the base flood elevation. The placement of fill
material so as to constitute shallow filling is permitted by right.
         (b)   Deep filling is filling which raises the land surface elevation
above that of the base flood elevation. The placement of fill material within
any regulatory floodplain so as to constitute deep filling shall be permitted
only pursuant to §
151.148(B). For the following deep filling activities, all other standards of §
151.149 shall apply.
            1.   Deep filling required for the construction of a stormwater
basin is subject to the standards contained §
151.146(E).
            2.   Driveway construction to allow access to an attached or
detached garage. Maximum allowable are to be deep-filled shall not exceed 1,000
square feet.
            3.   Fill placed in the floodplain to elevate existing floodtable
land where a new structure is being built. Compensatory storage shall be
provided. The fill shall not be placed more than ten feet from the foundation
of the building.
         (c)   Topdressing is the placement of not more than four inches of
topsoil within the regulatory floodplain for the purposes of stabilizing an
existing erosion control problem and establishing vegetative cover. Topdressing
shall be allowed by permit on a per-parcel, one-time only allowance, and not
damage or alter adjoining property drainage patterns. Upon approval of the
Planning, Building and Development Director, floodplain compensatory storage
shall not be required. Topdressing fill shall comply with the soil erosion and
sediment control standards and wetlands provisions of this chapter (§§
151.145 through
151.154). This provision shall not be applicable to the design process for new
development.
         (d)   Topdressing is the placement of not more than four inches of
topsoil within the regulatory floodplain. For the purposes of restoring pre-
subsidence grade to an area that primarily experiences subsidence due to a
documented flood event, topdressing shall be allowed by permit on a per-parcel
basis and not damage or alter adjoining property drainage patterns. Upon
approval of the Planning, Building and Development Director, floodplain
compensatory storage shall not be required. Topdressing fill shall comply with
the soil erosion and sediment control standards and wetlands provisions of this
chapter (§§
151.145 through
151.154). This provision shall not be applicable to the design process for new
development. A one time allowance of this provision shall be in accordance with
(1) through (3) of the following criteria and repeat allowances shall be in
accordance with (1) through (4) of the following criteria.
            1.   The restoration fill shall meet pre-subsidence elevations, and
within riverine areas, the pre-subsidence effective Regulatory Floodplain and
Regulatory Floodway conveyance shall be maintained.
            2.   The property being considered for top dressing shall be
documented and submitted by the applicant as part of the permit process. Proper
documentation shall be either topographic information or photographic
documentation of the flooding and subsidence that has occurred on the property.
            3.   Upon completion of top dressing, the applicant shall provide
topographic or photographic documentation of completed work.
            4.   Repeat top dressing applications are limited to documented
flood events with topographic or photographic evidence of subsidence.
         (e)   Impervious surface rehabilitative maintenance is the placement
of not more than four inches of pavement or any other impervious material
within the regulatory floodplain. For the purposes of restoring pre-subsidence
grades to an area that has experienced subsidence, rehabilitative maintenance
of such areas shall be allowed by permit on a per-project basis and not damage
or alter adjoining property drainage patterns. Upon approval of the Planning,
Building and Development Director, floodplain compensatory storage shall not be
required. Rehabilitative maintenance fill shall comply with the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control standards and Wetlands Provisions of this chapter (§
151.146(J) and (M)). This provision shall not be applicable to the design
process for new development. A one-time allowance of this provision shall be in
accordance with subsections (G)(1)(e)1. through (G)(1)(e)3. of the following
criteria and repeat allowances shall be in accordance with subsections (G)(1)
(e)1. through (G)(1)(e)4. of the following criteria:
            1.   The restoration fill shall meet pre-subsidence elevations, and
within riverine areas, the pre-subsidence effective regulatory floodplain and
regulatory floodway conveyance shall be maintained,
            2.   The project being considered for rehabilitative maintenance
shall be documented and submitted by the applicant as part of the permit
process. Proper documentation shall be either topographic information or
photographic documentation of the subsidence that has occurred on the project.
            3.   Upon completion of rehabilitative maintenance, the applicant
shall provide topographic or photographic documentation of completed work.
            4.   Repeat rehabilitative main-tenance applications are limited to
documented topographic or photographic evidence of subsidence.
      (2)   The placement of fill material within any regulatory floodplain so
as to constitute either shallow or deep filling shall be subject to the
following standards.
         (a)   Compensatory storage is required for all storage volume lost or
displaced due to either shallow or deep filling.
         (b)   Fill shall be of a material deemed stable enough to remain firm
and in place during periods of flooding. Fill shall consist only of soil, rock,
or concrete without rebar. Further, all fill areas shall be stabilized with
material which will ensure and protect against erosion hazards, undercutting,
and undermining. Asphalt shall not be used as a stabilizing material. Runoff
and drainage protection shall be provided to adjacent property owners.
         (c)   All changes in velocity, depth of flood elevation, or storage
shall be limited to the property of the owner doing the filling or those
property owners who have granted flood or flow easements, provided that in no
event shall an increase in flood elevation be permitted if it would affect any
existing building or bring any building to within two vertical feet of the
flood elevation.
   (H)   Building protection requirements for Regulatory Floodplains not within
Coastal High Hazard Area. No principal or accessory structure shall be located
in the regulatory floodplain, below the base flood elevation, with the
exception of a road, detached garage, storage shed, swimming pool, boathouse,
pump station, lift station, boat launching ramps, boat docks, piers, bridge and
bridge approaches, picnic shelters having no permanent walls, and stormwater
detention basins. All buildings and structures established in the regulatory
floodplain shall conform to the following standards.
      (1)   Compensatory storage is required for all storage volume lost or
displaced due to the placement of any building or structure in the regulatory
floodplain.
      (2)   Building protection requirements for residential structures shall
follow applicable FEMA regulations and include the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor including basements of all new residential
structures, including additions, shall be elevated up to at least the Flood
Protection Elevation (FPE). The floor of an attached garage for a new structure
must be elevated up to at least one-half of one foot above the base flood
elevation (BFE).
            1.   If placed on compacted fill, the top of the fill for a
residential structure shall be above the FPE. The top of fill for an attached
garage shall be one-half of one foot above the BFE. The fill pad shall be
placed at the appropriate elevation and designed to extend a minimum of ten
feet out from the building’s designed footprint unless the building is
certified by a Licensed Structural Engineer to be protected from damages due to
hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill pad shall meet 95% of Standard
Proctor Density in order to be demonstrated not to settle below the FPE for the
residential structure and not below one-half of one foot above the BFE for an
attached garage, and to be adequately protected against erosion, scour, and
differential settlement. Foundation excavations shall not extend more than five
feet beyond the foundation footprint. Backfill for the over excavated area does
not need to meet the compaction requirements.
            2.   If elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other foundation,
the building’s supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters
and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The
bottom of the permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above the
lowest adjacent grade. The total net area shall be provided below the BFE and
consist of a minimum of two openings for each enclosed area with each opening
of an enclosed area on a different exterior wall. The openings must have a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE. Any louvers, screens, or other
opening covers must not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into
and out of the enclosed area. The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as
to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice,
and floating debris, All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) for
the residential structure and all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
air conditioning equipment, and utility meters shall be located at or above the
FPE. Waterproofed service facilities, including, but not limited to, water and
sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, and submersible pumps, may be
located below the FPE. No area less than one foot above the BFE shall be used
for storage of items or materials.
         (b)   The lowest floor, including basements, of an existing
residential structure with a substantial improvement shall be elevated to at
least one foot above the BFE.
            1.   If placed on compacted fill, the top of the fill for a
substantially improved residential structure shall be at least one foot above
the BFE. The fill pad shall be placed at the appropriate elevation and designed
to extend a minimum of 10 feet out from the building’s designed footprint
unless the building is certified by a Licensed Structural Engineer to be
protected from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill pad
shall meet 95% of Standard Proctor Density in order to be demonstrated not to
settle below one foot above the BFE for the substantially improved residential
structure, and to be adequately protected against erosion, scour, and
differential settlement. Foundation excavations shall not extend more than five
feet beyond the foundation footprint. Backfill for the over excavated area does
not need to meet the compaction requirements.
            2.   If elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other foundation,
the building’s supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters
and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The
bottom of the permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above the
lowest adjacent grade. The total net area shall be provided below the BFE, and
consist of a minimum of two openings for each enclosed area with each opening
of an enclosed area on a different exterior wall. The openings must have a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE. Any louvers, screens, or other
opening covers must not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into
and out of the enclosed area. The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as
to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice,
and floating debris. All areas lower than one foot above the BFE shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor
(including basement) for the substantially improved residential structure and
all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and
utility meters shall be elevated to at least one foot above the BFE.
Waterproofed service facilities, including, but not limited to, water and sewer
pipes, electrical and telephone lines, and submersible pumps, may be located
below the BFE-plus-one-foot elevation.
      (3)   Building protection requirements for non-residential structures
shall follow applicable Federal Emergency Management Agency regulations and
include the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor, including basements, of all new non-
residential buildings, including additions, shall be elevated at least to the
FPE or be structurally dry flood-proofed to at least the FPE. A non-residential
building may be structurally dry flood-proofed (in lieu of elevation) provided
that a Licensed Professional Engineer, Licensed Structural Engineer, or
Licensed Architect shall certify that the building has been structurally dry
flood-proofed up to the FPE and the structure and attendant utility facilities
are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The
building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts
from debris or ice. Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity. (Levees, berms,
floodwalls, and similar works are not considered flood-proofing for the purpose
of this subsection.)
            1.   If a non-residential structure is not dry flood-proofed and is
placed on compacted fill, the top of the fill shall be above the FPE. The fill
pad shall be placed at the appropriate elevation and designed to extend a
minimum of ten feet out from the building’s designed footprint unless the
building is certified by a Licensed Structural Engineer to be protected from
damages due to hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill pad shall meet 95%
of Standard Proctor Density in order to be demonstrated not to settle below the
FPE and to be adequately protected against erosion, scour, and differential
settlement. Foundation excavations shall not extend more than five feet beyond
the foundation footprint. Backfill for the over excavated area does not need to
meet the compaction requirements.
            2.   If a non-residential structure is not dry flood-proofed and is
elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other foundation, the building’s
supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters and not subject
to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The bottom of the
permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent
grade. The total net area shall be provided below the BFE, and consist of a
minimum of two openings for each enclosed area with each opening of an enclosed
area on a different exterior wall. The openings must have a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding below the BFE. Any louvers, screens, or other opening
covers must not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out
of the enclosed area. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored
and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and
floating debris. All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) for the non-
residential structure and all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and utility meters shall be located at or above the
FPE. Waterproofed service facilities, including, but not limited to, water and
sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, and submersible pumps, may be
located below the FPE. No area less than one foot above the BFE shall be used
for storage of items or materials.
         (b)   The lowest floor including basements of all substantially
improved non-residential buildings and attendant utility facilities shall be
elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to a minimum of one foot above the
BFE. A substantially improved, nonresidential building may be structurally dry
flood-proofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a Licensed Professional
Engineer, Licensed Structural Engineer, or Licensed Architect shall certify
that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed up to a minimum of one
foot above the BFE and the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building
design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from
debris or ice. Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity. (Levees, berms,
floodwalls, and similar works are not considered flood-proofing for the purpose
of this subsection.)
            1.   If a substantially improved non-residential structure is not
dry floodproofed and is placed on compacted fill, the top of the fill for a
nonresidential structure substantial improvement shall be at least one foot
above the BFE. The fill pad shall be placed at the appropriate elevation and
designed to extend a minimum of ten feet out from the building’s designed
footprint unless the building is certified by a Licensed Structural Engineer to
be protected from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill
pad shall meet 95% of Standard Proctor Density in order to be demonstrated not
to settle below one foot above the BFE for the residential structure, and to be
adequately protected against erosion, scour, and differential settlement.
Foundation excavations shall not extend more than five feet beyond the
foundation footprint. Backfill for the over excavated area does not need to
meet the compaction requirements.
            2.   If a substantially improved non-residential structure is not
dry floodproofed and is elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other
foundation, the building’s supporting structure must be permanently open to
flood waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood. The bottom of the permanent openings shall be no more than one foot
above the lowest adjacent grade. The total net area shall be provided below the
BFE, and consist of a minimum of two openings for each enclosed area with each
opening of an enclosed area on a different exterior wall. The openings must
have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE. Any louvers, screens,
or other opening covers must not block or impede the automatic flow of
floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area. The foundation and supporting
members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining
structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as
current, waves, ice, and floating debris. All areas lower than one foot above
the BFE shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. The
lowest floor (including basement) for the substantially improved non-
residential structure and all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and utility meters shall be elevated to at least one
foot above the BFE. Waterproofed service facilities, including, but not limited
to, water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, and submersible
pumps, may be located below the BFE-plus-one-foot elevation.
 
COMMENTARY
See §
151.145(F)(2)(l)1. and (F)(2)(l)2. for substantial improvement submittal
requirements.
 
      (4)   A non-conforming structure damaged by any origin may be restored
unless the activity meets the definition of substantial improvement, in which
case it shall conform to the provisions of §
151.149(H)(2)(b) for residential structures or §
151.149(H)(3)(b) for non-residential structures.
      (5)   Mobile homes and recreational vehicles which are not road-ready and
cannot be disconnected from utilities in a timely manner and installed on-site
for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for
the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code 870.
The requirements in §
151.149(H)(2) shall apply to this section. Mobile homes and recreational
vehicles that are not elevated above the flood protection elevation shall be
moved to higher ground within 24 hours when the water level reaches a
recreational vehicle site.
      (6)   Storage sheds, detached garages, and attached garages which are not
substantial improvements on an existing single-family platted lot, may be
constructed with the lowest floor below one-half (0.5) foot above the BFE in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building shall not be used for human habitation.
         (b)   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage. Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall be
constructed and placed on a development site so as not to block the flow of
flood waters and shall also meet the appropriate use criteria of § 151.150. In
addition, all other requirements of this chapter must be met.
         (c)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
         (d)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed to the FPE.
         (e)   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses, or similar uses.
         (f)   If a residence is elevated appropriately, then the area below
the residence can be used as a garage, as long as the garage conforms to (a)
through (e) above and include permanent flow through openings as described in §
151.149(H)(2)(a)2.
         (g)   The building shall be valued at less than $24,550 (Feb. 2023
costs) and be no greater than 600 square feet in floor size.
         (h)   If elevated by means of walls or other foundation, the
building’s supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters on at
least two walls and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood. The permanent openings shall be at grade level and below the base flood
elevation, and consist of a minimum of two openings. The openings shall have a
total net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation. The
requirement for permanent openings may be waived by the Planning, Building and
Development Director if a Licensed Professional Engineer or Structural Engineer
certifies that the building is not water tight, inside and outside hydrostatic
pressures will be equal and that the rate at which the water rises will allow
for pressures to equalize. The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as
to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice
and floating debris.
      (7)   Boathouses may be constructed with the lowest floor below the flood
protection elevation in accordance with all of the following:
         (a)   The boathouse shall be built on an earthen floor or over a water
slip;
         (b)   The boathouse shall not be used for human habitation;
         (c)   All areas below the base flood elevation shall be constructed
with waterproof material;
         (d)   The boathouse shall be anchored to prevent flotation;
         (e)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or flood-proofed to the flood protection elevation (a flood-
proofing certificate shall be required); and
         (f)   The boathouse shall be used only for the storage of boats or
tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses, or similar uses.
      (8)   If the proposed development would result in a change in the base
flood elevation of a SFHA, the applicant shall submit sufficient data to
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission to obtain a Letter of Map Amendment or Letter of Map Revision.
Proposed changes to regulatory floodplain and regulatory floodway delineations
and the base flood elevation shall be submitted to the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission. The Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources concurrence is required for changes to the base flood elevation
and floodway delineation.
      (9)   If the proposed development is located in a public body of water,
as defined by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources, a permit from the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office
of Water Resources must be received.
      (10)   If the proposed development involves the construction,
modification, or removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water,
an Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources dam
safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required shall be received
prior to the start of development activity.
      (11)   If flood-proofing construction is required beyond the outside
dimensions of an existing habitable, residential, or commercial building, the
outside perimeter of the flood-proofing construction shall be placed no further
than ten feet from the outside of the building. Compensation of lost storage
and conveyance will not be required for flood-proofing activities.
   (I)   Building Protection Requirement for CHHA. The building protection
requirements of this section apply to development, including new construction
and substantial improvements in, or partly in, a Coastal High Hazard Area
according to the FIRM.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated
on pilings or columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or
above the BFE-plus-one-foot elevation, and the pile or column foundation and
structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components.
         (a)   Water loading values used shall be those associated with the
base flood.
         (b)   Wind loading values shall be those required by the applicable
state or local building standards. If no state or local building standards
required the application of wind loading values to structural design, then wind
loading values shall be those defined according to American Society of Civil
Engineers 7-16 Minimum design loads and associated criteria for buildings and
other structures, or other equivalent standard.
      (2)   A licensed professional structural engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to
be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of §
151.149(I)(2).
      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with
non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect screening
intended to collapse without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system.
         (a)   For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a
design safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds
per square foot.
         (b)   Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading
resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or where so required
by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a licensed professional
structural engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet all
of the following conditions:
            1.   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
            2.   The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural). Water loading values shall
be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be those
required by the applicable state or local building standards. If no state or
local building standards required the application of wind loading values to
structural design, then wind loading values shall be those defined according to
American Society of Civil Engineers 7-16 Minimum design loads and associated
criteria for buildings and other structures, or other equivalent standards.
         (c)   All space enclosed by breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work,
or insect screening below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage.
      (4)   Placement or substantial improvement of manufactured homes must
comply with §§
151.149(I)(1) through
151.149(I)(3).
      (5)   Recreational vehicles, including park models, must either:
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         (c)   Comply with §§
151.149(I)(1) through
151.149(I)(3).
      (6)   The use of fill for structural support of buildings within a
Coastal High Hazard Area is prohibited.
         (a)   Non-structural fill within a Coastal High Hazard Area shall be
permitted only if an engineering report demonstrates that the fill will not
cause wave runup, ramping, or deflection of floodwaters that cause damage to
buildings.
      (7)   Man-made alterations of sand dunes within a Coastal High Hazard
Area are prohibited unless an engineering report documents that the alterations
will not increase potential flood damage by reducing the wave and flow
dissipation characteristics of the sand dunes.
      (8)   Within a Coastal High Hazard Area, bulkheads, seawalls, revetments,
and other erosion control structures shall not be connected to the foundation
or superstructure of a building, and shall be designed and constructed so as
not to direct floodwaters or increase flood forces or erosion impacts on the
foundation or superstructure of any building.
(Ord., § 8.5, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 23-1056, passed 8-
8-2023)
§ 151.150 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR REGULATORY FLOODWAY DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Generally. This section establishes performance standards for
development within the regulatory floodway. The only development in a
regulatory floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses which will not
cause an increase in flood heights for all flood events up to and including the
base flood. Only those appropriate uses listed below will be allowed in the
regulatory floodway. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or
placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts,
piles, piers, or columns, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed
to act as a fence), and storage of materials except as specifically defined
above as an appropriate use. If the development is proposed for the regulatory
floodway portion of the regulatory floodplain, the standards of this section
apply in addition to the performance standards for regulatory floodplain
development.
   (B)   Appropriate uses. Only the construction, modification, repair, or
replacement of the following appropriate uses will be allowed in the regulatory
floodway:
      (1)   Public flood control projects and private improvements relating to
the control of drainage, flooding of existing buildings, erosion, water
quality, or habitat for fish and wildlife;
      (2)   Structures or facilities relating to functionally water dependent
uses such as facilities and improvements relating to recreational boating, and
as modifications or additions to existing wastewater treatment facilities;
      (3)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
      (4)   Underground and overhead utilities if sufficiently flood-proofed;
      (5)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems
including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any one
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions;
      (6)   Bridges, culverts, and associated roadways, sidewalks, and railways
necessary for crossing over the regulatory floodway or for providing access to
other appropriate uses in the regulatory floodway and any modification thereto;
      (7)   Parking lots and any modifications thereto, where the existing
depth of flooding for the base flood elevation is less than six inches and
aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation (the depth of
flooding can be greater than six inches for parking lots used for short term
outdoor recreational use facilities where the applicant agrees to restrict
parking during overbank flooding events and agrees to accept liability for all
damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank flooding events);
      (8)   Regulatory floodway re-grading, without fill, to create a positive
non-erosive slope toward a channel;
      (9)   Flood-proofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or the construction of flood walls around residential, commercial,
or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall
be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure,
and which are not considered to be substantial improvements to the structure;
      (10)   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building,
provided that the outside dimensions of the building are not increased, and
that the activity is not a substantial improvement. An activity that is a
substantial improvement shall conform to §
151.149(H)(2)(b) for residential structures or §
151.149(H)(3)(b) for non-residential structures;
      (11)   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the base flood elevation, and which
will not block flood flows including but not limited to fireplaces, bay
windows, decks, patios and second story additions. No enclosed floor areas may
be built on stilts; and
      (12)   Substantial improvements, provided that the outside dimensions of
the building are not increased; the building shall conform to §
151.149(H)(2)(b) for residential structures or §
151.149(H)(3)(b) for non-residential structures.
   (C)   Mitigation. Construction of allowed uses will be considered
permissible, provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering
and mitigation criteria and the standards of §
151.149 are so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations, and data
prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
      (1)   All effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the
development of appropriate uses, other than bridge or culvert crossings or on-
stream structures or dams, shall be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the base flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration.
         (a)   Regulatory floodway conveyance:
            K = 1.4886 AR2/3
                n
      where “n” is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective area of the
cross-section, and “R” is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.
         (b)   The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative
land cover.
      (2)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of
effective regulatory floodway conveyance, in the design of excavations in the
regulatory floodway, between cross-sections with rapid expansions and
contractions, and when meeting the regulatory floodway delineation on adjoining
properties. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used.
         (a)   Water will expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every four feet of the flooded channel’s length.
         (b)   Water will contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded channel’s length.
         (c)   Water will not expand or contract faster than one foot vertical
for every ten feet of flooded channel’s length.
         (d)   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
         (e)   In the design of excavations in the regulatory floodway, erosion
protection shall be provided on land upstream and downstream of proposed
transition sections.
      (3)   The development of all appropriate uses shall not result in an
increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage, for
all flood events up to and including the base flood event. However, in the case
of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing
up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be
increased at the structure site if erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by
the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
      (4)   In the case of on-stream structures built for the purpose of
backing up water, an increase in upstream stage when compared to existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the base flood event shall
be contained within recorded easements. A dam safety permit or letter
indicating that a permit is not required must be obtained from the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources for any structure
built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood
flow.
      (5)   If flood-proof construction is required beyond the outside
dimensions of an existing habitable, residential, or commercial building, the
outside perimeter of the flood-proofing construction shall be placed no further
than ten feet from the outside of the building. Compensation of lost storage
and conveyance will not be required for flood-proofing activities.
      (6)   For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of
this section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources, or Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission in areas outside of Illinois Department
of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources jurisdiction, through hydraulic
and hydrologic calculation that the proposed project will not singularly or
cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way
or easements for all flood events up to and including the base flood event.
(See §
151.149.)
      (7)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.
         (a)   The flood profiles, flows, and regulatory floodway data in the
regulatory floodway study referenced in §
151.147 must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data
appear to be in error or conditions have changed, the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources shall be contacted for approval
and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
         (b)   If the base flood elevation at the site of the proposed
construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving channel with
a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the
requirements of this section for the base flood elevation of the regulatory
floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving channel stream at normal
water elevations. Additional receiving stream elevations may be considered for
design if appropriate and approved by the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission or Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
         (c)   If the applicant is informed, in writing, by the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources, the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission or other jurisdictional authority that a
downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, constructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed, or modified within the next five
years, the proposed development shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert, or flood control project is
built.
      (8)   If the appropriate use will result in a change in the regulatory
floodway location or base flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to the
Lake County Stormwater Management Commission the information required to be
issued a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The application will not be considered complete until the
Conditional Letter of Map Revision is received. No filling, grading, dredging,
or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued by the
Planning, Building and Development Director. The construction or placement of
structures within the currently effective floodway boundary shall not take
place until a final Letter of Map Revision is issued by the Illinois Department
of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency which revises the floodway boundary.
 
COMMENTARY:
The Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources has
retained permit authority for any Illinois Department of Natural Resources,
Office of Water Resources project, dams, and the like and all other state,
federal, or Lake County Stormwater Management Commission projects. The Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission will issue permits to local units of
government for regulatory floodway development.
 
      (9)   For those circumstances listed below and located in a regulatory
floodway, the following information shall be submitted to the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources or the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission:
         (a)   Analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge, culvert
crossings, and roadway approaches;
         (b)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing or approach road is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile; and
         (c)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage.
(Ord., § 8.6, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 23-1056, passed 8-
8-2023)
§ 151.151 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR BRIDGES, CULVERT CROSSINGS AND ROADWAY
APPROACHES.
   This section details special considerations and performance standards for
the construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway approaches, or
the reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culvert crossings, or
roadway approaches.
   (A)   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than one-tenth foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the base flood event unless
contained within the channel banks, project right-of-way, or recorded
easements. The evaluation shall be submitted to the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission for review and concurrence before a site development
permit is issued.
   (B)   If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages
greater than one-tenth foot, the developer must contact the Illinois Department
of Natural Resources, Office of Resources for a dam safety permit or waiver.
   (C)   Lost regulatory floodway and regulatory floodplain storage must be
compensated in accordance with all regulatory floodplain performance standards
of this chapter, except that artificially created storage that is lost or
displaced due to a reduction in upstream head loss caused by a bridge, culvert,
storm sewer, or constructed embankment shall not be required to be replaced,
provided no damage will be incurred downstream (see §
151.150).
   (D)   Velocity increases must be mitigated in accordance with all regulatory
floodway performance standards of this chapter except that in the case of
bridges, culverts, or on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased
at the structure site if erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use
of appropriate measures (see §
151.150).
   (E)   For modification or replacement of existing structures, the existing
structure must first be evaluated in accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part
3708 to determine if the existing structure is a source of flood damage. If the
structure is a source of flood damage, the applicant’s engineer must evaluate
the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater,
taking into consideration the effects of flood damage to upstream and
downstream properties. Modifications or replacement structures shall not
increase flood stages compared to the existing or regulatory condition,
whichever is greater, for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event. The evaluation shall be submitted to the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources, Office of Water Resources or its designee for review and concurrence
before a site development permit is issued.
   (F)   If the crossing is proposed over a public body of water, an Illinois
Department of Transportation, Office of Water Resources permit shall be
received. (See
Appendix I for a list of public bodies of water.)
   (G)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing
the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile shall be submitted to
the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources for
concurrence that Conditional Letter of Map Revision is not required.
(Ord., § 8.7, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012)
§ 151.152 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR REGULATORY FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT REGULATORY
FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   The applicant, through the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission, shall obtain approval from the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources, Office of Water Resources for all development with a tributary
drainage area of 640 acres or more located within the regulatory floodplain
without a delineated regulatory floodway. The development shall not, singularly
or cumulatively, result in an obstruction of flood flows or potential flood
damages outside the development due to increased flood heights, velocities or
loss of floodplain storage.
   (B)   The applicant shall meet the requirements of §
151.147 in accordance with following criteria and shall submit to the Lake
County Stormwater Management Commission:
      (1)   An engineering study performed by a licensed professional engineer
which will determine a floodway which meets the definition of the regulatory
floodway and show the proposed development will meet all applicable
requirements of §
151.147;
      (2)   An engineering study performed by a licensed professional engineer
which will determine a base flood elevation and demonstrate that the proposed
development will maintain the existing conditions conveyance, will not increase
flood velocities, will not increase flood profiles and will compensate for all
lost flood storage at a ratio of 1.2 to one in a manner that is hydraulically
equivalent; or
      (3)   An engineering study performed by a licensed professional engineer
which will demonstrate, for a range of flood elevations (which would exceed the
expected 100-year flood elevation), the proposed development will maintain the
existing condition’s conveyance, will not increase flood velocities, will not
increase flood profiles, and will compensate for all lost flood storage at a
ratio of 1.2 to one in a manner that is hydraulically equivalent.
(Ord., § 8.8, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 23-1056, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 151.153 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR FLOOD TABLE LAND DEVELOPMENT.
   The following flood table land requirements apply to new construction only
and not to additions or substantial improvements to structures within flood
table lands built before August 10, 1999:
   (A)   Public health protection standards.
      (1)   No chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal waste,
fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic
materials shall be placed or stored below the flood protection elevation.
      (2)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, and sanitary sewer
lines may be permitted providing all manholes or other above-ground openings
located below the FPE are watertight.
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be designed to avoid
inundation by the base flood.
   (B)   Building protection requirements.
      (1)   The lowest floor, including basements, of all new residential
structures, including additions, shall be elevated or structurally dry flood-
proofed up to at least the flood protection elevation (FPE). The floor of an
attached garage for a new structure must be elevated up to at least one-half of
one foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). If structurally dry flood-
proofed, a Licensed Professional Engineer, Licensed Structural Engineer, or
Licensed Architect shall certify that the building has been structurally dry
flood-proofed up to the FPE and the structure and attendant utility facilities
are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The
building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts
from debris or ice. Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity. (Levees, berms,
floodwalls. and similar works are not considered flood-proofing for the purpose
of this subsection.)
         (a)   If the residential structure is not dry flood-proofed and is
placed on compacted fill, the top of the fill for a residential structure shall
be above the FPE. The top of fill for an attached garage shall be one-half of
one foot above the BFE. The fill pad shall be placed at the appropriate
elevation and designed to extend a minimum of ten feet out from the building’s
designed footprint unless the building is certified by a Registered Structural
Engineer to be protected from damages due to hydrostatic pressures.
Additionally, the fill pad shall meet 95% of Standard Proctor Density in order
to be demonstrated not to settle below the FPE for the residential structure
and not below one-half of one foot above the BFE for an attached garage, and to
be adequately protected against erosion, scour, and differential settlement.
Foundation excavations shall not extend more than five feet beyond the
foundation footprint. Backfill for the over excavated area does not need to
meet the compaction requirements.
         (b)   If the residential structure is not dry flood-proofed and is
elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other foundation, the building’s
supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters and not subject
to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The bottom of the
permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent
grade. The total net area shall be provided below the FPE, and consist of a
minimum of two openings for each enclosed area with each opening of an enclosed
area on a different exterior wall. The openings must have a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding below the FPE. Any louvers, screens, or other opening
covers must not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out
of the enclosed area. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored
and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and
floating debris. All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) for the
residential structure and all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and utility meters shall be located at or above the
FPE. Waterproofed service facilities, including, but not limited to, water and
sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, and submersible pumps, may be
located below the FPE. No area less than one foot above the BFE shall be used
for storage of items or materials.
      (2)   The lowest floor including basements of all new non-residential
buildings, including additions, shall be elevated at least to the FPE or be
structurally dry flood-proofed to at least the FPE. A nonresidential building
may be structurally dry flood-proofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a
Licensed Professional Engineer, Licensed Structural Engineer, or Licensed
Architect shall certify that the building has been structurally dry flood-
proofed up to the FPE and the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building
design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from
debris or ice. Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity. (Levees, berms,
floodwalls, and similar works are not considered flood-proofing for the purpose
of this subsection.)
         (a)   If a non-residential structure is not dry flood-proofed and is
placed on compacted fill, the top of the fill shall be above the FPE. The fill
pad shall be placed at the appropriate elevation and designed to extend a
minimum of ten feet out from the building’s designed footprint unless the
building is certified by a Licensed Structural Engineer to be protected from
damages due to hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill pad shall meet 95%
of Standard Proctor Density in order to be demonstrated not to settle below the
FPE and to be adequately protected against erosion, scour and differential
settlement. Foundation excavations shall not extend more than five feet beyond
the foundation footprint. Backfill for the over excavated area does not need to
meet the compaction requirements.
         (b)   If a non-residential structure is not dry flood-proofed and is
elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other foundation, the building’s
supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters and not subject
to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The bottom of the
permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent
grade. The total net area shall be provided below the FPE, and consist of a
minimum of two openings for each enclosed area with each opening of an enclosed
area on a different exterior wall. The openings must have a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding below the FPE. Any louvers, screens, or other opening
covers must not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out
of the enclosed area. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored
and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and
floating debris. All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) for the non-
residential structure and all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and utility meters shall be located at or above the
FPE. Waterproofed service facilities, including, but not limited to, water and
sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, and submersible pumps, may be
located below the FPE. No area less than one foot above the BFE shall be used
for storage of items or materials.
      (3)   Mobile homes and recreational vehicles to be installed on-site more
than 180 days shall be elevated to or above the FPE and shall be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down
Act issued pursuant to 77 III. Adm. Code 870.
      (4)   Accessory structures and attached garages may be constructed with
the lowest floor below the FPE in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building shall not be used for human habitation.
         (b)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
         (c)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or flood-proofed to the FPE.
         (d)   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage.
         (e)   The floor must be elevated up to at least one-half (0.5) foot
above the base flood elevation (BFE) unless it meets all the requirements of §
151.149(H)(6).
(Ord., § 8.9, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 23-1056, passed 8-
8-2023)
§ 151.154 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR FLOOD-PRONE AREA DEVELOPMENT.
   This section establishes performance standards for development located in
flood-prone areas with drainage areas less than 640 acres:
   (A)   Flood-carrying capacity. The flood-carrying capacity shall be
maintained for channels with flood-prone areas draining a tributary area of 20
acres or more.
   (B)   Flood-prone area conveyance, velocities, flood profiles, and flood
storage.
      (1)   For all development within a flood-prone area where the tributary
drainage area is 100 acres or more, the applicant shall meet the requirements
of §
151.149 according to the following criteria and submit to the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission for permit or approval:
         (a)   An engineering study performed by a licensed professional
engineer which will determine a floodway which meets the definition of the
regulatory floodway and show the proposed development will meet all applicable
requirements of §
151.147;
         (b)   An engineering study performed by a licensed professional
engineer which will determine a base flood elevation and demonstrate that the
proposed development will maintain the existing condition’s conveyance, will
not increase flood velocities, will not increase flood profiles, and will
provide hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage at a ratio of 1.2 to one.
Such compensation areas shall be designed to drain freely and openly to the
channel and located opposite or adjacent to fill areas in a manner that is
hydraulically equivalent; or
         (c)   An engineering study performed by a licensed professional
engineer which will demonstrate, for a range of flood elevations (which would
exceed the expected 100-year flood elevation), the proposed development will
maintain the existing condition’s conveyance, will not increase flood
velocities, will not increase flood profiles, and will provide hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage at a ratio of 1.2 to one. Such compensation
areas shall be designed to drain freely and openly to the channel and located
opposite or adjacent to fill areas.
      (2)   For all development within a flood-prone area where the tributary
drainage area is more than 100 acres, the applicant shall meet the requirements
of §
151.147.
(Ord., § 8.10, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 23-1056, passed
8-8-2023)
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 151.165 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   New development. The off-street parking standards of this section
apply to any new building constructed and to any new use established.
      (2)   Expansions and alterations. The off-street parking standards of
this section apply to all principal and accessory uses when an existing
structure or use is expanded or enlarged. Additional off-street parking spaces
will be required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire
building or use, provided that in all cases the number of off-street parking
spaces provided for the entire use (preexisting + expansion) must equal at
least 75% of minimum ratio established in the off-street parking schedule of
subsection (B) below.
      (3)   Change of use. Off-street parking must be provided for any change
of use or manner of operation that would, based on the off-street parking
schedule of subsection (B) below, result in a requirement for more parking
spaces than the existing use.
   (B)   Off-street parking schedule. Off-street parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the following schedule of requirements. (See rules
for computing requirements, subsection (C) below.)
Table 151.165(B)
Use Category (See §      Use Types Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces
151.270  for Description)           Required
Table 151.165(B)
Use Category (See §
151.270  for          Use Types     Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
Description)
Residential Use Categories
Household living                    2 per dwelling unit
Public, Civic and Institutional Use Categories
College                             1 per 4 students, plus 1 per staff member
                      Library or    2.5 per 1,000 square feet or 1 per 4 person-capacity (whichever is greater),
                      museum        plus 1 per employee
Community service     Community
                      service not   1 per 3-person capacity
                      otherwise
                      classified
Day care                            1 per teacher/employee, plus 1 per 6 enrollees, or off-street waiting to
                                    accommodate at least 6 vehicles
                      Assisted      1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per employee
                      living
                      Convent or    1 per 6 residents, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per 2.5 chapel seats if open to
Group living          monastery     the public
                      Group living
                      not otherwise 1 per 3 residents, plus 1 per employee
                      classified
Hospital                            1.8 per patient bed
                      Cemetery      No minimum
                      Golf course   60 per 9 holes, plus 1 per employee, plus 50% of spaces otherwise required for
                                    any accessory uses (e.g. bars, restaurants)
                      Golf course,  25 per 9 holes, plus 1 per employee
Parks and open space  Par 3
                      Parks and
                      open space    1 per 4-person capacity
                      not otherwise
                      classified
Religious                           1 per 4 seats, plus 50% of spaces otherwise required for any accessory uses
institutions                        (e.g., banquet hall, day care)
                      Elementary
School                and Junior    1 per faculty/staff member, plus 1 per 2 classrooms
                      High
                      Senior High   1 per faculty/staff member, plus 1 per 5 students
Utility, major                      None required
Retail, Service and Commercial Use Categories
                      Major
Entertainment event,  entertainment
major                 event not     1 per 3-person capacity
                      otherwise
                      classified
                      Office,       3 per examining room, plus 1 per staff doctor/employee
Office                medical
                      Office, non-  2.5 per 1,000 square feet
                      medical
Parking, commercial                 None required
                      Camp          1 per employee, plus 1 per camp vehicle normally parked on the premises, plus
                                    1 visitor space per acre, with a minimum of 5 and a max maximum of 50 spaces.
                      Golf driving  1 per tee, plus 1 per employee
                      range
Recreation and        Golf          1 per hole, plus 1 per employee
entertainment,        miniature
outdoor               Outdoor
                      recreation
                      and           1 per 4-person capacity
                      entertainment
                      not otherwise
                      classified
                      Bank          2.5 per 1,000 square feet, plus stacking spaces per §
                                    151.165 (I)
                      Barber or     3 per operator chair
                      beauty shop
                      Bars,
                      taverns,
                      dance halls   14 per 1,000 square feet
                      and
                      nightclubs
                      Bowling       5 per lane, plus 1 per employee, plus 50% of spaces otherwise required for
                      center        accessory uses (e.g., bars, restaurants, gamerooms)
                      Convenience
                      store         6 per 1,000 square feet
                      (grocery)
                      Funeral home  1 per 4 seats or 25 per chapel, whichever is greater
                      Grocery or    4 per 1,000 square feet
                      supermarket
                      Hotel or      1 per room or suite, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per person-capacity of each
Retail sales and      motel         public meeting and banquet room, plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required for
service                             accessory uses (e.g., restaurants and bars)
                      Repair        3.2 per 1,000 square feet
                      service
                      Class “A” 12 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1 per 3 employees, plus stacking spaces per §
                      restaurant    151.165(I)
                      Class “B” 14 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1 per 3 employees
                      restaurant
                      Class “C” 12 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1 per 3 employees
                      restaurant
                      Retail sales
                      and service   4 per 1,000 square feet (shopping centers: 5 per 1,000 square feet)
                      not otherwise
                      classified
                      Theater or
                      auditorium,   1 per 3-person capacity
                      indoor
                      Theater,      1 per 3-person capacity
                      outdoor
                      Vehicle sales 0.5 per 1,000 square feet of display area, whether indoor or outdoor plus 2.5
                                    per 1,000 square feet devoted to servicing vehicles
Self-service storage                None required
Vehicle repair                      2.5 per 1,000 square feet
Vehicle service,                    2.5 per 1,000 square feet
limited
Industrial Use Categories
Industrial sales and                2.5 per 1,000 square feet
service
Manufacturing and                   2.5 per 1,000 square feet
production
Warehousing and                     1 per employee
freight movement
Waste-related use                   1 per employee
Wholesale sales                     2.5 per 1,000 square feet
Other Use Categories
Agriculture                         None required
                      Mining and
Mining                resource      1 per employee
                      extraction
 
   (C)   Rules for computing requirements. The following rules apply when
computing off-street parking requirements.
      (1)   Multiple uses. Unless otherwise approved, lots containing more than
one use must provide parking in an amount equal to the total of the
requirements for all uses.
      (2)   Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces
result in a fractional number, any fraction of one-half or less shall be
rounded down to the next lower whole number and any fraction of more than one-
half shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
      (3)   Area measurements. Unless otherwise specifically noted, all square
footage-based parking standards must be computed on the basis of floor area
used or intended to be used for office space (as a principal use), service
areas accessible to customers, patrons, clients, patients or tenants, including
areas occupied by fixtures or equipment used for display or sale of
merchandise. Floor area for the purposes of this section shall not include any
area used for:
         (a)   Storage accessory to the principal use of the building;
         (b)   Window displays;
         (c)   Offices or spaces incidental to the management or maintenance of
a store or building;
         (d)   Restrooms;
         (e)   Utilities, including HVAC systems; or
         (f)   Dressing, fitting, or alteration rooms.
      (4)   Occupancy- or capacity-based standards. For the purpose of
computing parking requirements based on employees, students, residents, or
occupants, calculations shall be based on the largest number of persons working
on any single shift, the maximum enrollment or the maximum fire-rated capacity,
whichever is applicable and whichever results in the greater number of spaces.
      (5)   Fleet parking. For the purpose of computing parking requirements,
any vehicle owned or leased by a business, government agency, or other
organization, rather than by an individual, shall be provided one space on the
same zoning lot as the principal use. Spaces shall be sized appropriately for
fleet vehicles.
      (6)   Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use
not specifically listed in an off-street parking schedule, the Planning,
Building and Development Director shall apply the off-street parking standard
specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or
establish minimum off-street parking requirements on the basis of a parking
study prepared by the applicant. A parking study must include estimates of
parking demand based on recommendations of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable estimates as approved by the Planning,
Building and Development Director, and should include other reliable data
collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable
with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined by density, scale,
bulk, area, type of activity, and location. The study must document the source
of data used to develop the recommendations.
      (7)   Consideration of operational standards. The provisions of this
section represent the minimum required parking. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to consider their unique operational needs, which may require
additional parking. The Planning, Building and Development Director may require
additional analysis of business operational needs.
   (D)   Off-street parking reductions for large developments. In order to
prevent the establishment of a greater number of parking spaces than actually
needed to meet the particular needs of large developments of over 500,000
square feet of gross floor area, a reduction in the number of required off-
street parking spaces may be permitted by the Planning, Building and
Development Director. Reduction shall be permitted subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   Maximum reduction. A maximum reduction of one parking space per
every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 20% of the total spaces required
(whichever is less) may be permitted. The site plan shall indicate the location
and dimensions of the parking area provided.
      (2)   Reservation. Sufficient area shall be reserved to accommodate the
total number of off-street parking spaces otherwise required by this section.
The purpose of this reservation is to ensure adequate area to meet any future
need for additional parking spaces. The reserved area shall be located on the
same site and noted on the site plan. The reserved parking area shall not
include areas for required landscaping, setbacks, or areas that would otherwise
be unusable for parking due to the physical characteristics of the land or the
requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Installation of additional spaces.  The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall be authorized to require that the developer install
additional parking spaces, up to the total number otherwise required by this
section, if the Planning, Building and Development Director determines that
additional parking spaces are necessary to satisfy the off-street parking needs
of the use.
   (E)   Off-street parking alternatives.
      (1)   Off-site parking. The Planning, Building and Development Director
may approve the location of required off-street parking spaces on a separate
lot from the lot on which the principal use is located, subject to all of
following standards.
         (a)   Limitation on amount of off-site parking. No more than 50% of a
use’s required off-street parking may be located off-site unless the off-site
parking is located on a lot that is contiguous to the lot containing the
subject use. There shall be no limit on the amount of off-site parking located
on a contiguous lot.
         (b)   Ineligible activities. Off-site parking may not be used to
satisfy the off-street parking standards for residential uses, restaurants,
bars, resorts, convenience stores, or other convenience-oriented uses. Required
parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may not be located off-
site.
         (c)   Location. No off-site parking space may be located more than 600
feet from the primary entrance of the use served.
         (d)   Zoning classification. Off-site parking areas require the same
or a more intensive zoning classification than required for the use served.
         (e)   Covenant for off-site parking. If the off-site parking area is
under separate ownership from the use to be served by the parking area, an
irrevocable written covenant among all owners of record shall be required prior
to approval of the off-site parking. An attested copy of the irrevocable
covenant between the owners of record must be submitted to the Planning,
Building and Development Director for recordation on forms made available in
the Planning, Building and Development Department. The covenant must be
recorded in the Lake County Recorder’s office before any building permits may
be issued for any use to be served by the off-site parking area. A shared
parking covenant may be revoked only if all required off-street parking spaces
will be provided, in accordance with subsection (B) above.
      (2)   Shared parking. The Planning, Building and Development Director may
approve shared parking facilities for developments or uses with different
operating hours or different peak business periods if the shared parking
complies with the all of following standards.
         (a)   Location. Shared parking spaces must be located within 600 feet
of the primary entrance of all uses served.
         (b)   Zoning classification. Shared parking areas require the same or
a more intensive zoning classification than required for the use served.
         (c)   Shared parking study. Applicants wishing to use shared parking
as a means of satisfying off-street parking requirements must submit a shared
parking analysis to the Planning, Building and Development Director that
clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking. The study must be
provided in a form established by the Planning, Building and Development
Director and made available to the public. It must address, at a minimum, the
size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the
anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and
traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces.
         (d)   Covenant for shared parking. A shared parking plan will be
enforced through an irrevocable, written covenant among all owners of record.
An attested copy of the irrevocable covenant between the owners of record must
be submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Director for recordation
on forms made available in the Planning, Building and Development Department.
The covenant must be recorded in the Lake County Recorder’s office before any
building permits may be issued for any use to be served by the shared parking
area. A shared parking covenant may be revoked only if all required off-street
parking spaces will be provided, in accordance with subsection (B) above.
 
COMMENTARY:
Certain large uses, such as regional shopping centers, may need fewer parking
spaces than otherwise required by this section, since they typically have a
lower trip generation rate than smaller uses. This provision allows a 20%
maximum reduction in required parking spaces for the uses, while requiring that
land be reserved to accommodate future parking should the need arise.
 
   (F)   Location.  
      (1)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, required
off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same zoning lot as the
principal use. Except as otherwise provided in this section, off-street parking
and stacking spaces may be located within required setbacks but not within
required landscaping and not within five feet of any property line. In lieu of
providing side and rear setbacks, landowners of adjoining properties shall be
entitled to enter into an agreement that provides for a waiver or partial
waiver of the requirements. The agreement shall be in the form of a covenant or
deed restriction and shall require approval of the Planning, Building and
Development Director. Once approved, the agreement shall be recorded in the
Lake County Recorder’s office and shall run with the land.
 
COMMENTARY:
When ultimate right-of-way is reserved but not dedicated to the highway
authority, required off-street parking spaces are permitted to be located up to
the edge of the ultimate right-of-way.
 
      (2)   However, the parking of any car, van, or truck may occur between
the principal structure and an improved street in residential zoning districts
only on an improved pad not to exceed 400 square feet or on an improved
driveway (in both cases either gravel, paved, or otherwise improved with
hardscape). In no event shall these personal vehicles be allowed to park on
grass or other unimproved surface between the principal structure and an
improved street. This provision shall not apply to nonresidential uses
permitted in residential zones.
 
COMMENTARY:
This provision is not intended to prohibit occasional or “short-term” parking on
grass in front yards for special events (such as family functions, parties, and
the like).
 
   (G)   Use of off-street parking areas. Required off-street parking areas are
to be used solely for the parking of licensed motor vehicles in operating
condition. Required spaces may not be used for the display of goods for sale or
lease or for long-term storage of vehicles, boats, motor homes, campers, mobile
homes, or building materials.
   (H)   Design.
      (1)   Design standards. The minimum size of each required off-street
parking space shall be consistent with the chart below.
 
              Stall Width Stall Length Aisle Width
                                       One Way/Two Way
Parallel Parking
   0 degree9'          22'          12'/22'
   45 degre9'          18'          13'/24'
   60 degre9'          18'          18'/24'
   90 degre9'          18'          24'/24'
 
      (2)   Markings. Each required off-street parking space shall be
designated by lines or parking blocks.
      (3)   Surfacing and maintenance. All off-street parking areas shall be
kept in a dust-free condition at all times. Parking areas for nonresidential
uses that are located between an improved street and the principal building on
the parcel shall be paved.
      (4)   Consideration of operational standards. The provisions of this
section represent the minimum traffic circulation standards. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to consider their unique operational needs,
which may require unique parking stall sizes, aisle widths, and circulation
radii. The Planning, Building and Development Director may require additional
analysis of business operational needs, such as modeling of vehicle
maneuverability.
   (I)   Vehicle stacking areas. Vehicle stacking shall be prohibited within
public rights-of-way.
 
COMMENTARY:
The following guidelines will be used in evaluating the adequacy of vehicle
stacking areas. Vehicle stacking shall be prohibited within public rights-of-
way.
 
      Number of Spaces
Table 151.165(I)-Commentary
Activity Type Spaces Measured From
Table 151.165(I)-Commentary
Activity Type                Spaces      Measured From
Automated teller machine     3           Teller
Bank teller lane             4           Teller or window
Car wash stall, automatic    6           Entrance
Car wash stall, self-service 3           Entrance
Gasoline pump island         2           Pump island
Pharmacy/drug store          4           Pickup window
Restaurant drive-through     6           Order box
Restaurant drive-through     4           Order box to pickup window
Other uses                   3 (minimum) Pickup window
 
      Design and Layout
      1.   Size
      Stacking spaces must be a minimum of 8 feet by 20 feet in size.
      2.   Location
      Stacking spaces may not impede on- or off-site traffic movements or
movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
      3.   Design
      Stacking spaces must be separated from other internal driveways by raised
medians if deemed necessary for traffic movement and safety.
   (J)   Accessible parking for physically handicapped persons. A portion of
the total number of required off-street parking spaces in each off-street
parking area shall be specifically designated, located, and reserved for use by
persons with physical disabilities, in accordance with all applicable county,
state, and federal standards.
(Ord., § 9.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-
2019)
§ 151.166 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   No use of public right-of-way.
      (1)   At no time shall goods be loaded or unloaded from the right-of-way
of a collector or arterial street.
      (2)   No part of any vehicle shall be allowed to extend into the ultimate
right-of-way of a collector or arterial street while being loaded or unloaded.
   (B)   Location. Plans for location, design, and layout of all loading spaces
shall be indicated on required site plans.
   (C)   Design.
      (1)   Space size. Off-street loading spaces, excluding maneuvering areas,
shall be at least ten feet wide and 25 feet long unless off-street loading will
involve the use of semi-tractor trailer combinations or other vehicles in
excess of 25 feet in length, in which case the minimum size of a space shall be
12 feet by 65 feet.
      (2)   Surfacing and maintenance.
         (a)   All off-street loading areas shall be kept in a dust-free
condition at all times.
         (b)   Loading areas located between an improved street and the
principal building on the parcel shall be paved.
(Ord., § 9.2, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.167 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Intent. This landscape section is intended to accomplish the
following:
      (1)   Preserve or enhance the appearance and character of the property
and its surroundings;
      (2)   Reduce noise and air pollution, light glare, soil erosion, and
solar heating of the environment;
      (3)   Provide buffering between land uses and zoning districts of
differing intensity;
      (4)   Promote the preservation of existing significant vegetation;
      (5)   Improve the appearance of parking areas and property abutting
public rights-of-way; and
      (6)   Promote the implementation of best management practices, low impact
development features, and sustainable design elements. (See
Appendix A.)
      (7)   Support ecological sustainability, stormwater management, and
climate resilience.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   The standards of this section shall apply to the following
development types (see also §
151.167(J) Landscape standards for transition areas):
         (a)   All development subject to the site capacity calculations/site
plan review procedures of §
151.070(A); and
         (b)   All nonresidential development adding at least 1,000 square feet
of floor area or 2,000 square feet of impervious surface (on any size parcel)
when adjacent to a residential use or zoning district.
         (c)   Any new nonresidential development or use on any size parcel
consisting of at least 1,000 square feet of floor area or 2,000 square feet of
impervious surface.
   (C)   Modification of landscape standards. So long as the intended purpose
of the landscaping is not compromised, landscape requirements may be modified
by the Planning, Building and Development Director in instances such as:
      (1)   When installing the plant material would compromise the health,
vitality, or ecology of existing vegetation, or those natural resources
requiring protection under §
151.070; or
      (2)   Where unique limitations of the site preclude the installation of
the required plant units; or
      (3)   When the principal use of the site is changed to a principal use of
the same or lesser intensity.
   (D)   Previously approved development. A development that was legally
established in accordance with all landscaping regulations in effect at the
time of establishment shall not be deemed nonconforming solely due to the fact
that it does not comply with the landscaping regulations of this section.
   (E)   Plant unit and material standards. Plant material used to satisfy the
standards of this section shall comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Plant units. A plant unit is a measurement used to determine the
quantity of plant material required.
         (a)    One plant unit is comprised of all of the following elements,
of which at least six elements shall be native:
            1.   One canopy tree;
            2.   Two understory trees;
            3.   Two evergreen trees; and
            4.   Seven shrubs.
      (2)   Plant material. Plant material used to satisfy the standards of
this section shall comply with the following standards:
         (a)   Size. Unless otherwise expressly provided, all plant materials
used to satisfy the requirements of this section shall meet the following
minimum size standards:
Plant Type Minimum Size
Plant Type                      Minimum Size
Oaks (Quercus sp)                
Hickories (Carya sp)            1.25-inch caliper
Hornbeams (Carpinus sp)
Canopy tree (all other species) 1.5-inch caliper
Understory/ornamental tree      1.5-inch caliper or 6 feet height
Evergreen/conifer tree          8 feet height
Broadleaf/deciduous shrub       3 feet height
Needleleaf/evergreen shrub      2 feet height
Columnar evergreen shrub        3 feet height
 
         (b)   Types of species. Species of plant material that satisfy the
requirements of this section are contained in
Appendix A. That Appendix categorizes plant species as either “canopy
trees,”“evergreen trees,” “understory trees,” or “shrubs”. With the exception
of native species requirement, varieties and cultivars of the plant species
listed in
Appendix A may be used to satisfy the other requirements of this section,
provided that the variety or cultivar used complies with all applicable size
and form standards.
         (c)   Quality. Plants installed to satisfy the requirements of this
section shall meet or exceed the plant quality standards of the most recent
edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American
Horticulture Industry Association. Plants shall be nursery-grown and balled
with burlapping or other suitable material that is biodegradable.
         (d)   Additional landscape treatment. All required landscape areas not
dedicated to trees, shrubs or preservation of existing vegetation shall be
landscaped with grass, groundcover, or other landscape treatment, not including
sand, rock, or pavement.
         (e)   Species mix. No single plant species shall represent more than
15% of the total plantings.
         (f)   Berms not required in perimeter landscape transition areas. Any
berm not required by this section but otherwise required by a county condition
of development approval, containing at least five feet in height whose toe is
within 25 feet of any right-of-way or other property line shall be improved
with a minimum of one plant unit per 100 linear feet for every five feet of
height up to a maximum height of 20 feet. The Planning, Building and
Development Director may modify the planting requirements for berms proposed in
locations that will be buffered by existing natural features or are proposed in
locations that will not impact drainage patterns or neighboring land owners.
   (F)   Landscape standards for parking lots.
      (1)   Applicability. The parking lot landscaping standards of this
subsection (F) shall apply to all off-street parking areas containing more than
five off-street parking spaces with the exception of interior landscaping
associated with multi-level parking structures. The standards of this
subsection (F) shall not apply to storage of new or used motor vehicles or
boats or to trucking or motor freight terminals that are not normally open to
the public.
      (2)   Area and planting standards.
         (a)   Parking lots that are greater than 4,000 square feet shall
contain landscaped areas to break up the expanse of pavement. The landscaped
areas shall be located entirely within the lot in either internal or corner
islands and conform to the following area ratios:
 
Parking Lot Area                Required Landscape Area
4,000 sq. ft. to 10,000 sq. ft. 5% of paved surface
Greater than 10,000 sq. ft.     10% of paved surface
 
         (b)   Each 325 square feet of required landscape area shall contain
the following plant material:
 
2 Canopy trees:
   Oaks (Quercus sp), Hickories (Carya sp), Hornbeams (Carpinus 1.25-inch
sp)                                                                caliper
   All other species                                            1.5-inch
                                                                   caliper
5 Shrubs (low growing, not to exceed 3 ft. ht.)                    2 ft. ht.
 
         (c)   Existing vegetation located within the interior or the corner
portions of the parking lot may be counted towards required landscape plantings
upon approval by the Planning, Building and Development Director.
         (d)   Native perennials and grasses may be planted in lieu of shrubs,
up to 20% of the total number of required shrubs. Three native perennial plants
or native grasses shall equal one shrub.
         (e)   The minimum width of all parking lot landscaped areas shall be
ten feet and shall be protected by raised curbs with a minimum height of four
inches with the exception of low impact development features (see
Appendix A) as appropriate.
         (f)   The minimum area for a corner island shall be 200 square feet.
         (g)   The finished grade (crown) of interior planting areas shall not
be less than three inches above curb or pavement with the exception of low
impact development features as appropriate.
         (h)   The parking lot perimeter shall be landscaped with a minimum of
one plant unit per 100 lineal feet (not to include ingress/egress dimensions).
In situations where the perimeter of the parking lot overlaps with the required
transition area, whichever requirement is greater shall apply.
         (i)   Prior to planting, all interior areas shall be excavated to a
depth of three feet and amended with a soil mixture consisting of one part
screened topsoil, one part existing topsoil and two parts of organic compost,
or an approved equivalent, with the exception of other soil mixtures as
necessary to accommodate low impact development features. This requirement may
be waived upon confirmation by the Planning, Building and Development Director
that the pre-existing soil is suitable for planting and drainage, and that no
amendments are necessary.
         (j)   All landscaped areas that are not planted in grass shall be
mulched with a three-inch layer of shredded hardwood bark mulch or stone.
         (k)   A maintenance schedule shall be provided for review prior to
approval of the landscape plan.
   (G)   Best management practices. With the incorporation of best management
practices (BMPs), low impact development practices (LIDs), or other sustainable
practices into the project, the Planning, Building and Development Director may
allow the required landscaping to be reduced or arranged in a manner that will
enhance the design concept. Refer to Appendix A for examples of BMP, LID, and
sustainability features.
      (1)   Considerations shall include the following.
         (a)   To qualify for consideration, sustainability features such as
swales or bio-filters shall be placed in islands or at the perimeter of the
parking areas and shall be designed to improve the filtration and quality of
stormwater runoff.
         (b)   Proposals to modify the type or quantity of landscape material
may be allowed in exchange for the installation of plant species such as native
trees, shrubs, grass, or perennials that will enhance the filtering capacity of
the site and promote the use of diverse native species.
         (c)   Proposed swales or filters using a structural pervious surface
may be used for parking or drive aisles provided the features are designed to
withstand vehicular loads.
         (d)   At the discretion of the Planning, Building and Development
Director, an increase in the on-site impervious surface ratio of up to 10% may
be allowed on the site in exchange for the addition of BMP or LID features,
provided that the total impervious surface ratio shall not exceed 80%.
      (2)   The following BMP/LID incentives are available subject to the above
considerations:
 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE                INCENTIVES
                                        Additional impervious surface
                                        Can be used for parking/drive aisle
Permeable pavement                      Reduced curb & gutter
                                        Wheel stops in lieu of curb & gutter
                                        Alteration of plant species/quantity
Structural soil                         Additional impervious surface
                                        Alteration of plant species/quantity
                                        Additional impervious surface
Vegetated swale or buffer bio-retention Reduced curb & gutter
cell/rain garden                        Wheel stops in lieu of curb & gutter
                                        Alteration of plant species/quantity
 
      (3)   Provide both a short-term and long-term maintenance and management
plan of BMP areas.
   (H)   Landscape standards for streets.
      (1)   Subdivision and local streets. Subdivision and local streets
(including alleys) shall have two canopy trees per 100 feet of road frontage.
      (2)   Arterial/collector/freeway.
         (a)   Residential uses abutting an arterial or collector street or a
freeway shall have three plant units per 100 feet of road frontage.
         (b)   Nonresidential uses abutting an arterial or collector street or
a freeway shall have one plant unit per 100 feet of road frontage.
      (3)   Ultimate right-of-way provisions. 
         (a)   Where a parcel extends to the centerline of an existing street
or where the existing street adjacent to the development site contains less
than the right-of-way width specified in §
151.169, the landscape material shall be located no closer than the ultimate
right-of-way line of local streets and no closer than one foot outside the
ultimate right-of-way of collector streets, arterial streets, and freeways,
unless the roadway authority provides written notice there is no immediate or
foreseen future need to widen the right-of-way.
         (b)   No landscaping shall be located within the existing right-of-way
of any public road without written consent of the highway authority having
jurisdiction over the public road.
   (I)   Landscape standards for common open space.
      (1)   Applicability and standards. Residential subdivisions or
residential developments containing common open space shall provide one-half
plant unit of landscaping for each residential dwelling unit within the common
open space.
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   Plant material shall be installed so it relates to the natural
environment and habitat in which it is placed.
         (b)    Native vegetation or plant species shall be utilized in all
instances unless site conditions or availability of species warrant the use of
cultivars or similar materials compatible with the area.
Figure 151.167(H): Landscape Standards for Streets
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3072.jpg]
   (J)   Landscape standards for transition areas.
      (1)   Applicability.
         (a)   A transition area shall be required when a residential use is
adjacent to a nonresidential use.
         (b)   A transition area and associated landscaping shall be provided
along the perimeter of all developments subject to the standards of this
section.
      (2)   Transition landscape standards.
         (a)   The width of a required transition area shall be calculated as
20% of lot width, but in no case shall the transition area be any less than ten
feet or more than 30 feet in width.
         (b)   Plant unit intensity shall be based on transition area width,
and shall be calculated proportionately at one plant unit for every ten feet of
transition area width.
         (c)   Subject to this width requirement, transition area landscaping
shall be determined in accordance with the following
Table 151.167(J):
Table 151.167(J): Perimeter Transition Landscape Requirements
(Plant Units Per 100 Linear Feet, Based on a 30-foot Transition Area)
           Existing Site
Proposed   Residential             Nonresidential    Vacant
Developing Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 GO LC RC GC LI II O S Vac. Res. Vac. Non- AG
Site                                                               Res.
Table 151.167(J): Perimeter Transition Landscape Requirements
(Plant Units Per 100 Linear Feet, Based on a 30-foot Transition Area)
           Existing Site
Proposed   Residential                Nonresidential    Vacant
Developing Class 1  Class 2  Class 3  GO LC RC GC LI II O S Vac. Vac. Non- AG
Site                                                        Res. Res.
Class 1    -                                            A*  -    2         2
Class 2    2        -                                   A*  -    2         2
Class 3    3        2        -                          A*  -    2         2
GO         3+B or D 3+B or D 3+B or D -                 A   3    -         2
LC         3+B or D 3+B or D 3+B or D 1  -              A   3    -         2
RC         3+B or D 3+B or D 3+B or D 1  1  -           A   3    -         2
GC         3+B or D 3+B or D 3+B or D 2  1  1  -        2A  3    -         2
LI         3+C or E 3+C or E 3+C or E 2  2  2  2  -     2A  3    -         3
II         3+C or E 3+C or E 3+C or E 2  2  2  2  1  -  2A  3    -         3
OS         -        -        -        -  -  -  -  -  -  -   -    -         -
Notes:
Nonresidential uses allowed in the Agricultural and Residential Districts
shall be subject to the transition landscape requirements of the LC Zoning
District.
Class 1 = Detached house, village house or lot line house
Class 2 = Duplex, patio house, atrium house, twinhouse, multiplex, townhouse
Class 3 = Multi-dwelling
A = Split rail fence or other fence not to exceed 10% opacity
B = Fence (minimum 95% opacity), 6-foot minimum height
C = Wood fence (minimum 95% opacity), 8-foot minimum height with concrete
footings
D = Earthen berm, 3-foot minimum height; not required for commercial solar or
wind facilities
E = Earthen berm, 5-foot minimum height; not required for commercial solar or
wind facilities
Plant units: one plant unit is comprised of all of the following: 1 canopy
tree; 2 understory trees; 2 evergreen trees; and 7 shrubs.
* Fence permitted at the property line and no transition yard required,
provided that no parking lot, active recreational area, or other structure is
currently located within 30 feet of the adjoining property line on the OS-
Zoned parcel.
 
      (3)   Location.
         (a)   All plant material within transition areas shall be installed
within the required setback line of the proposed development site as close to
the property line as practical.
         (b)   In instances where a drainage or utility easement are
conterminous with the transition easement, the width of the transition area
shall be increased so it does not compromise the function of the transition
area plantings nor the utility or drainage easement.
Figure 151.167(J): Transition Area Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4072.png]
 
      (4)    Calculation of plant units. In calculating the number of plant
units required, measurements shall be measured along the external dimensions of
the property.
   (K)    Telecommunication and co-locate facilities. All new telecommunication
towers and co-locate facilities shall require landscaping to be determined by
amount, location and species on a site-specific basis.
   (L)   Exceptions.
      (1)    Plant material existing within a transition area of a proposed
development site or on an adjacent parcel that has comparable composition and
density to the minimum landscape standards of this section may be used to
satisfy landscape requirements, provided that the plant material is designated
and protected as permanent open space and further provided that, if the plant
material is located on the adjacent property, a written agreement between both
adjoining property owners is reached and recorded against both properties. In
this instance, the existing plant material need not comply with the “species
mix” standards of this section.
      (2)   A protected natural resource that exists on a proposed development
site within the transition area or on an adjacent parcel may be counted toward
meeting the transition landscape requirements of §
151.167(J), provided that the following minimum width is provided.
 
Mature Woodland Young Woodland or Grove Other Resources
30 feet         40 feet                 100 feet
 
      (3)   If a development is proposed on a tract of land that exceeds the
minimum lot area standard of the zoning district in which it is located, the
landowner may designate a smaller area of parcel as the development site and
provide landscaping in accordance with this section within the smaller
development site area. In order to use this provision, the size of the
designated development site and the remaining land area of the tract must both
equal or exceed the minimum lot size and width standard of the underlying
zoning district.
      (4)   Landscaping shall not be required for accessory uses or additions
to principal uses, provided that:
         (a)   The accessory use or addition does not exceed 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area or 2,000 square feet of impervious surface area; and
         (b)   The Planning, Building and Development Director determines that
no adverse land use impacts will result.
   (M)   Transition agreements. In lieu of providing transition landscaping
that complies with the minimum standards of this section, landowners of
adjoining properties shall be entitled to enter into an agreement that provides
for a waiver or partial waiver of the requirements. The agreement shall
consider the relationship of the existing uses of each property and their
ultimate development potential. The agreement shall state each owner’s
obligation for preserving and maintaining the transition easements. The
agreement shall be in the form of a covenant or deed restriction and shall
require approval by the Planning, Building and Development Director. Once
approved, the agreement shall be recorded with the Lake County Recorder and
shall run with the land.
   (N)   Use of transition and common open space landscape areas.
      (1)   Passive recreation. Landscape areas may be used for passive
recreation and may contain pedestrian, bicycle, or equestrian trails, provided
that:
         (a)   No required plant material is eliminated and the survival
potential of the plant materials is not compromised; and
         (b)   For the purpose of this provision, passive recreation includes
activities associated with extremely low noise levels and individual
activities, such as birdwatching, walking, jogging, bicycling, horseback
riding, and picnicking. Motorized activities of any kind are not included, nor
are activities that involve competition, large groups or special facilities
such as tennis courts, ski hills, skating rinks, or swimming pools. Lighting,
if provided, shall be extremely low level and associated with pedestrian
walkways in a “campus-like” setting.
      (2)   Drainage and utility easements. Drainage and utility easements may
be allowed within transition and common open space landscape areas, provided
that the easement and landscape requirements are compatible and the function of
the easement is not adversely affected.
      (3)   Structures. No structures, other than those allowed by the
Planning, Building and Development Director pursuant to this subsection (N)(3),
shall be permitted within transition and common open space landscape areas. The
Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized to allow signs,
decorative fences, and other accessory structures within transition and common
open space landscape areas, provided that the structures will not detract from
the intended purpose and function of the landscape easement and no plant
material is eliminated.
   (O)   Installation, maintenance, and replacement.
      (1)   Installation.  
         (a)   All landscaping shall be installed according to sound nursery
practices in a manner designed to encourage vigorous growth. Where possible,
best management practices should be incorporated (see Appendix A). Properly
amended soil shall be provided in all planting areas, and subsurface drainage
shall be provided where berms, elevated areas, or other suitable means for
providing proper drainage do not exist.
            1.   All lawn and planting areas shall be cultivated to a minimum
depth of six inches and amended with a mixture consisting of one part existing
topsoil and two parts organic compost, or an approved equivalent.
            2.   When not specifically waived pursuant to subsection (F)(2)(j)
above, planting islands shall be excavated of compacted soil to a depth of
three feet and be backfilled with a soil mix consisting of one part screened
topsoil, one part existing topsoil and two parts of organic compost or an
approved equivalent with the exception of other soil mixtures as necessary to
accommodate low impact development features.
            3.   Individual planting pits shall be a minimum two times the
width of the root ball of the plants.
         (b)   Installation inspections shall be conducted at the time the
planting areas area prepared so that verification of planting pit size and soil
amendments can be completed. The office of the Planning, Building and
Development Director should be contacted to arrange for inspections and
associated inspection fees.
      (2)   Maintenance and replacement. Required trees, shrubs, structures,
and other landscape features shall be considered as elements of the project in
the same manner as parking, building materials, and other details are elements
of the plan. The property owner, or successors in interest, shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the following:
         (a)   All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition and in a
manner that presents a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance. All landscaping
shall be maintained free from disease, pests, weeds, and litter. Maintenance
shall include weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning, mowing, edging,
mulching, or other care, as needed. All maintenance shall be performed in
accordance with acceptable horticultural practices;
         (b)   The repair or replacement of required landscape structures
(e.g., fences) to a structurally sound condition;
         (c)   The regular maintenance, repair, or replacement, where
necessary, of any landscaping required by this section;
         (d)   Continuous maintenance of the site as a whole; and
         (e)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be
authorized to require documented assurance of continued landscape performance
and/or maintenance in the form of a condition, covenant, contract, development
agreement or performance/maintenance assurance to assure installation and, for
a minimum one-year period, the continued maintenance of landscape improvements
associated with a development. The amount of the performance assurance shall be
at least 130% of the estimated cost of the required landscape improvements. The
maintenance assurance shall be equal to at least 10% of the performance
assurance. Notwithstanding the above, the Planning, Building and Development
Director shall be authorized to reduce or waive the maintenance assurance,
provided the landscape features incorporate best management practices and/or
low impact development features contained in
Appendix A. Any performance and/or maintenance assurance required by the
Director shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of §
151.203 of this chapter.
(Ord., § 9.3, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-
10-2019; Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024; Ord.
24-0924, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 151.168 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   General. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the provisions of this
section shall apply to all outdoor lighting except lights on lots containing
single family detached houses, public street lights, and the exempt active
outdoor recreational uses specified in the following subsection (A)(2).
      (2)   Exempt active outdoor recreational uses. Because of their unique
requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation,
active outdoor recreational facilities within a public park and schools shall
be exempt from the outdoor lighting standards of this section. Exempt active
outdoor recreational uses shall be subject to the following requirements in
addition to the general standards applicable to all outdoor lighting contained
in subsection (A)(3) below:
         (a)   Exempt outdoor recreational uses shall not exceed a maximum
permitted post height of 50 feet;
         (b)   Light sources or luminaires shall not be located within
landscape areas except on pedestrian walkways; and
         (c)   Lights shall not be illuminated after 11:00 p.m.
      (3)   General standards applicable to all outdoor lighting. Outdoor
lighting shall comply with the following standards:
         (a)   Outdoor lighting shall not exceed one-half footcandle at any
point on the adjoining property if the subject property abuts a residential
zoning district or a lot containing a residential use;
         (b)   Outdoor lighting shall not exceed one footcandle at any point on
the adjoining property if the subject property abuts a nonresidential zoning
district or lot containing a nonresidential use or at the right-of-way line;
         (c)   All luminaires shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover to adjacent residential property and abutting rights-of-way;
         (d)   No flickering or flashing lights, search lights, laser source
lights or mercury vapor lamps shall be permitted; and
         (e)   Subject to the above standards, security lighting shall be
installed on the site of nonresidential development in accordance with industry
standards for security lighting.
   (B)   Measurements.
      (1)   Metering equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in
footcandles with a direct-reading, portable light meter. The meter shall read
within an accuracy of plus or minus 5%. It shall have been tested, calibrated,
and certified by an independent commercial photometric laboratory or the
manufacturer within one year of the date of its use.
      (2)   Method of measurement. The meter sensor shall be mounted not more
than six inches above ground level in a horizontal position at the property
line. Readings shall be taken only after the cell has been exposed long enough
to provide a constant reading. Measurements shall be made after dark with the
light sources in question on, then with the same sources off. The difference
between the two readings shall be compared to the maximum permitted
illumination. This procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and other
ambient light.
(Ord., § 9.4, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 151.169 TRAFFIC AND ACCESS.
   (A)   Street classifications. Classification is the process by which streets
are grouped into categories or classes according to the character of service
provided. Factors that determine the classification of streets include the
width of the roadway, continuity of alignment, spacing of intersections,
frequency of the points of access, and traffic controls. Streets have two
functions: to provide mobility and to provide access to land. There are four
basic classifications: freeway, arterial, collector, and local.
      (1)   Local streets. Local streets provide access to adjacent land,
provide service to travel short distances, provide the lowest level of mobility
for through travel, and provide access service to other streets. Service to
through traffic is discouraged. The minimum ultimate right-of-way width of
local streets is 60 or 66 feet (depending on design), unless otherwise
established through the subdivision approval process of §
151.191.
      (2)   Collector streets. Collector streets serve as intracounty travel
corridors channelizing and distributing traffic to and from arterial and local
streets. Collector streets often provide service by connecting urban areas,
large developments, and other land uses of intracounty importance. The minimum
ultimate right-of-way width of collector streets is 100 feet.
      (3)   Arterial streets. Arterial streets serve or connect major urban
activity centers, are high volume travel corridors, provide for long trip
desires, and form an integrated network providing intercounty and interstate
service. Arterial streets channelize and distribute traffic to and from
collector streets and freeways. Access to abutting land uses is subordinate to
the provision of travel service for major traffic movements. The minimum
ultimate right-of-way width of arterial streets is 120 feet.
      (4)   Freeways. Freeways serve or connect metropolitan areas, carrying
the major portion of trips entering or leaving an urban area as well as the
majority of through trips bypassing these areas. Freeways are high volume
traffic corridors and carry a high proportion of the total area travel with a
minimum of total mileage. Access to freeways is fully or partially controlled.
The minimum ultimate right-of-way width of freeways is 200 feet.
      (5)   Designated freeways. Designated freeways are those streets so
designated as provided for in 605 ILCS 5/8. Collector streets, arterial streets
and freeways as classified by this chapter may all, in addition, be designated
as designated freeways. Access to designated freeways shall be determined by
the highway authority having jurisdiction over the designated freeway from
which access is being taken. The minimum ultimate right-of-way width of a
designated freeway shall be the same as for freeways.
   (B)   Street classifications map. See
Appendix B.
   (C)   Street access.
      (1)   An access permit shall be obtained from the highway authority with
jurisdiction over the street from which access is proposed to be taken. When
the highway authority has not established access standards, the standards of
the Lake County Division of Transportation shall apply.
      (2)   Each lot shall take access to an improved, approved street.
   (D)   Access easements.
      (1)   If a parcel is to be developed with any nonresidential land use, an
access easement shall be provided by the property owner to adjoining properties
which front on the same street and which may be developed or are developed with
nonresidential land uses. Access easements shall have a minimum width of 30
feet and shall be situated parallel to the street right-of-way line abutting
both parcels and at the ultimate right-of-way line unless otherwise established
through the subdivision approval process. Access easements shall be maintained
by the property owner.
      (2)   The Planning, Building and Development Director, after consultation
and written consent of the highway authority having jurisdiction, may waive the
requirement for an easement of access required above in those cases where
unusual topography or site conditions would render the easement of no useable
benefit to adjoining properties.
      (3)   The Planning, Building and Development Director, after consultation
and written consent of the applicable highway authority, may approve the
abandonment of an easement of access in those cases where adjoining parcels are
subsequently developed with a residential use.
   (E)   Fire and emergency vehicle access. Fire and emergency vehicle access
shall be provided in accordance with the Fire Code.
(Ord., § 9.5, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.170 SEWER AND WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   Residential; requirements for community systems.  Community sewer and
water supply systems shall be required for all residential uses in all
residential zoning districts, with the following exceptions.
      (1)   In all residential zoning districts, if community water facilities
are not available within 250 feet at the time of initial development (measured
from the lot line of the subject lot), another approved water source may be
employed.
      (2)   Residential development in the R-1, Estate, Rural Estate and
Agricultural Zoning Districts may utilize on-site sewage disposal systems
regardless of lot size and lot width.
      (3)   (a)   Detached houses may be constructed in the R-2, R-3, R-4, R-
4A, R-5, R-6, and RR Zoning Districts prior to the establishment of required
community sewer systems on parcels containing at least 40,000 square feet of
lot area and 130 feet of lot width.
         (b)   These width and area requirements shall not apply to legal
nonconforming parcels.
 
COMMENTARY:
Community water or sewage disposal facilities that would be available only from a
municipality are not considered “available” for the purposes of interpreting the
provisions of §
151.170. Individual sewage disposal systems may be used for detached houses if
they comply with Lake County Health Department standards. Additionally,
alternative water sources in lieu of community water systems may be employed if
they comply with Lake County Health Department standards.
   
   (B)   Nonresidential.
      (1)   Community water supply systems shall be required for all
nonresidential uses, provided that if community water facilities are not
available within 250 feet at the time of initial development (measured from the
lot line of the subject lot), another approved water source may be employed if
the systems comply with the requirements of the Lake County Health Department.
      (2)   Nonresidential uses that generate more than 1,500 gallons of
wastewater per day, as determined by the Lake County Health Department, shall
be allowed only when served by community sewer facilities.
(Ord., § 9.6, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.171 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to promote attractive well-
designed development that is built to human-scale; to encourage creativity in
new development (as opposed to homogeneity or “look-alike” projects); and to
foster attractive streetscapes and pedestrian environments, while accommodating
vehicular movement and access.
   (B)   Applicability. These standards shall apply to all developments that
are subject to design review (see §
151.053).
   (C)   Prohibited building materials. The following materials shall not be
used as exterior building materials and shall be prohibited on all exterior
walls:
      (1)   Concrete finishes or precast concrete panels (tilt wall) that are
not exposed aggregate, hammered, sandblasted, or covered with a cement-based
acrylic coating shall be prohibited;
      (2)   Metal panels with a depth of less than one inch or a thickness less
than U.S. standard 26 gauge shall be prohibited; and
      (3)   Mirrored glass with a reflectance greater than 40% shall be
prohibited from covering more than 40% of the exterior walls of any building.
   (D)   Building orientation. To the maximum extent feasible, primary facades
and entries shall face an adjacent street. Except in industrial districts, a
main entrance shall face the adjacent street or a connecting walkway with a
direct pedestrian connection to the street without requiring pedestrians to
walk through parking lots or cross driveways.
   (E)   Massing. Single, large building masses shall be avoided. Structures
with walls of more than 1,500 square feet must incorporate fascias, canopies,
arcades, building setbacks of three feet or more, or other multidimensional
design features to break up large wall surfaces on their street facing
elevations. Wall surfaces must visually be divided by the features into areas
of 750 square feet or less.
(Ord., § 9.7, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.172 INTERSECTION VISIBILITY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other standard of this chapter, nothing shall be
erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede or
obstruct vision between a height of three feet and ten feet above the road
crown within an imaginary area formed by a point on each street centerline
located:
      (1)   One hundred feet from the intersection of local street centerlines
and a third line connecting the two points; or
      (2)   One hundred thirty feet from the intersection of collector or
higher category street centerlines and a third line connecting the two points.
   (B)   This provision may be modified by the Planning, Building and
Development Director after consulting with the subject highway authority. (See
Figure 151.172(B).)
Figure 151.172(B): Intersection Visibility
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3076.jpg]
 
COMMENTARY:
The area described in §
151.172 shall be referred to as the “intersection visibility triangle”.
 
(Ord., § 9.8, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012)
§ 151.173 SIGNS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Purposes. The purposes of these sign regulations are to:
         (a)   Permit the effective use of signs as a means of communication in
the county;
         (b)   Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the ability
of the county to attract sources of economic development and growth;
         (c)   Maintain pedestrian and traffic safety and minimize the
distractions, hazards, and obstructions caused by signs;
         (d)   Minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public
and private property; and
         (e)   Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations.
      (2)   Applicability. Signs may be erected, placed, established, painted,
created, or maintained only in conformance with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Computations and measurements.
      (1)   Sign area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is
also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be
computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or
combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral section of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence
or wall when the supporting device otherwise meets the regulations of this
chapter and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
      (2)   Area of double-faced signs. Where the sign faces of a double-faced
sign are parallel or the interior angle formed by the faces is 90 degrees or
less, only one display face shall be counted in computing sign area. If the two
faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be
the area of the larger sign face. In all other cases, the areas of all faces of
a multi-faced sign shall be added together to compute the area of the sign.
      (3)   Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance to
the highest point of the sign or sign structure, measured from the elevation of
the road to which it is oriented, or, if there is no road, from the natural
ground elevation beneath the sign.
      (4)   Wall area. In computing the area of a wall only the first 12 feet
of building height shall be used.
      (5)   Maximum total permitted sign area for a lot. The permitted sum of
the area of all individual signs on a lot shall be computed by applying the
formula set out in
Table 151.173(H), Maximum Total Sign Area, to the lot frontage, building
frontage, or wall area, as specified in the table. Lots fronting on two or more
streets shall be allowed the stated sign area for each street frontage.
However, the total sign area that is oriented toward a particular street may
not exceed the portion of the lot’s total sign area allocation that is derived
from the lot, building, or wall area frontage on that street.
   (C)   Location.
      (1)   Visibility triangles. All signs shall be located outside of
required visibility triangles in accordance with §
151.172.
      (2)   Landscaping. Signs may be located within required landscaping if
the Planning, Building and Development Director determines that the intent of
the landscaping regulations will not be adversely affected.
      (3)   Right-of-way. All signs shall be located outside the public right-
of-way.
   (D)   Signs exempt from regulation. The following signs shall be exempt from
regulation under this section:
      (1)   Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
      (2)   Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door that
is not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of
the lot or parcel on which the sign is located;
      (3)   Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message, not to
exceed 60 days per year;
      (4)   Traffic control signs on private property, such as “stop”, “yield”,
and similar signs, the faces of which contain no commercial message of any
sort;
      (5)   Merchandise display signs not exceeding four square feet in area;
      (6)   Barber poles not exceeding 12 inches in diameter and six feet in
height;
      (7)   Vending machines;
      (8)   Tombstones;
      (9)   Works of art that do not contain any commercial message and are not
intended to attract attention to the type of business or activity conducted on
the premises;
      (10)   Fuel pumps; and
      (11)   Mailboxes.
   (E)   Prohibited sign types. All signs not expressly permitted under this
section or exempt from regulation are prohibited. The signs include but are not
limited to:
      (1)   Animated signs;
      (2)   Beacons;
      (3)   Bench signs;
      (4)   Directional signs, except as allowed by subsection (G)(5)(h)3.d.;
      (5)   Flashing signs;
      (6)   Pennants;
      (7)   Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background,
unless expressly exempted;
      (8)   Inflatable signs and tethered balloons;
      (9)   Portable signs;
      (10)   Roof signs;
      (11)   Signs that by their position, working, illumination, size, shape
or color, obstruct, impair, obscure, or interfere with traffic signs, signals,
or devices;
      (12)   Signs that mimic official traffic control signs and devices;
      (13)   Signs that obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway, or
opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress for any building
that would cause a violation of building codes; and
      (14)   Illuminated signs that cause glare onto traffic or adjacent
property.
   (F)   Zoning district classes. For the purpose of this section, zoning
districts are grouped into the following classes:
      (1)   Residential = AG, RE, E, RR, and all R Districts;
      (2)   Nonresidential = GO, LC, RC, GC, LI, and II; and
      (3)   Institutional = OS Zoning District, nonresidential use allowed in
the AG District and nonresidential uses permitted in residential districts.
   (G)   Permitted sign types. Signs shall be allowed in accordance with
Table 151.173(G), Permitted Sign Types.
      (1)   Signs permitted without permits. An “A” indicates that a sign type
is allowed in the
respective zoning district without a permit. Signs permitted without permits
are subject to all other applicable regulations of this section.
      (2)   Signs requiring permits. A “P” indicates that a sign type is
permitted in the respective zoning district only after a sign permit for the
subject sign has been obtained in accordance with §
151.055. The signs shall be subject to all other applicable regulations of this
section.
      (3)   Signs not allowed. An “N” indicates that a sign type is not allowed
in the respective district.
      (4)   Special sign standards. Special sign standards that apply to
certain types of signs are indicated in the permitted sign types table by
[bracketed] letters.
Table 151.173(G): Permitted Sign Types
Sign Type Zoning District Class
          Residential Nonresidential Institutional
Table 151.173(G): Permitted Sign Types
Sign Type                Zoning District Class
                         Residential Nonresidential Institutional
Freestanding Signs
Electronic message board N           P[k]           P[k]
Entrance                 P[c]        P[c]           P[c]
Identification           A[d]        A[d]           A[d]
Incidental               A[e]        A[e]           A[e]
Residential              A[g]        N              N
Temporary                A[h]        P[h]           P[h]
Other                    N           P              P
Building Signs
Banner                   N           P[a]           P[a]
Building marker          A[b]        A[b]           A[b]
Canopy                   N           P              N
Electronic message board N           P[k]           P[k]
Entrance                 P[c]        P[c]           P[c]
Identification           A[d]        A[d]           A[d]
Incidental               A[e]        A[e]           A[e]
Projecting               N           P[f]           P[f]
Residential              A[g]        N              N
Suspended                N           P[f]           P[f]
Temporary                A[h]        P[h]           P[h]
Time/temperature         N           A              A
Wall                     N           P[i]           P[i]
Window sign              N           A[j]           A[j]
Residential = AG, RE, E, RR, and R
Nonresidential = GO, LC, RC, GC, LI, and II
Institutional= OS District and nonresidential uses in residential districts
 
      (5)   Special sign standards.
         (a)   Banners. See subsections (J) and (K) below.
         (b)   Building markers.
            1.   Residential districts. Building markers in residential
districts shall be not greater than two square feet in area.
            2.   Nonresidential and institutional districts. Building markers
in nonresidential and institutional districts shall be not greater than four
square feet in area.
         (c)   Entrance signs.
            1.   Residential districts. One entrance sign shall be allowed per
entrance within a residential development. Entrance signs shall not exceed 40
square feet in area, with a maximum height of six feet and a minimum setback of
seven and one-half feet from all rights-of-way. Entrance signs for residential
development shall be allowed in addition to all other allowed signage within a
development and shall not be counted in calculating a site’s maximum allowed
signage.
            2.   Nonresidential and institutional districts. Entrance signs in
nonresidential and institutional districts shall comply with all other
applicable standards of this section and shall be counted in calculating a
site’s maximum allowed signage.
         (d)   Identification signs.
            1.   Residential districts. Identification signs in residential
districts shall be no larger than two square feet in area. Identification signs
may carry only the property address and occupant name. They shall carry no
commercial message.
            2.   Nonresidential and institutional districts. Identification
signs in nonresidential and institutional districts shall be not greater than
ten square feet in area. Identification signs may carry only the property
address and occupant name. They shall carry no commercial message.
         (e)   Incidental signs. The size of incidental signs shall not exceed
two square feet. Incidental signs shall not be counted toward the maximum
number of signs permitted on a lot.
         (f)   Projecting and suspended signs. Projecting or suspended signs
shall have at least nine feet of vertical clearance between the ground beneath
the sign and the bottom of the sign. Projecting or suspended signs shall not
encroach into any street rights-of-way.
         (g)   Residential signs. Residential signs shall carry no commercial
message except for a message identifying a permitted bed and breakfast use.
         (h)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be allowed in addition to
all signs allowed under this section and shall not be counted in calculating a
site’s maximum allowable signage. Temporary signs shall be subject to the
following standards.
            1.   Setbacks and height. Temporary signs are subject to the
setback and height standards of subsection (I) below.
            2.   Location. Temporary signs shall be located only on the site
for which the sign is requested.
            3.   Residential, nonresidential, and institutional districts. The
following types of temporary signs shall be allowed in residential,
nonresidential, and institutional zoning districts. The signs shall be located
only on private property, outside of the public right-of-way.
               a.   Construction signs. One temporary sign, up to 12 square
feet in area, shall be permitted for the duration of an allowed construction
project.
               b.   Temporary uses and special events. One temporary sign, up
to 16 square feet in area, shall be permitted per entrance or per road frontage
for temporary uses and special events for which a temporary use permit has been
issued in accordance with §
151.114(B). In any event, the total number of signs for a temporary use or a
special event shall not exceed two. The signs shall be allowed for the duration
of the temporary use permit or such other time as expressly established at the
time of approval of the temporary use permit.
               c.   Real estate signs. One temporary real estate (“for sale” or
“for rent”) sign shall be permitted per road or water frontage per parcel. In
any event, the total number of signs per parcel shall not exceed two. Temporary
real estate signs shall not exceed six square feet in area in RE, E, R-1, R-2,
and R-3 Districts, 12 square feet in area in AG (for parcels less than ten
acres), R-4, R-4A, R-5, and R-6 Districts, and 32 square feet in area in AG
(for parcels ten acres and greater) and nonresidential districts. Real estate
signs shall be permitted only on the property for sale or for rent, and shall
not be permitted off-site.
               d.   Directional signs. One temporary directional sign, up to
four square feet in area, shall be permitted per development or per each 1,000
linear feet street right-of-way within a development. Directional signs shall
be allowed during the time that lots are being marketed. Directional signs
shall contain no commercial message other than the name of the developer/
builder.
               e.   Election signs. Temp-orary election signs shall be allowed
without a permit.
               f.   Subdivision marketing signs. One temporary sign, not to
exceed 96 square feet, may be permitted per external road frontage for
marketing lots within a subdivision that has received final plat approval in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The signs shall be set back a
minimum of 30 feet from the right-of-way and shall not exceed 15 feet in
height. The subdivision signs shall be permitted only during the time lots
offered for sale remain unsold. Permits for the signs shall be issued for a
one-year period and may be renewed for additional one-year periods to allow
time for reasonable display, up to a maximum of five years. Subdivision
marketing signs shall be permitted only on the property for sale, and shall not
be permitted off-site.
         (i)   Wall signs. See subsections (J) and (K) below.
         (j)   Window signs. See subsections (J) and (K) below.
         (k)   Electronic message boards. Electronic message boards are
allowed, subject to the following standards.
            1.   The electronic message board component of a freestanding sign
may comprise no more than 60% of the sign’s total allowed sign face area. The
electronic message board component of a building sign shall not exceed 48
square feet in a nonresidential zoning district class and 36 square feet in an
institutional zoning district class.
            2.   Freestanding electronic message boards must be mounted on a
base with a width that is at least 75% of the width of the sign’s face, based
on the greatest horizontal dimension of the sign face.
            3.   The maximum height of the electronic message board component
of a freestanding sign shall be 12 feet as measured from the ground elevation
to the highest point on the electronic message board component. This provision
shall not apply to the electronic message board component of a building sign.
            4.   a.   The message area of an electronic message board sign may
be illuminated by incandescent lamps, LED (light emitting diodes), or magnetic
discs. Whatever the light source, undue brightness is prohibited. For the
purpose of enforcing this provision, undue brightness will be construed to mean
illumination of a white portion of the sign in excess of the intensity levels
specified below:
 
Day:   5,000 nits
Night: 1,000 nits
 
               b.   To ensure compliance with this provision, the sign must
have an automatic phased proportional dimmer, which must be used to reduce
nighttime brightness levels (compared to daytime brightness levels). Further,
prior to the issuance of a permit for an electronic message board sign, the
applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that
the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the levels specified
above, and the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by
password-protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the
Planning, Building and Development Director.
            5.   Any individual letter scrolling or otherwise displayed on the
electronic message board shall remain illuminated and visible for at least two
seconds.
            6.   The message shall not flash. Any message that remains visible
for less than two seconds shall be considered as flashing.
            7.   A zoning lot shall be allowed one message board. A message
board sign shall be allowed along a collector or arterial street, but shall not
be allowed along a local street.
            8.   Electronic message board signs are prohibited within 100 feet
of a principal residential structure if any part of the sign face would be
visible from the principal residential structure.
 
COMMENTARY:
At the time of filing the application, the applicant will have to demonstrate
that standard (G)(5)(k)8. is met. This may be accomplished either by showing
that this standard is not applicable or by submitting a landscape plan or a
plan referencing other means of screening that would buffer the sign face from
the principal residential structure.
 
   (H)   Maximum total sign area per lot. The sum of the area of all building
and freestanding signs on a lot shall be less than or equal to the maximum
permitted sign area indicated in
Table 151.173(H), Maximum Total Sign Area Per Lot. The lowest number resulting
from any of the applicable alternative computations in any column in
Table 151.173(H) shall be the maximum total sign area permitted for the
respective district class.
Table 151.173(H): Maximum Total Sign Area Per Lot
 Zoning District Class
 Residential Nonresidential Institutional
Table 151.173(H): Maximum Total Sign Area Per Lot
                                      Zoning District Class
                                      Residential Nonresidential Institutional
Per foot of street frontage (square   N/A         1              0.25
feet)
Per linear foot of building frontage  N/A         2              0.50
(square feet)
Maximum on vacant land (square feet)  12          60             30
Absolute maximum (square feet)        18          500 [1]        300
[1] The absolute maximum restriction for signage within corporate headquarters
or corporate campuses (occupied by a single corporate user) containing at
least 250,000 square feet of floor area shall be 3,000 square feet.
 
   (I)   Number and dimensions. All allowed signs shall comply with the
standards of
Table 151.173(I).
Table 151.173(I): Number and Dimension of Individual Signs
 Zoning District Class
 Residential Nonresidential Institutional
Table 151.173(I): Number and Dimension of Individual Signs
                                Zoning District Class
                                Residential Nonresidential Institutional
Freestanding Signs
Maximum height (feet)           5           30             15
Maximum sign area (square feet) 6 [1]       80 [4]         60
Maximum number [2]              1*          1 or 1 per 200 ft. street frontage
Minimum setback (feet) [3]      7.5         10             7.5
Building Signs
Maximum number (see §          1           No maximum
151.173(J))
Maximum area (percent of the
wall area to which it is        N/A         10             10
attached)
Maximum area (square feet)      2           N/A            N/A
*1 per road entrance or driveway
N/A = Not applicable
[1] Maximum size restriction does not apply to residential development
entrance signs.
[2] Maximum number does not include temporary signs, residential development
entrance signs or incidental signs.
[3] All signs shall comply with the intersection visibility standards of §
151.172.
[4] The maximum size restriction for individual signs for corporate
headquarters or corporate campuses (occupied by a single corporate user)
containing at least 250,000 square feet of floor area shall be 400 square feet
when the signs are adjacent to rights-of-way; however, when signs are located
adjacent to an interstate highway, they may be 1,000 square feet.
 
   (J)   Building signs in nonresidential districts. Building signs in
nonresidential districts shall be subject to the standards of
Table 151.173(J).
Table 151.173(J): Building Signs in Nonresidential Districts
Sign Type Number Permitted Maximum Area Vertical Clearance
Table 151.173(J): Building Signs in Nonresidential Districts
Sign Type      Number Permitted         Maximum Area       Vertical Clearance
Banner         1 per building           5% of wall area    9 feet
Canopy         1 per building entrance  16 square feet     9 feet
Projecting     1 per principal building 5% of wall area    9 feet
Roof, integral 2 per principal building 5% of wall area    N/A
Suspended      1 per building entrance  5% of wall area    9 feet
Wall           No limit                 10% of wall area   N/A
Window         No limit                 25% of window area N/A
N/A = Not applicable
 
   (K)   Sign characteristics. All allowed signs shall comply with
Table 151.173(K), Permitted Sign Characteristics.
 
Table 151.173(K): Permitted Sign Characteristics
Characteristic                      District Class
                                    Residential Nonresidential Institutional
Changeable copy                     No          Yes            Yes
Illumination, exposed bulbs or neon No          Yes            No
Illumination, external              Yes         Yes            Yes
Illumination, internal              No          Yes            Yes
 
   (L)   Design, construction, and maintenance. All signs shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards.
      (1)   All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
current Building and the Electrical Code of the county and shall be maintained
in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical
codes.
      (2)   Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this section, all signs
shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached
to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid
wall, frame, or structure.
   (M)   Signs in the public right-of-way. No signs shall be permitted in the
public right-of-way, except for those signs erected by or on behalf of the
highway authority having jurisdiction over the subject right-of-way.
   (N)   Flags. Flags do not require a permit but are subject to the size and
location limitations below:
      (1)   The total area of all flags on a lot shall not exceed 60 square
feet in area;
      (2)   No flag shall be flown from a pole that exceeds 40 feet in height;
      (3)   If a flag is mounted to a building, the vertical clearance from
ground level when limp shall not be less than nine feet; and
      (4)   No flags shall be mounted above the roofline of a structure.
   (O)   Non-commercial signs, not otherwise classified. The signs do not
require a permit but are subject to the requirements of
Table 151.173(I).
(Ord., § 9.9, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed - -)
SUBDIVISIONS
§ 151.185 GENERAL.
   The layout, design and engineering of all subdivision improvements shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable county,
state and federal requirements. Whenever a permit, certificate or approval is
established or required by this chapter for any use or structure, the permit,
certificate or approval shall not beissued to any lot or part of a lot which
the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.) requires to have been created by a
plat but which was created in violation of that Act.
(Ord., § 10.1, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.186 SUBDIVISION TYPES.
   This section sets out the review and approval procedures for subdividing
land (Subdivisions).
   (A)   General. The “general” procedural requirements and standards of §
151.045 shall apply to the subdivision procedures of this section.
   (B)   Subdivision types. 
      (1)   Major subdivision. Application that involves the creation of more
than five lots.
      (2)   Minor subdivision. Application that involves the creation of five
or fewer lots. (See §
151.187, panhandle lot subdivision, a type of minor subdivision.)
      (3)   Lot split.  Application that involves:
         (a)   The division of a single lot or parcel into no more than two
lots, provided that the division does not involve any new streets or easements
of access. In instances where a new street or easement of access is created,
the subdivision shall be processed as a minor subdivision;
         (b)   The adjustment or movement of a common boundary line between
conforming lots that does not create any additional lots, provided the lots are
under common ownership.
      (4)   Plat amendment. A modification of a portion of a recorded final
plat of subdivision that does not result in any additional lots. Examples
include: reconfiguring existing lots (also defined as a resubdivision),
changing lot or open space boundaries, combining conforming lots, adjusting or
the vacation of easements.
(Ord., § 10.2, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.187 PANHANDLE SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   Criteria for approval. A panhandle subdivision shall be permitted only
when the subdivision complies with the following standards.
      (1)   The parcel displays unusual topography or has sufficient area but
has insufficient width on a street and therefore is unable to be subdivided to
the extent provided for in this chapter;
      (2)   All lots to be created are to be used solely for detached house
(single family residential) purposes;
      (3)   No more than three lots will be created by the subdivision;
      (4)   Development of the subdivision, including the location, length, and
width of the access streets, shall not be detrimental to nor hinder the future
development of any adjoining parcels or the general area;
      (5)   The private street contained within the subdivision shall take
access to a public street which is or will be in the jurisdiction of a public
roadway authority.
   (B)   Access.
      (1)   Access to all lots shall be provided by a private street
constructed in accordance with §
151.194.
      (2)   The private street shall be for the benefit of all adjoining
property owners in the subdivision. All beneficiaries of the private street
shall consent to the future improvement and dedication of the private street
for future public road purposes.
      (3)   Where adjoining parcels are unsubdivided or of a similar character,
the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee may require the street to be
located along the common property line and may also require the street to
extend the full length of the property. The Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee may require the street to be dedicated and improved to standards
required for a publicly dedicated street.
      (4)   The Planning, Building and Development Director, hereafter referred
as the “Director”, shall notify the property owner(s) adjacent to the street of
the proposed subdivision. If Planning, Building and Zoning Committee finds that
the neighboring property will be detrimentally affected by the creation of new
zoning nonconformities, neighbors’ written consent shall be required prior to
acceptance of the final plat for review by the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
   (C)   Review and approval procedure. Panhandle lot subdivisions shall be
subject to the subdivision procedures of §
151.191.
(Ord., § 10.3, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.188 PHASED SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   When a developer has no immediate development plans for a portion of
the land to be subdivided, the portion may be excluded from the legally
described subdivision, provided the remnant parcel conforms to the lot width
and area requirements of the zoning classification in which it is located, and
has suitable area and shape to be separately subdivided or developed. To
subdivide such parcels, the developer shall be required to begin the
subdivision approval process at the Early Assistance meeting stage for each
excluded parcel.
   (B)   When a developer has development plans for the entire subdivision but
desires, for whatever reason, to seek approval and record the final plat in
phases, the subdivision may be platted in phases, subject to the following
standards:
      (1)   The approved preliminary plat shall show the proposed layout for
the entire area of the subdivision to be platted in phases;
      (2)   The limits of each phase shall be shown on the final engineering
plans and the review of final engineering plans shall be completed for the
entire subdivision prior to the approval of the final plat of the first phase
of the subdivision;
      (3)   The total platted area with the platting of each phase of the
subdivision shall function independently in terms of site capacity, natural
resource protection, recreation and open space standards, and engineered
improvements;
      (4)   The entire area to be subdivided, as shown on the preliminary plat,
may be platted with the first phase of the subdivision. Those areas to be
subdivided as future phases of the subdivision may be reserved as outlots for
future development. Such outlots shall reference the approved preliminary plat
and final engineering plans, and the resubdivision of such outlots shall be in
accordance with the approved preliminary plat and final engineering plans. The
final plat approval for the outlots shall be received within the 24-month
period during which the preliminary plat is valid. The Director may grant
extension requests, not to exceed 12 months, for each phase of the subdivision.
When determining whether an extension request shall be granted, the Director
shall consider the circumstances underlying the request and consistency of the
approved preliminary plat with current ordinances.
      (5)   If the proposed resubdivision of any outlot varies substantially
from that approved for the preliminary plat, the Multi-Disciplinary Team may
require submittal and review of revised preliminary plat and final engineering
plans for the outlot. The development of the outlot then may be subject to
regulations in effect at the time of approval of revised preliminary plat.
(Ord., § 10.4, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.189 LOTS AND OUTLOTS.
   (A)   Lots. Lots shall be laid out to promote functional circulation
patterns and compatible relationships among adjacent and nearby land uses, and
shall be designed in accordance with the following criteria.
      (1)   With the exception of planned unit developments, all lots shall
meet the lot width and area requirements of §
151.125 for the underlying zoning district.
      (2)   Subdivision lot layout shall relate to topography, soils, drainage,
natural resources, and planned open space areas. Lots adjoining common or
dedicated open space areas shall be encouraged. Unless otherwise provided by §
151.072(E)(3), the platting of deed-restricted open space shall be prohibited.
      (3)   The design of proposed lots which results in the formation of
irregularly shaped lot lines is prohibited unless the lines follow natural
features such as streams and wetlands, and the like. The Director may approve
irregularly shaped lot lines after evaluation of the issues that created the
irregularity.
      (4)   All lots shall front directly on and have direct access to a street
improved in accordance with the standards of this chapter, or improved and
accepted by the affected roadway authority.
      (5)   Residential lots adjoining freeways, arterials, collectors,
railroad tracks, or lands used for nonresidential purposes shall provide
separation adequate to ensure protection of the residential uses.
   (B)   Outlots. Outlots may be platted in subdivisions for a variety of
purposes including those described in this subsection (B). Outlots platted for
resource protection, open space or utility installation purposes are not
required to meet the lot size or lot width requirements of the underlying
zoning district. All structures located in the outlots shall be constructed in
accordance with the density and dimensional standards of §
151.125 for the zoning district in which they are located, provided the lot
meets or exceeds the minimum lot area requirement for its zoning
classification. If the lot is less than the minimum lot area for its zoning
classification, the structures shall be constructed in accordance with §
151.233.
      (1)   Resource protection and open space. Outlots may be platted for
those purposes designated in §
151.072. Open space areas shall be integrated into the overall subdivision
design to promote ease of maintenance, access, and enjoyment for all residents
of the subdivision. Within a subdivision, the platting of many small open space
outlots shall be discouraged, and the platting of fewer larger open space
outlots shall be encouraged. All outlots platted for open space purposes shall
be identified on the final plat by ownership and purpose (e.g., “Outlot A:
Common Open Space for Recreational Purposes”).
      (2)   Future development. Outlots may be platted for future development
in phased subdivisions or for alternate uses in mixed use subdivisions. (See §
151.188.)
      (3)   Dedications. Outlots may be platted for lands dedicated for school,
park or utility purposes (see §
151.190).
(Ord., § 10.5, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.190 DEDICATIONS, EASEMENTS, AND RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   Dedications.
      (1)   Street rights-of-way. All public street rights-of-way shall be
labeled on the final plat as follows: “Hereby Dedicated for Public Road
Purposes”. Public street rights-of-way shall be dedicated in accordance with
the following:
         (a)   Internal streets. With the exception of private streets (see
subsection (B)(1) below), all land contained within proposed streets shall be
dedicated to the public. Street right-of-way widths shall comply with the
standards of §
151.194.
         (b)   Perimeter streets. When a subdivision abuts an existing public
street, the developer shall dedicate additional right-of-way sufficient to
provide one-half the required right-of-way width for the subject street type.
The following half-width rights-of-way are minimums unless otherwise
established through the subdivision approval process. The highway authority
having jurisdiction may require additional right-of-way to be dedicated, or may
waive the dedication of right-of-way if traffic engineering studies,
transportation plans, or in the opinion of the authority, sufficient right-of-
way exists and additional right-of-way is unnecessary.
 
Perimeter Street Type   Minimum Half-Width ROW
Arterial                60 feet
Collector               50 feet
Freeway                 100 feet
Local (closed drainage) 30 feet
Local (open drainage)   33 feet
 
      (2)   School land. Land for schools shall be calculated and provided in
accordance with §
151.220. Land to be dedicated for school purposes shall be labeled on the final
plat as follows, “Hereby Dedicated to the (School District) for Public School
Purposes”.
      (3)   Park and recreation land. Land for park and recreation areas shall
be provided in accordance with the park contribution requirements of §
151.221. The lands may be dedicated to any public agency willing to accept the
dedication, as provided in §
151.221(H). Land to be dedicated to the public for park and recreational
purposes shall be labeled on the final plat as follows: “Hereby Dedicated to
the (Public Agency) for Recreational Purposes”. Park and recreational areas
created to satisfy the requirements of §
151.070(D), and intended to be owned and maintained by a homeowners’
association, shall be labeled as “Common Open Space for Park and Recreational
Purposes”.
      (4)   Public water supply and public sewage disposal. At the discretion
of the authorized public agency, all water supply and sewage disposal
facilities, including well houses, storage tanks and lift stations, shall be
dedicated to the public and shall be labeled on the final plat as follows,
“Hereby Dedicated to the (Public Agency) for Utility Purposes”.
   (B)   Easements.
      (1)   Access easements (private streets). Private streets shall not be
permitted, except that the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee may approve
the use of existing private streets or the creation of private streets on
parcels that satisfy §
151.187 provided the streets serve no more than three lots. If approved by the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee, private streets shall comply with the
standards and specifications contained in §
151.194(M). Since private streets will not be publicly maintained, means shall
be established through covenants, conditions, and restrictions, or an agreement
that involves all lots accessing the street, to provide for perpetual
maintenance by the property owners. Private streets shall be labeled on the
final plat as follows: “This Subdivision Contains Private Streets Which Will
Not Be Maintained by the County or Any Other Public Agency. Property Owners
Within the Subdivision Are Responsible for All Maintenance.”
      (2)   Utility easements. Easements shall be provided for any overhead or
underground utility service, including but not limited to sanitary sewer,
water, gas, telephone, and electric. Utility easements shall have a minimum
total width of 15 feet unless otherwise adjusted by the utility provider. Where
multiple utilities share the same easement, additional width sufficient to
avoid conflict shall be provided. Easements shall be established to provide
continuity of alignment throughout the area to be served and to adjoining
unsubdivided areas. Utility easements shall be coterminous with all private
street easements. Utility easements shall not be located within any portion of
a publicly dedicated street right-of-way.
      (3)   Drainage easements. All components of the Lake County Stormwater
Management System, including detention basins, compensatory storage areas and
buffers, shall be included in an easement ordesignated as open space. Drainage
easements shall not be located within any portion of a publicly dedicated
street right-of-way.
         (a)   Storm sewers. Drainage easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet
in total width. Additional easement width may be required depending on pipe
size and depth of cover.
         (b)   Overland flow paths. Drainage easements shall be a minimum of 20
feet in total width. For 100-year overflow paths, calculations shall be
submitted and the drainage easements shall be sized accordingly, but shall not
be less than 15 feet.
      (4)   Alterations to platted easements. Alterations to platted access,
utility and drainage easements shall be processed as minor subdivision
modifications in accordance with §
151.192.
   (C)   Reservations.
      (1)   Areas to be reserved. Whenever all or part of the land to be
subdivided is shown on any officially adopted state, county, or local plan for
a street, school, forest preserve, park, or other public use, upon receipt of
written notification by the agency claiming the reservation, the developer
shall dedicate or reserve the lands for that proposed use. The reservation
shall remain valid for a period of two years from the date the agency is
notified of the proposed subdivision, during which time it shall be made
available for sale to the public agency concerned. The Director shall notify
the developer and all applicable public agencies of the date that the
reservation shall expire. If the public agency has not acquired the reserved
site before the reservation expires, the developer may use it for any purpose
allowed by the regulations in effect at that time.
      (2)   Exemptions. The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall be
authorized to exempt a proposed development from the Reservation requirement of
this section, provided the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee has received
a written statement from the applicable public agency that acquisition of the
subject property is not scheduled, intended, or feasible within the two-year
period.
(Ord., § 10.6, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.191 SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Subdivision review and approval process. Subdivision applications
shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with
Table 151.191(A) below. Unless otherwise authorized in this chapter, each stage
of the process shall be completed prior to initiating a subsequent stage. For
lot splits or plat amendments that proceed directly to the final plat stage,
the Director shall be authorized to require the submittal of information
otherwise required for any subdivision stage and shall be authorized to impose
any additional requirements of this chapter to address potential negative
impacts of the subdivision.
Table 151.191(A): Development Type Staging and Approval Authorities
                        Applicable Development Stage       Approval Authority
Subdivision Public      Early      Preliminary Final Plat
Type        Information Assistance Plat and    and Final
            Meeting     Meeting    Preliminary Engineering Planning,
                                   Engineering             Building   Planning
                                                           and Zoning Director
Code        §          §         §          §          Committee
Section     151.191(B)  151.191(D) 151.191(E)  151.191(F)
Table 151.191(A): Development Type Staging and Approval Authorities
                        Applicable Development Stage       Approval Authority
Subdivision Public      Early      Preliminary Final Plat
Type        Information Assistance Plat and    and Final
            Meeting     Meeting    Preliminary Engineering Planning,
                                   Engineering             Building   Planning
                                                           and Zoning Director
Code        §          §         §          §          Committee
Section     151.191(B)  151.191(D) 151.191(E)  151.191(F)

Major       X           X          X           X           X
subdivision
Minor       X           X                      X           X
subdivision
Lot split                                      X                      X
Plat                                           X           X
amendment
 
   (B)   Public information meeting.
      (1)   Following the initial review of the Early Assistance Meeting
application by the Multi-Disciplinary Team, a Public Informational Meeting that
includes a neighbor notice in accordance with §
151.045(G)(2)(a) shall be held for all minor and major subdivisions, subject to
the following.
         (a)   The Director shall be authorized to conduct the Public
Informational Meeting for minor subdivisions provided that, within 15 calendar
days of receipt of the neighbor notice of such meeting, no duly notified
property owner files a written request for the Public informational Meeting to
be held before the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
         (b)   The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall hold Public
Informational Meetings for all major subdivisions, or for those minor
subdivisions, lot splits or plat amendment applications referred to them by the
Director.
      (2)   In instances where the Multi-Disciplinary Team believes development
issues are substantive enough to potentially change the subdivision design, the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee may choose to delay the information
meeting until the issues are resolved to its satisfaction.
      (3)   A public information meeting shall not be required when a
subdivision is part of a conditional use permit application for a planned unit
development.
   (C)   Concurrent processing of zoning map amendments and subdivision
applications. Unless a subdivision is part of a planned unit development
application, an application for a preliminary plat shall not be accepted until
the necessary zoning approvals are obtained. Applicants shall be authorized to
file an application for a preapplication conference while a zoning map
amendment is pending.
   (D)   Early Assistance meeting. A preapplication conference is intended to
familiarize the applicant with applicable procedures, submittal requirements,
development standards, and other pertinent matters before finalizing the
development proposal or otherwise spending large sums of money in laying out
the proposed subdivision. An Early Assistance meeting may be required for a lot
split or a plat amendment, if in the opinion of the Director the application
involves unique circumstances that warrant review by the Multi-Disciplinary
Team prior to proceeding to the final plat stage.
      (1)   Application filing. Early Assistance meeting applications shall be
submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms
available from that Department. The application shall be accepted only after a
check-in meeting.
      (2)   Distribution of application; scheduling of Multi-Disciplinary Team
meeting. Upon the completion of a check-in meeting with the Planning, Building
and Development Department and receipt of a complete application, the Director
shall distribute copies of the application to Multi-Disciplinary Team members
and other affected reviewing agencies.
      (3)   Review of application. Within ten days of the receipt of a complete
preapplication conference application, Multi-Disciplinary Team members shall
review the application and provide written comments to the Director. The
Director shall compile all comments received by the end of the review period
and shall make the comments available to the applicant and his or her
designated representative prior to the date of the Early Assistance meeting.
      (4)   Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting. Multi-Disciplinary Team comments
on the Early Assistance meeting application shall be discussed with the
applicant at the scheduled Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting. Following the
meeting, the Director shall provide a written report to the applicant
containing the written comments of the Multi-Disciplinary Team and instructions
for proceeding with the subdivision process.
      (5)   Time limits. Comments furnished to an applicant at an Early
Assistance meeting shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of
the preapplication conference. Within this period, the applicant shall file an
application for a preliminary plat, or in instances when a preliminary plat is
not required, an application for a final plat shall be filed with the Director.
If more than 12 months have elapsed, the applicant shall be required to
reinitiate the Early Assistance meeting. Upon receipt of a written request, the
Multi-Disciplinary Team may grant a time extension and may impose conditions as
necessary. In no instance shall an extension be granted for more than 12 months
following the date of the preapplication conference.
   (E)   Preliminary plat. During the preliminary plat stage of the subdivision
process, the general layout and design of the proposed subdivision is evaluated
for compliance with all applicable regulations of this chapter. Preliminary
plat review also allows an analysis of natural resource and other physical
constraints affecting the subject property.
      (1)   Preliminary plat review process.
         (a)   Application filing. Preliminary plat applications shall be
submitted to the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms
available from that Department. The application shall be accepted only after a
check-in meeting.
         (b)   Distribution of application; scheduling of Multi-Disciplinary
Team meeting. Upon receipt of a complete preliminary plat application, the
Director shall distribute copies of application to Multi-Disciplinary Team
members and other affected reviewing agencies and place the preliminary plat on
the agenda. The Director shall notify all preliminary plat reviewers and the
applicant of the date, time, and place of the scheduled Early Assistance
meeting.
         (c)   Review of application. Within 15 days of the receipt of a
complete preliminary plat application, Multi-Disciplinary Team members and
others to whom the application has been distributed shall review the
preliminary plat application and provide written comments to the Director. The
Director shall compile all comments received and make the comments available to
the applicant and his or her designated representative prior to the date of the
Early Assistance meeting.
         (d)   Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting. Multi-Disciplinary Team
comments on the preliminary plat application shall be discussed with the
applicant at the scheduled Early Assistance meeting. Following the Early
Assistance meeting, the Director shall provide a written report to the
applicant containing the written comments of the Multi-Disciplinary Team and
instructions for proceeding with the subdivision process.
         (e)   Resubmittals. In instances when plans are not approved and a
resubmittal is required, the applicant shall prepare the necessary plans and
reports using previous Multi-Disciplinary Team comments as a guide, and shall
contact the Director for a check-in meeting. At the check-in meeting, the
applicant shall include a copy of the plans and reports to be resubmitted and a
cover letter explaining how all comments have been addressed. Plans shall not
be accepted unless a check-in meeting has been conducted or approval has been
given by the Director to submit plans. The review procedure for resubmitted
plans shall be conducted in accordance with initial submittal of the original
preliminary plat application (see subsections (E)(1)(a) through (E)(1)(e)) of
this section. The Early Assistance meeting may be waived if the Committee finds
that the nature of the outstanding comments and concerns does not warrant
another meeting.
      (2)   Information meeting.
         (a)   Notice of Planning, Building and Zoning Committee information
meeting.  Neighbor notice of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee’s
information meeting on a preliminary plat shall be provided in accordance with
§
151.045(G).
         (b)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee information meeting.
When the Director has determined that the preliminary plat application is ready
for an information meeting before the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee,
the preliminary plat application shall be placed on the agenda for the purpose
of providing information and receiving public input on the application. The
Multi-Disciplinary Team may present its recommendation on the preliminary plat
at the information meeting, in which case the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee may take action on the preliminary plat at that time.
      (3)   Multi-Disciplinary Team Recommendation.
         (a)   Possible actions. After completing all required reviews and
receiving all departmental/agency comments, the Multi-Disciplinary Team shall
consider the preliminary plat application in light of the approval criteria of
this section and shall take one of the following actions:
            1.   Recommend that the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
approve the preliminary plat;
            2.   Recommend that the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
approve the preliminary plat subject to the applicant addressing all
outstanding Multi-Disciplinary Team and Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
comments, if any, during final plat review; or
            3.   Recommend that Planning, Building and Zoning Committee deny
the preliminary plat application.
         (b)   Approval criteria. In taking action on a preliminary plat
application, the Multi-Disciplinary Team and the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee shall determine that the design of the subdivision and its components
can comply with all county and state regulations.
      (4)   Scheduling of Planning, Building and Zoning Committee meeting.
         (a)   Time limits and extensions. The preliminary plat application
shall be approved by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee no less than
12 months following acceptance of the application by the Director (see §
151.193(A)(2)(a)). If more than 12 months have elapsed, the applicant shall be
required to reinitiate the subdivision process by submitting another
application for an Early Assistance meeting and shall pay the required
application fees unless a time extension is granted by the Multi-Disciplinary
Team. Upon receipt of a written request, the Multi-Disciplinary Team may grant
a time extension and may impose conditions as necessary. In no instance shall
an extension be granted for more than 12 months.
         (b)   Request for action. Once the Multi-Disciplinary Team has issued
a recommendation to approve a preliminary plat application or the applicant has
informed the Director that they are prepared to proceed with a recommendation
of denial, the Director shall place the subdivision on the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled Planning, Building and Zoning Committee meeting and notify
the applicant of the date, time, and place of the meeting.
      (5)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee review and action. The
Director shall present the proposed preliminary plat to the Planning, Building
and Zoning Committee. After considering the matter, the Committee shall act to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed preliminary plat.
         (a)   Effect of action.
            1.   Approval or approval with conditions. Approval or conditional
approval of a preliminary plat constitutes acceptance of the overall general
planning concepts for the subdivision and is a prerequisite for the filing of a
final plat. An approval or conditional approval indicates that the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee considers the preliminary plat to be in
compliance with subsection (E)(3)(b) above, and when applicable, what
conditions need to be met by the applicant prior to action on the final plat by
the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. Approval or conditional approval
confers upon an applicant a right to have the final plat for the subject
subdivision reviewed in accordance with standards of this chapter that are no
more restrictive than those in effect on the date of preliminary plat approval.
Preliminary plat approval or conditional approval does not, however, guarantee
the number of dwelling units allowed; lot configuration; the extent of open
space and natural resource protection areas required; the amount of floor area
or impervious surface allowed; the adequacy of proposed stormwater management
facilities, sewage disposal facilities, and water supply systems; or the
location or configuration of vehicle access points. Neither does preliminary
plat approval or conditional approval limit nor restrict the rights and powers
of any other local, state, or federal agency to impose additional or more
restrictive standards that may affect the layout and design of the proposed
subdivision.
            2.   Denial. If the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee denies
or fails to approve a preliminary plat, the applicant may:
               a.   Amend the preliminary plat application or obtain the
additional information and documentation requested by the Planning, Building
and Zoning Committee and resubmit the subdivision for further review, provided
the resubmittal is within the time limit established in subsection (E)(4)(a);
or
               b.   Appeal the decision of the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee in accordance with §
151.192.
         (b)   Notification of Planning, Building and Zoning Committee action.
            1.   Approval or approval with conditions.  If the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee approves or conditionally approves the
preliminary plat application, the Director shall provide the applicant with
written notification within five days of the date of the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee’s decision. The notification shall include:
               a.   A statement indicating the effect of preliminary plat
approval;
               b.   The date of Unified Development Ordinance regulations to
which the subdivision will be subject throughout the remainder of the
subdivision process;
               c.   The date on which preliminary plat approval and all rights
arising from or created by the approval shall expire; and
               d.   Any conditions of preliminary plat approval established by
the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
            2.   Denial of preliminary plat. If the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee denies the preliminary plat application, the Director shall
provide the applicant with written notification within five days of the date of
the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee’s decision. The notification shall
include:
               a.   A statement indicating the effect of preliminary plat
denial;
               b.   The reasons for the denial, as stated by the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee; and
               c.   Directions for continuing the subdivision process.
      (6)   Lapse of approval. An approved preliminary plat shall lapse and be
of no further effect if a final plat for the subject subdivision is not
approved by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee within 24 months of the
date of preliminary plat approval by the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee. If final plat approval is not received within this 24-month period,
the applicant shall be required to reinitiate the subdivision process at the
preapplication conference stage. If the applicant does not receive final plat
approval within the required 24-month period, the applicant may file an
extension request with the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. The request
must be received by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee before the
expiration date of the approved preliminary plat. The extension request shall
state reasons for the delay and the proposed length of the extension requested.
In reviewing the time extension request, the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee shall consider the circumstances behind the extension request and the
status of current regulations. There shall be no limit on the number of
extensions that may be granted (for good cause shown) by the Planning, Building
and Zoning Committee, provided that the total cumulative effect of all
extensions granted shall not extend the life of a preliminary plat by more than
12 months. (See also phased subdivision provisions of §
151.188.)
   (F)   Final plat. The final plat stage of the subdivision process requires
review and approval of final engineering plans and final plat documents, which
may be processed concurrently or separately, at the option of the applicant.
      (1)   Purpose.
         (a)   Final plat. Final plat documents are reviewed for the purpose of
ensuring that the final plat, together with the other documents that will be
recorded to legally create the proposed subdivision, are in full compliance
with the state statutory requirements and all and applicable county
regulations.
         (b)   Final engineering plans and engineering reports. The final
engineering plans and engineering reports are reviewed for the purpose of
ensuring that the layout, design, and engineering of a proposed subdivision
comply with all applicable standards of this chapter. The approved final
engineering plans represents an approved set of construction documents for the
proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Review process.
         (a)   Application filing. Final plat and final engineering
applications shall be submitted to the Planning, Building and Development
Department on forms available from that Department. The application shall be
submitted in person to the Director. A check-in of all documents required in
the final plat stage shall occur separately or at one time. If submitted
separately, a check-in of the final engineering plans and reports shall occur
first followed by a check-in of final plat, covenants, conditions and
restrictions, and agreements.
         (b)   Distribution and review of application. Upon receipt of a
complete final plat and/or final engineering application, the Director shall
distribute copies of the application to Multi-Disciplinary Team members and
other affected reviewing agencies and place the application on the agenda of
the Multi-Disciplinary Team following the review period. The Director shall
notify the Multi-Disciplinary Team and the applicant of the date, time, and
place of the scheduled Early Assistance meeting.
         (c)   Review of application. Within 15 days of the receipt of a
complete final plat application, Multi-Disciplinary Team member agencies shall
review the application and provide written comments to the Director. The
Director shall compile all comments received by the end of the review period
and make the comments available to the applicant and his or her consultant(s)
prior to the date of the Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting where the application
will be discussed.
         (d)   Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting. Multi-Disciplinary Team
comments on the application shall be discussed with the applicant at the
scheduled Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting. Following the Multi-Disciplinary
Team meeting, the Director shall provide a written report to the applicant
containing the written comments of the Multi-Disciplinary Team and instructions
for proceeding with the review process.
         (e)   Multi-Disciplinary Team recommendation. At the conclusion of the
Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting at which the final plat and/or the final
engineering plans and engineering reports are considered, the Multi-
Disciplinary Team shall act in accordance with the following:
            1.   Recommend approval. If the Multi-Disciplinary Team finds that
the final engineering plans and engineering reports demonstrate that the
layout, design, and engineering of the proposed subdivision and the final plat,
and associated documents are in full compliance with all applicable regulations
of this chapter, the Multi-Disciplinary Team shall act to approve the final
plat and/or the final engineering plans and engineering reports for the
proposed subdivision.
            2.   Recommend denial. If the Multi-Disciplinary Team finds that
the final plat and/or the final engineering plans or engineering report do not
demonstrate that the layout, design, and engineering as well as all associated
documents for the proposed subdivision are in full compliance with all
applicable regulations of this chapter, the Multi-Disciplinary Team shall
detail for the applicant the reasons for this determination and describe the
type of additional information that may be necessary to demonstrate compliance.
The Multi-Disciplinary Team also shall direct the applicant on the procedure
for continuing with the review, and shall decide, based on the nature of the
outstanding comments and concerns, whether or not the applicant shall be
required to return for another Early Assistance Meeting.
         (f)   Resubmittals. In instances when plans are not approved and a
resubmittal is required, the applicant shall prepare the necessary plans and
reports using previous Multi-Disciplinary Team comments as a guide, and shall
contact the Director for a check-in meeting. At the check-in meeting, the
applicant shall include a copy of the plans and reports to be resubmitted and a
cover letter explaining how all comments have been addressed. Plans shall not
be accepted unless a check-in meeting has been conducted or approval has been
given by the Director to submit plans. The review procedure for resubmitted
plans shall be conducted in accordance with initial submittal of the original
application. (See subsections (F)(2)(a) through (F)(2)(e).) The Early
Assistance Meeting may be waived if the Committee finds that the nature of the
outstanding comments and concerns does not warrant another meeting.
      (3)   Notification of Early Assistance Meeting Action. Within five days
of the Multi-Disciplinary Team’s decision on a final plat and/or final
engineering plan, and engineering reports, the Director shall provide the
applicant with written notification of the Multi-Disciplinary Team’s decision.
This notification shall include the following information:
         (a)   Approval.
            1.   A statement indicating the effect of approval;
            2.   The date on which preliminary plat approval had been given, if
required, and all rights arising from, or created by, and when the approval
will lapse (see subsection (E)(6) above);
            3.   Directions for continuing the plat approval process;
            4.   Directions for commencing construction activities in
accordance with §
151.202; and
            5.   If the Multi-Disciplinary Team recommends approval, the
recommendation shall be accompanied by instructions informing the applicant how
to prepare the final plat, covenants, conditions and restrictions, agreements
and subdivision assurances for action before the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee, or Director, when applicable.
         (b)   Denial. If the Multi-Disciplinary Team recommends denial, the
recommendation shall be accompanied by instructions for continuing the review
process.
      (4)   Submittal of final plat, covenants, restrictions, agreements and
assurances. The applicant shall submit for review by the Director, the signed
original final plat; the executed covenants and restrictions, if any; all
executed agreements, if any; and the executed performance assurances, if any.
      (5)   Permits required. The following permits may be required as part of
final engineering and/or final plat approval. These permits shall be secured
prior to the county approving the final engineering plans and/or final plat.
         (a)   Site development permit. A site development permit shall be
obtained from the Planning, Building and Development Department before
beginning any construction or earth moving activity in connection with the
proposed subdivision. The applicant may apply for this permit after Multi-
Disciplinary Team approval of the final engineering plan and engineering
reports. Before beginning construction, a preconstruction conference shall be
held and restoration assurance shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.203 before issuance of a site development permit.
         (b)   Access permit. If access to the proposed subdivision is obtained
from a county highway, an access permit shall be obtained from the Lake County
Division of Transportation, in accordance with the Lake County Highway Access
Regulation Ordinance (see
Chapter 91). The final engineering plans and engineering reports shall not be
approved until an access permit, if required, has been obtained. If access to
the proposed subdivision is obtained from a township road or state highway, an
access permit shall be obtained from the appropriate township or state highway
authority.
         (c)   Facility permit. If the proposed subdivision is adjacent to a
county highway, with or without proposed access to this highway, and work is
required to be performed within the right-of-way of the county highway, a
facility permit shall be obtained from the Lake County Division of
Transportation, in accordance with the Lake County Highway Utility and Facility
Placement Ordinance (see
Chapter 92). The final engineering plans and engineering reports shall not be
approved until the facility permit, if required, has been obtained. If access
to the proposed subdivision is obtained from a state highway or township road,
a facility permit shall be obtained from the appropriate township or state
highway authority.
         (d)   Other required permits. Applicants shall be responsible for
ensuring that other local, county, state, and federal permit requirements have
been met.
         (e)   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and Army Corps of
Engineers permits. Before beginning any site development activity, permits
shall be obtained from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers for sanitary sewer or water improvements, if
applicable. A U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) permit shall be required for
any work within a USACE wetland. An National Pollutant Discharge System permit
may be required from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      (6)   Scheduling of Planning, Building and Zoning Committee meeting. When
this chapter requires the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee to act on a
final plat, upon the Multi-Disciplinary Team finding that the final plat Mylar
and any covenants, restrictions, agreements, and assurances are in the proper
form, the Director shall prepare a report and recommendation for presentation
to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. The Director also shall place
the subdivision on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee meeting and shall notify the applicant of the
date, time, and place of the meeting.
      (7)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee or Director review and
action. The final plat shall be presented to the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee or the Director for action in accordance with
Table 151.191(A). After considering the matter, the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee or Director shall act to approve or deny the proposed final
plat. No final plat shall be approved unless it is found to be in full
compliance with all applicable regulations of this chapter.
         (a)   Effect of Planning, Building and Zoning Committee or Director
action.
            1.   Approval. Upon Planning, Building and Zoning Committee or
Director approving the final plat, the final plat, together with the other
documents required by this chapter to be recorded with the plat, shall remain
in the custody of the Director unless other arrangements are authorized by the
Committee or Director. Within five days following approval, the applicant shall
have the sole responsibility for recording the final plat and associated
documents with the Lake County Recorder and for paying all costs associated
with the recording of the documents. Upon recording, the final plat Mylar shall
be returned to the applicant or surveyor of record for the subdivision. The
official record of the final plat and associated documents shall be kept in the
custody of the county.
            2.   Denial. If the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee or
Director denies a final plat, the applicant may:
               a.   Amend the final plat or obtain the additional information
and documentation requested by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee or
Director and resubmit the subdivision for further review in accordance with
subsection (F)(2); or
               b.   Appeal the decision of the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee or Director in accordance with the standards of §
151.192.
         (b)   Notification of Planning, Building and Zoning Committee or
Director action.
            1.   Approval of final plat. If the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee or Director act to approve the final plat, the Director shall provide
written notification to the applicant including the following information:
               a.   The name, document number, and recording date of the final
plat and each associated document recorded together with the plat;
               b.   The amount and date of expiration of the performance
assurance, if any;
               c.   Directions for com-mencing construction activities, if
construction has not already commenced, in accordance with §
151.202; and
               d.   Any conditions associated with approval of the final plat.
            2.   Recording of final plat. Following recording of the final
plat, the Planning, Building and Development Director also shall distribute an
appropriate number copies of the recorded final plat to each member of the
Multi-Disciplinary Team.
            3.   Denial of final plat. If the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee or Director act to deny the final plat, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall provide written notification to the applicant
including the following information:
               a.   A statement indicating final plat denial;
               b.   The reasons for disapproval as stated by the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee or Director;
               c.   Directions for resubmitting the final plat for further
review; and
               d.   Directions for appealing the decision.
      (8)   Lapse of approvals.
         (a)   Lapse of final engineering plan and engineering report. If the
preliminary plat approval lapses (see subsection (E)(6)), or if a preliminary
plat is not required and the developer fails to obtain final plat approval
within 24 months of application for a final plat, Multi-Disciplinary Team
approval of the final engineering plans and engineering reports shall also
lapse and be of no effect.
         (b)   Lapse of final plat approval. Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee or Director approval of the final plat shall expire if the final plat
and associated documents are not recorded with the Lake County Recorder within
five days following approval unless other arrangements are authorized.
(Ord., § 10.7, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.192 MODIFICATIONS AND APPEALS.
   Modifications or appeals of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
considered in accordance with the following standards.
   (A)   Classification of modifications.
      (1)   Minor modification. All modifications of this subchapter where the
decision-making authority lies with the Director, the County Engineer, or the
Multi-Disciplinary Team shall be classified and processed as a “minor
subdivision modification”.
      (2)   Major modification. All modifications other than those listed in
subsection (A)(1) above shall be classified and processed as “major subdivision
modifications”. The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall be authorized
to approve major subdivision modifications.
   (B)   Minor modification procedures.
      (1)   Application filing. Minor modification requests shall be submitted
to the Director and shall include: a request from the applicant for subdivision
approval, listing the section(s) of this chapter to be modified; the reasons
why the modification(s) is/are necessary; and any support information deemed
necessary by the applicant to assist the Director, the County Engineer or the
Multi-Disciplinary Team in making a decision concerning the requested
modification(s).
      (2)   Action on minor modifications. Upon receipt of a request for a
minor modification, the Director shall distribute copies to the County Engineer
or Multi-Disciplinary Team, as applicable, for their consideration. Following a
review period of not more than five days, the County Engineer or the Multi-
Disciplinary Team shall provide a recommendation to the Director. The minor
modification may be granted only when it is determined that the requested minor
modification will facilitate the review process, will in no way compromise the
intent of this chapter, or affect the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public. Any action on a minor modification may include reasonable conditions
deemed necessary to meet the intent of this chapter.
      (3)   Deferral of action. The Director, County Engineer, or the Multi-
Disciplinary Team may defer a decision on a minor modification request at any
time when they believe the request may not be authorized under this subchapter,
or when in their opinion, the request contains interrelated impacts that should
be assessed by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. In these instances,
the applicant shall be notified by the Director of the time, place, and reasons
for the deferred action so he or she may attend the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee meeting to present testimony relevant to his or her request.
      (4)   Notification.
         (a)   Report to Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. Upon
approving a minor modification, the Director, County Engineer, or the Multi-
Disciplinary Team shall provide a report to the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee. This report shall describe the request, standard(s) being modified,
and the basis for the decision.
         (b)   Notice to applicant. The Director shall provide a written
notification of the decision to the applicant as follows:
            1.   If the modification is approved, the notification shall list
all conditions of approval; and
            2.   If the modification is denied, the notification shall list all
reasons for denial and notify the applicant of his or her right to appeal the
decision in accordance with this section.
   (C)   Major modification procedure.
      (1)   Application filing. Major modification requests shall be submitted
to the Director and shall include: a request from the applicant describing the
specific provision of this subchapter to be modified; the reasons and
justifications for the requested modification, in light of the approval
criteria of this section; and any plans, reports, or other support information
that the applicant deems necessary for the county to evaluate the request.
      (2)   Multi-Disciplinary Team Recom-mendation. Upon receipt of a request
for a major modification, the Director shall distribute copies to the Multi-
Disciplinary Team. The Multi-Disciplinary Team shall have ten days to review
the request and submit a recommendation to the Director. The Multi-Disciplinary
Team’s recommendation shall state the reasons for the recommendation and any
suggested conditions of approval. Upon receipt of the Multi-Disciplinary Team’s
recommendation, the Director shall prepare a report and recommendation for
presentation to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee and schedule the
application for consideration on the next regular agenda of the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee. The Director shall also notify the developer of
the time and place of the meeting so he or she can present his or her arguments
and all related information to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
prior to the Committee acting on the request.
      (3)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee action; approval criteria.
The Director shall present the major modification request to the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee. The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the modification, based
on the following factors:
         (a)   The granting of the major modification shall not be detrimental
to the public safety, health, or welfare, or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
         (b)   Unique conditions exist with the property to be developed that
require the modification, and that these conditions are not self-created, and
that the applicant had no knowledge of the impact of the regulations on the
development of the property at the time of the property’s purchase;
         (c)   The major modification is the least deviation from this chapter
that will mitigate the hardship or practical difficulty that exists on the
subject property;
         (d)   Absent the requested modification, the applicant will be
deprived of the ability to develop the property to the full extent otherwise
allowed for in this chapter;
         (e)   The modification shall not in any manner vary any other
provisions of this chapter; and
         (f)   The standard sought to be modified serves no public or private
interest.
      (4)   Notification. Following the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee’s action, the Director shall provide written notification to the
applicant as follows:
         (a)   If the modification is approved, the modification shall list any
and all conditions of approval.
         (b)   If the modification is denied, the notification shall list all
reasons for denial and notify the applicant of his or her right to appeal the
decision of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee in accordance with this
section.
   (D)   Appeals of decisions. Developers aggrieved by decisions of the
Director, the County Engineer, the Multi-Disciplinary Team, or the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee, may appeal that decision in accordance with the
procedures of this subsection (D).
      (1)   Appeals of Director, County Engineer, or Multi-Disciplinary Team
actions. 
         (a)   Appeals of actions or decisions of the Director, the County
Engineer, or the Multi-Disciplinary Team may be taken by filing an appeal with
the Director within 20 days of the action or decision.
         (b)   Upon receipt of an appeal, the Director shall place the matter
on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee meeting and shall notify the appellant of the date, time, and place
of the meeting.
         (c)   The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall act to uphold
or overturn the action or decision.
         (d)   Within five days following the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee meeting, the Director shall provide the appellant with written notice
of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee’s action.
      (2)   Appeals of Planning, Building and Zoning Committee actions.
         (a)   Appeals of actions or decisions of the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee may be taken by filing an appeal with the Director within 20
days of the action or decision. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Director shall
notify the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee of the appeal. The Director
shall place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled County
Board meeting. The Director shall notify the appellant of the date, time, and
place of the County Board meeting.
         (b)   The County Board shall act to uphold or overturn the action or
decision of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. A two-thirds vote of
the entire membership of the County Board shall be required to overturn the
decision or action of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. The action
of the County Board shall be final and binding on all parties. Within five days
following the County Board meeting, the Director shall provide the appellant
with written notice of the County Board’s action.
(Ord., § 10.8, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.193 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND DOCUMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Submission requirements.
         (a)   All applications shall be prepared in accordance with
Table 151.193(A).
         (b)   Plat/plan documents shall be prepared using the general
application requirements of this section and the detailed information specified
for each document type.
         (c)   No applications, plans, or reports will be accepted unless the
Director determines that documents submitted comply with the application
requirements of this section.
Table 151.193(A): Application Standards for Subdivisions and Related
Applications
                Development Stages 2
                Preapplication   Preliminary Plat  Final Plat Stage
Development     Stage            Stage
Type            Early Assistance Preliminary Plat
                Meeting          and Preliminary   Final Engineering Final Plat
                                 Engineering
                                 Plat - §         Engineering - §
Code Section(s) §               151.193(C)        151.193(E)        Plat - §
                151.193(B)       Engineering - §                    151.193(D)
                                 151.193(E)
Table 151.193(A): Application Standards for Subdivisions and Related
Applications
                Development Stages 2
                Preapplication   Preliminary Plat  Final Plat Stage
Development     Stage            Stage
Type            Early Assistance Preliminary Plat
                Meeting          and Preliminary   Final Engineering Final Plat
                                 Engineering
                                 Plat - §         Engineering - §
Code Section(s) §               151.193(C)        151.193(E)        Plat - §
                151.193(B)       Engineering - §                    151.193(D)
                                 151.193(E)
Minor           X                                  X                 X
subdivision
Major           X                X                 X                 X
subdivision
Lot split                                          X                 X
Plat amendment                                                       X
Road extension                                     X
1
Planned unit    X                X                 X                 X
development
Footnotes:
1   See §
151.194 for street engineering and design standards.
2   Specific document types required at any stage may be modified by the Multi-
Disciplinary Team (MDT) depending on the complexity and/or level of detail
required to conduct a thorough review of the subdivision application.
 
      (2)   General application requirements. Unless otherwise modified by the
Multi-Disciplinary Team, the following standards shall be met for all
applications and documents submitted for review.
         (a)   Application. An application for development review shall be
submitted to the Director in accordance with §
151.045 on forms available from the Director. Unless otherwise waived by the
Director, separate applications shall be submitted at the preapplication
conference, preliminary plat, and final plat stages. No application shall be
accepted unless all plans and documents required by this subchapter have been
submitted and fees have been paid.
         (b)   Document standards.
            1.   Size and scale.
               a.   The plat/plan review documents shall be prepared on a sheet
size of not greater than 24 inches by 36 inches and at a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet or at one inch equals 100 feet if necessary to portray the
proposed development on a single sheet. All plan sheets shall be numbered
consecutively and bound into a package. All reports shall be bound and indexed;
               b.   A graphic scale and a north arrow shall be provided;
               c.   Linear dimensions shall be given in feet and decimals of a
foot; and
               d.   Area dimensions shall be given in acres or square feet.
            2.   Plan sheet details.
               a.   Each sheet shall have a title block that shall identify the
name of the subdivision/development;
               b.   The title of the sheet;
               c.   The sheet number and the name, address, and telephone
number of the developer;
               d.   The name, address, and telephone number of the preparer;
and
               e.   The date of original design along with all subsequent
revision dates indicated in the revision block.
         (c)   Boundary survey. A complete boundary survey containing a legal
description of the property to be included in the subdivision shall be
provided. For Early Assistance Meeting applications, if a boundary survey is
not available, a tax map identifying the subject property may be submitted.
         (d)   Document retention. Upon approval of the final engineering plans
and final as-built plans for a subdivision, digital copies of the approved
plans in electronic format in TIF or PDF format shall be submitted to the
Director for archival purposes.
   (B)   Early Assistance meeting applications.
      (1)   Application. The application shall be submitted in accordance with
subsection (A)(2).
      (2)   Site capacity calculations and preliminary natural resource
inventory. When required by §
151.070(A), site capacity calculations and a natural resource inventory map and
analysis showing the location, limits, and area of all natural resources, as
defined in §
151.071, shall be provided for the property to be developed.
      (3)   Concept plan. The developer shall provide a concept plan which
includes the following information:
         (a)   Proposed subdivision layout showing the design of the streets,
lots, stormwater detention areas, parks, and other open space areas;
         (b)   The proposed means of access to adjacent roads;
         (c)   Surrounding land uses;
         (d)   A preliminary map and analysis of natural resources present on
the subject property, including those natural resources that overlap on
adjacent properties; and
         (e)   When services are available, the location of all connection
points for sanitary sewer and public water supply should be shown.
   (C)   Preliminary plat applications.
      (1)   Application. The application shall be submitted in accordance with
subsection (A)(2).
      (2)   Required documents. The preliminary plat application submission
shall include the following documents:
         (a)   Preliminary plat;
         (b)   Site capacity calculations and preliminary natural resource
plan; and
         (c)   Preliminary engineering plans and all applicable reports.
      (3)   Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   The marketing title and type of subdivision (e.g., conventional,
conservation, planned development, commercial, mixed-use);
         (b)   A sketch of a typical lot for each proposed use type indicating
the minimum lot standards for each use as specified by the underlying zoning
district (e.g., lot area, lot width at the street yard setback line, side and
rear yard setbacks);
         (c)   A table identifying the following lot characteristics, by lot
number:
            1.   Number of lots and/or dwelling units (residential uses);
            2.   Floor area (nonresidential uses);
            3.   Impervious surface (nonresidential uses); and
            4.   Use mixture (e.g., multiplex, commercial, open space) and the
amount of land area devoted to each use type.
         (d)   Proposed platted improvements. The location of all of the
following proposed platted improvements shall be shown:
            1.   Lots and outlots. All lots and outlots shall be designed in
accordance with §
151.189. Lots shall be numbered consecutively. Outlots shall have their purpose
designated on the plat and labeled with numbers or letters.
            2.   Rights-of-way. The layout and design of all proposed public
and private road rights-of-way. Right-of-way widths and cul-de-sac radii shall
be labeled. Proposed road names shall appear on the plat.
            3.   Open space areas. All proposed open space areas shall be
identified by type (e.g., natural resource protection, recreation, stormwater
detention) and ownership (e.g., common, deed-restricted).
            4.   Reservations and dedications. All areas of land to be reserved
or dedicated as required in §
151.189 shall be represented on the preliminary plat.
         (e)   Phase limits (also see §
151.188). Whenever a subdivision will be developed in phases, the phase limits
shall be shown in accordance with the following:
            1.   If the developer has no immediate development plans for a
portion of the land to be subdivided, those portions for which there are no
immediate development plans shall be labeled “Not Included” on the preliminary
plat; or
            2.   If the developer has development plans for the entire
subdivision, but desires to plat the subdivision in phases, the limits of each
phase, if known, shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
      (4)   Site capacity and natural resource plan. 
            (a)   When required, preliminary site capacity calculations
prepared in accordance with the requirements of §
151.070 shall be provided.
            (b)   A preliminary natural resource plan shall be provided in
accordance with subsection (E)(4)(g) of this section.
      (5)   Preliminary engineering plans and reports. Preliminary engineering
plans and engineering reports shall be prepared in accordance with subsection
(E)(3).
   (D)   Final plat applications.
      (1)   Required documents. The following information and documentation
shall be required for the final plat review.
         (a)   Application;
         (b)   Final plat;
         (c)   Covenants, conditions, and restrictions, if necessary;
         (d)   Agreements, if necessary; and
         (e)   Final engineering plans and reports, if necessary.
      (2)   Application. The application shall be submitted in accordance with
subsection (B).
      (3)   Final plat. The final plat shall be prepared by a state registered
land surveyor in accordance with the document preparation standards of §
151.193(A)(2) of this chapter and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Title information. Identify the title of the subdivision and the
type of subdivision (e.g. conventional detached single family residential). The
name, address, and telephone number of the developer; the name, address, and
telephone number of the surveyor; and the date of the original design along
with all subsequent revision dates (if any);
         (b)   Property description. Provide a legal description of the
property to be subdivided;
         (c)   Proposed platted improvements.
            1.   Lots and outlots. All lots and outlots shall be designed in
accordance with §
151.189 of this chapter. Lots shall contain dimensions and shall be numbered
consecutively. Outlots shall have their purpose designated on the plat and
labeled with numbers or letters.
            2.   Rights-of-way. The layout and design of all proposed public
and private road rights-of-way; right-of-way widths and cul-de-sac radii;
proposed road names.
            3.   Easements. The size and type of proposed utility, drainage,
detention, access, and other easements.
            4.   Open space areas. Open space areas shall be identified by type
(e.g., natural resource protection, recreation) and ownership (e.g., common,
deed-restricted) as required by this chapter.
            5.   Reservations and dedications. All areas of land to be reserved
or dedicated as required in §
151.190 shall be represented on the final plat.
            6.   Reference notes. A reference note section that references the
name and document number assigned by the Lake County Recorder of all agreements
and covenants and restrictions, if any, affecting the proposed subdivision
shall be provided.
            7.   Certificates and approvals. All applicable certificates
prepared in accordance with
Appendix E of this chapter.
            8.   Easement provisions. When the subdivision contains easements
for public utilities, a statement granting use of the easements to all
applicable utility companies shall be placed on the final plat.
      (4)   Final engineering plans and reports. Final engineering plans and
engineering reports shall be submitted as required by
Table 151.193(E) below.
      (5)   Covenants and restrictions. A declaration of covenants and
restrictions shall be required for all subdivisions, except for those that do
not contain any stormwater management or other open space areas as required by
this chapter. The declaration of covenants and restrictions shall at a minimum,
contain the following information:
         (a)   Plat reference. Identify the final plat by its name and document
number assigned by the Lake County Recorder;
         (b)   Legal description. Include the legal description of the land to
be subdivided as shown on the final plat;
         (c)   Duration and benefit. State that the covenants and restrictions
shall run with the land and are for the benefit of all lot or unit owners in
the subdivision and the association. For subdivisions containing stormwater
detention facilities and open space required by this chapter, the covenants and
restrictions shall include the county as a beneficiary of these components of
the subdivision;
         (d)   Definitions. Define all applicable operative terms which may
include but are not limited to association, board, transition yard, common area
and/or common element (if condominium or townhouse development), common open
space, county, declaration, declarant(s) (shall be all owners of the property
to be subdivided), deed-restricted open space, lot, owner, unit and stormwater
management facilities;
         (e)   Formation of association. Provide for the formation of a
mandatory property owner’s association when a minimum of 80% of the lots in the
subdivision are sold, or prior to the release of the maintenance assurance by
the county, whichever comes first. The association shall be formed in
perpetuity and membership in the association by lot or unit owners shall be
compulsory;
         (f)   Ownership. Assign ownership of all stormwater management
facilities and other common open space areas to the association. Each lot or
unit owner shall own an undivided proportionate share of the stormwater
management facilities and other common open space areas in the subdivision.
Ownership of all deed-restricted open space, if any, shall be assigned to the
owners of the lots on which the deed-restricted open space is platted;
           (g)   Use restrictions. State that all stormwater management
facilities and other open space areas shall be used only for the purposes
intended by this chapter and shall not be used or developed for or with any
other use which would limit or cause to limit their use and function as
intended by this chapter. Specific open space use restrictions, as specified by
this chapter for each type of open space in the subdivision, also shall be
stated in the declarations;
         (h)   Maintenance responsibilities. State that all stormwater
management facilities, landscaping, and other common open space areas in the
subdivision shall be maintained in perpetuity by the association. Each lot or
unit owner shall bear proportionate responsibility for the maintenance of all
stormwater management facilities, landscaping, and other common open space
areas. Each lot or unit owner’s deed shall state that owner’s liability for
maintenance of the stormwater management facilities, landscaping, and other
common open space areas. State that all deed-restricted open space shall be
maintained by the owner of the lot on which the deed-restricted open space is
platted. The general maintenance provisions for stormwater management
facilities, landscaping and open space areas as required by this chapter as
well as the specific maintenance responsibilities as may be identified by the
subdivision’s design consultants, if any, also shall be stated in the
declarations;
         (i)   Assessment mechanism. Make provisions for the assessment and
collection of all funds necessary for the repair and maintenance of all
stormwater management facilities, landscaping, and other common open space
areas within the subdivision. The assessments, together with interest, costs,
and reasonable collection fees, shall be a charge on the land and shall be a
continuing lien upon the property against which each assessment, together with
interest, costs, and reasonable collection fees, also shall be made a personal
obligation of the lot or unit owner of the property at the time the assessment
fell due;
         (j)   Dedications and agreements. If any, reference dedications of
school and recreational land within the subdivision, and/or all agreements for
cash donations in lieu of dedication of school or recreational sites;
         (k)   Transfer of ownership. Make provisions for the transfer of
ownership in the stormwater management facilities and other common open space
areas from the declarant to the association;
         (l)   Transfer of maintenance responsibilities. State the declarant
shall be responsible for the maintenance of all stormwater management
facilities and other common open space areas, regardless of ownership, until
such time as 80% of the lots or units in the subdivision have been sold.
Further state that the declarant shall not transfer the maintenance
responsibilities in stormwater management facilities and other common open
space areas until all maintenance assurances held by the county for the
required improvements have been released by the county;
         (m)   Enforcement. The declarations shall include provisions for the
following enforcement mechanisms:
            1.   Enforcement of the declarations may be any proceeding at law
or in equity, either to restrain violation or to cover damages by the
association, any lot or unit owner, or the county, against any person violating
or attempting to violate any covenant or restriction;
            2.   Duly designated officials and employees of the county shall be
granted a perpetual easement to enter upon, on, or over all stormwater
management facilities and other open space areas in the subdivision to ensure
that the facilities and areas are being used properly and maintained in
accordance with this declaration and all applicable county ordinances;
            3.   The failure of the association to enforce the provisions of
this declaration with respect to the proper use and maintenance of any
stormwater management facility or any other open space area in the subdivision
shall operate to empower the county to act for and on behalf of the
association, subject to reasonable inspection notice and demand requirements,
and perform all maintenance or other operation necessary to ensure that all
stormwater management facilities and other open space areas function and may be
used as intended by this chapter; except that, in the event that the county
finds that the failure to enforce the provisions of this declaration has
created an immediate threat to public health, safety, and welfare, the county
shall not be required to give notice before causing the correction of the
problems arising from the failure of the association to enforce the provisions
of this declaration. Furthermore, the county shall be entitled to reimbursement
by the association for all reasonable costs incurred by the county in acting
for, and on behalf of, the association including placing liens on all
properties that are part of the association; and
            4.   The failure of the association, any lot or unit owner, or the
county to enforce any covenant or restriction shall in no event be deemed a
waiver of the right to do so thereafter.
         (n)   Phased subdivisions. If the subdivision is to be platted in
phases, the declaration shall contain provisions for the phased platting;
         (o)   Amendments. The declaration may contain provisions permitting
the addition, amendment, or termination of any covenant or restriction; shall
contain provisions that the addition, amendment, or termination of any covenant
or restriction shall not be permitted if the result would in any manner
diminish the function of the declaration with respect to the use and
maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other open space areas
required by this chapter in the subdivision unless otherwise approved by the
County Plat Officer;
         (p)   Severability. The declaration shall contain a severability
clause;
         (q)   Execution. The declaration shall include the notarized signature
of the declarant. The declaration shall not be executed until it has been
approved by the Multi-Disciplinary Team; and
         (r)   Agreements. The developer shall obtain all school and
recreational land agreements as required by §§
151.220 and
151.221, if any. Each agreement shall include a legal description of the land
to be subdivided and shall reference the final plat by name and document number
as assigned by the Lake County Recorder.
   (E)   Engineering improvement plans and details.
      (1)   Applicability. Engineering plans, reports and calculations shall be
required for all minor or major subdivisions and road extensions. The Multi-
Disciplinary Team shall determine the extent of engineering information
required for lot splits or plat amendments based on the subdivision’s impact on
existing roads, sanitary sewer and water main infrastructure, natural
resources, or drainage.
      (2)   Submission requirements.
         (a)   
Table 151.193(E) provides a detailed list of the documents required to be
submitted at the preliminary plat and final plat stages of the subdivision
process. Unless authorized by the Multi-Disciplinary Team, engineering plans
and reports shall be prepared in accordance with the application requirements
and document standards specified in this section.
         (b)   The Multi-Disciplinary Team shall be authorized to modify the
information to be submitted and the format in which it is submitted based on
the complexity of the subdivision to assure a thorough review of the
subdivision’s impact on natural resources, soils, stormwater, sanitary sewer
and water services, transportation, and access components.
Table 151.193(E): Engineering Submission Requirements
                     Code §                Preliminary   Final Engineering
Document Description 151.193(E), Subsection Engineering   Applicability
                                            Applicability
Engineering Reports and Calculations
Table 151.193(E): Engineering Submission Requirements
                                                           Code §    Preliminary   Final
Document Description                                       151.193    Engineering   Engineering
                                                           (E),       Applicability Applicability
                                                           Subsection
Engineering Reports and Calculations
   Stormwater management report                         (3)(a)1.a. X             X
   Base flood elevation report                          (3)(a)1.b. W/A           W/A
   Wetland report                                       (3)(a)1.c. W/A           W/A
   Stormwater maintenance report                        (3)(a)2.   W/A           W/A
   Sewer and water improvements report                  (3)(a)3.   W/A           W/A
   Site capacity calculations                           (3)(b)     X             X
Engineering Plan Sheets
   Cover/title page                                     (4)(a)     X             X
   Master plan                                          (4)(b)     W/A           W/A
   Existing conditions plan                             (4)(c)     X             X
   Grading and drainage plan                            (4)(d)     X             X
   Soil erosion and sediment control plan               (4)(e)                   X
   Field tile survey                                    (4)(f)     W/A           W/A
   Natural resource inventory and protection plan       (4)(g)     X             X
   Typical road cross-sections                          (4)(h)     X             X
   Infrastructure improvements plan                     (4)(i)     X             X
   Road cross-sections                                  (4)(j)                   X
   Construction details and standards                   (4)(k)                   X
   Pavement marking, sign location, and street lighting (4)(l)                   X
plan
   Landscape and recreational improvement plan          (4)(m)                   X
Cost Estimate and Schedule
   Cost estimates                                       (5)(a)                   X
   Construction schedule                                (5)(b)                   X
W/A - When applicable; consult with staff
 
      (3)   Engineering reports and calculations.
         (a)   Engineering reports. When required by this chapter, the
consulting engineer shall provide engineering reports for all preliminary plat
and final plat applications. The reports shall be bound into a document which
includes information related to roadways, access, stormwater management, soils,
drain tiles, and sanitary sewer and water main details, when applicable, to
assist staff in evaluating compliance with this chapter.
            1.   Stormwater management improvements. A description of the
proposed stormwater management system, including drainage for road rights-of-
way and the following information:
               a.   Stormwater management report. At the preliminary plat
stage, the stormwater management report may be limited to drainage
calculations, including detention basin sizing and storage calculations, and
basin restrictor size calculations. A full report containing the following
information shall be provided at the final plat stage of the subdivision
process.
                  (i)   Stormwater manage-ment narrative. A brief explanation
of existing site drainage conditions, existing structures, an explanation of
proposed site drainage conditions, nature of proposed development, an
explanation of stormwater modeling used for the subdivision, and an explanation
of compliance with the runoff hierarchy of §
151.146(D) and a summary of the results;
                  (ii)   Drainage exhibits. The subject property boundary
depicted on:
                     (I)   The best available topographic information,
including all on-and off-site tributary drainage areas defined, including their
acreage and points of entry and discharge;
                     (II)   A Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM);
                     (III)   A county wetland inventory map; and
                     (IV)   A soils inventory map.
                  (iii)   Detention basin storage volume calculations;
                  (iv)   Storm sewer pipe sizing calculations;
                  (v)   Tributary area exhibit;
                  (vi)   Outlet control structure restrictor sizing
calculations; and
                  (vii)   Overflow weir calculations.
               b.   Base flood elevation report. If a flood-prone area of
unknown elevation exists on or near the subject property, a base flood
elevation analysis report must be submitted to the County Department of
Planning, Building and Development or the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission, whichever is appropriate, for review and approval. Refer to §
151.147(B) for further information.
               c.   Wetland report. If the subject property contains any
existing wetlands, a wetland study report will be required for the subdivision.
Refer to §§
151.145 through
151.154 for complete requirements.
            2.   Stormwater maintenance report and plan. A short-term and long-
term maintenance plan, prepared by an appropriate professional, shall be
submitted at the final engineering stage consisting of a narrative describing
the short-term and long-term maintenance practices to be implemented for on-
site stormwater management facilities and the responsible parties. This
document may include but is not limited to the following: maintenance of pipes,
swales, basins, native plantings, mowing and controlled burning, in addition to
other necessary procedures to ensure maintenance of the facilities in
accordance with the approved final engineering plans.
            3.   Sewer and water improve-ments report. At the preliminary plat
stage, the sewer and water improvement report may be limited to a general
discussion with related maps and/or calculations that address how the following
items will be addressed in subdividing the property. A full report containing
the following information shall be provided at the final plat stage of the
subdivision process:
               a.   A description of the proposed means of sewage disposal (on-
site waste water disposal or public sewer) and water supply (private water well
or public/community water supply);
               b.   Proposed points of connection to existing public systems;
               c.   A discussion of capacities and modification to existing
facilities to accommodate additional system demand, if required;
               d.   A description of easements and future ownership/operation
of improvements;
               e.   Design basis including number of units and projected flow
calculations;
               f.   Invert elevations at point of connection and lowest on-site
invert elevation;
               g.   A determination if a sanitary sewer lift station will be
required;
               h.   A determination if an existing sanitary sewer lift station
will require upgrading;
               i.   A discussion of current and future looping of water mains;
               j.   A discussion of critical factors affecting design, if any
(e.g., river, railroad, highway crossings, wetlands, floodplains, or extreme
grade changes), and the method of installation (e.g., directional boring
requiring room for receiving pit); and
               k.   A discussion of major anticipated system improvements and
proposed locations such as well house, water treatment facilities, wells,
elevated water towers, reservoirs, lift stations, and emergency generators if
required.
         (b)   Site capacity calculations. When applicable, site capacity
calculations shall be prepared in accordance with §
151.070 of this chapter and shall be submitted with a natural resource
inventory and natural resource protection plan specified in subsection (E)(4)
(g) of this section. At the preliminary plat stage, these calculations may be
submitted in draft form along with the associated natural resource inventory
and natural resource plan.
      (4)   Engineering plan sheets.
         (a)   Cover/title page. This sheet shall be labeled “Cover or Title
Page” and shall include the following information:
            1.   A detailed vicinity map depicting the location of the subject
property boundary in relation to major roads, natural features, municipalities,
and the like so the property being developed can be easily located;
            2.   An index of all sheets;
            3.   The parcel identification number(s) of the property to be
subdivided;
            4.   A legend of all symbols and abbreviations used in the plans;
            5.   The imprinted seal, signature and license expiration date of
the engineer responsible for the preparation of the plans;
            6.   Surface water drainage statement (see
Appendix D);
            7.   Location and elevation of benchmarks; and
            8.   Lake County Division of Transportation general notes (see
Appendix C).
         (b)   Master plan. A master plan shall be required only when the
proposed subdivision cannot be portrayed on a single 24-inch by 36-inch sheet
at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet. This sheet shall be labeled “Master
Plan” and shall include the following information:
            1.   The proposed layout of all lots and road rights-of-way, lot
numbers, road names, water mains, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers drawn to
any scale that is read easily and which can be portrayed conveniently on a
single 24-inch by 36-inch sheet;
            2.   Match lines showing the sheet segmentation of the subdivision
when drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets;
and
            3.   If the subdivision will be platted in phases, the limits of
each phase.
         (c)   Existing conditions plan. The following existing conditions for
the property to be developed shall be shown:
            1.   The existing lots, parcels, road rights-of-way and easements,
including street names, on the subject site and on all adjoining parcels;
            2.   The location of all existing man-made features such as houses,
barns, and other constructed features;
            3.   A topographic survey prepared either by a surveyor or an
engineer containing the following information:
               a.   Existing contour lines at not greater than one-foot
intervals extending a minimum of 200 feet off-site. All elevations shall be
referenced to National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), 1988 (NAVD), which
supersedes the NAVD 29 datum used prior to Sepctember 18, 2013;
               b.   The reference benchmark and elevation shall be cited; and
               c.   Spot elevations order to verify the accuracy of the
topographic survey.
            4.   The location of all known field and storm drainage tiles as
evidenced in a field tile survey and report prepared in accordance with
subsection (E)(4)(f) of this section;
            5.   The normal shoreline of water bodies, channels, existing
detention basins, their easements, and direction of flow;
            6.    The location, size, and flowline elevation of all existing
storm sewers, culverts, sanitary sewers, and water mains of record;
            7.   The location of all existing individual sewage disposal
systems of record; and
            8.   The location of all existing wells of record.
         (d)   Grading and drainage plan. A grading and drainage plan
containing the following information shall be prepared in accordance with §§
151.145 through
151.154 of this chapter.
            1.   Existing conditions. The existing conditions described above.
The existing conditions shall be screened with the proposed improvements items
below overlaid;
            2.   Platted improvements. The location of proposed lots, road
rights-of-way and easements, including lot numbers and street names;
            3.   Engineered improvements. The approximate location of proposed
structures, roads, sidewalks within the road right-of-way, and other impervious
surfaces;
            4.   Phase limits. If the subdivision will be platted in phases,
the limits of each phase;
            5.   Waste disposal and wells. When applicable, the approximate
location of proposed on-site waste disposal systems and private wells;
            6.   Grading and drainage improvements.
               a.   Topographic survey with proposed contour lines at not
greater than one-foot intervals. Proposed spot elevations shall be provided at
all breaks in grade and where necessary to indicate grade changes in areas of
low relief;
               b.   Off-site drainage areas, points of discharge and entry,
velocity of flow, and flow quantities;
               c.   An indication of the direction of water flow in all
existing and proposed swales;
               d.   Drainageways, including the slope of channel and existing
and proposed typical cross-sections and profiles;
               e.   The location of all existing streams and floodplains to be
maintained, and proposed channels to be constructed, including specifications
and dimensions of proposed channel modifications, locations, and orientation of
cross-sections and profiles;
               f.   The location of all existing detention basins to be
maintained, enlarged, or otherwise altered, and proposed basins and their
design showing the following:
                  (i)   Length, width, dimension;
                  (ii)   Berm elevation;
                  (iii)   Water elevation - normal and high;
                  (iv)   Bottom slope elevation;
                  (v)   Control structure details (e.g., outlets, restrictors,
spillways);
                  (vi)   Contours at one-foot intervals; and
                  (vii)   Overflow weir locations and dimensions.
               g.   The location, type, length, size, and slope of proposed
storm sewers and culverts, if any, together with all related structures,
including rim and invert elevations;
               h.   Proposed culverts and bridges, their materials, elevations,
and waterway openings;
               i.   Cross-sections of all existing and proposed channels or
other open drainage facilities showing the elevation of the existing land and
the proposed changes thereto, together with the calculated high water
elevations expected from stormwater overland flowpath, and the relationship of
structures, roads, and other utilities;
               j.   The limits of grading and other construction activities;
               k.   Proposed elevations in U.S. Geological Survey datum for top
of foundation, walkouts and lookouts; finished grade elevations around all
proposed structures; and
               l.   The pavement elevations at each 100-foot centerline station
point, at street intersections and at the center of cul-de-sacs, and
indications of direction of stormwater flow.
            7.   On-site waste disposal systems and private wells.
               a.   When applicable, the soil map showing all boring locations,
as provided by a licensed soil classifier, overlaid onto the grading plan. All
soil boring logs must also be included.
               b.   When applicable, the location of proposed private water
wells.
         (e)   Soil erosion and sediment control plan. This sheet shall be
labeled “Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan” and shall be prepared in
accordance with the provisions of §§
151.145 through
151.154 of this chapter.
         (f)   Field tile survey. When required by §§
151.145 through
151.154, a field tile survey may either be furnished as an independent report
and plan or incorporated into the preliminary engineering or final engineering
plans for the subdivision. When incorporated into the preliminary engineering
or final engineering plans for the subdivision, the sheet shall be labeled
“Field Tile Survey” and prepared in accordance with the provisions of §§
151.145 through
151.154. Field tile systems disturbed during the site development process must
be reconnected by those responsible for their disturbance, unless the approved
drainage plan allows their relocation.
         (g)   Natural resource inventory and protection plan. This sheet shall
be labeled “Natural Resource Protection Plan” and shall be prepared as an
overlay of the grading and drainage plan containing the following information.
            1.   The location and extent of the following natural resources, as
defined in §
151.071 of this chapter:
               a.   Nonlinear water bodies (lakes and ponds);
               b.   Linear water bodies (channels);
               c.   Regulatory floodplains, flood-prone areas, and limits of
floodways;
               d.   Water body buffers (for linear and nonlinear water bodies);
               e.   Wetlands;
               f.    Mature woodlands; woodland groves; significant trees; and
               g.   Young woodlands.
            2.   The location and extent of all natural resource protection
areas and the location, type, and nature of all temporary and permanent
measures and practices to be utilized to protect natural resource protection
areas from development activities, as required by this chapter; and
            3.   A table similar to the following
Table 151.193(E)(4)(g) indicating the gross area (pre-development area) of each
identified natural resource, the net area (post-development area) of each
identified natural resource and the percentage protection of each identified
natural resource shall be represented.
 
Table 151.193(E)(4)(g)
Name of Resource Predevelopment Resource Post Development Percent Protection
                 Area                    Resource Area
 
         (h)   Typical road cross-sections. This sheet shall be labeled
“Typical Road Cross-Sections”. Cross-sections shall be prepared at a horizontal
scale of one inch equals ten feet and a vertical scale of one inch equals five
feet and shall contain the following information:
            1.   Typical road cross-section of the existing right-of-way
conditions (if applicable);
            2.   Typical road cross-section of the proposed improvements
including pavement structure, pavement cross-slope, ditch slope rates, and
other horizontal width components such as right-of-way, pavement, shoulder,
curb and gutter, ditches, and the like; and
            3.   For examples refer to typical cross-sections for local
streets,
Appendix O of this UDO.
         (i)   Infrastructure improvement plan and profile. This sheet shall be
labeled “Infrastructure Improvement Plan”. Plan and profile views shall be
shown on the same sheet using the same scale. The plan view shall be located at
the top of the sheet with the corresponding profile shown below. Plans and
profiles shall be prepared with a horizontal scale between one inch equals 50
feet and one inch equals 20 feet and a vertical scale with a 10:1 ratio to the
horizontal scale and shall include the following information:
            1.   Plan view.
               a.   Existing conditions shall be screened with proposed
improvements such as platted improvements (location of proposed lots, road
rights-of-way and easements, including lot numbers and street names),
engineering improvements, and phase limits;
               b.   The location of proposed structures, roads, sidewalks
within the road right-of-way, utilities, storm sewer, sanitary sewers, water
mains, and other impervious surface dimensioned showing widths and offsets from
the centerline;
               c.   Centerline of the proposed roadway with construction
stationing at 100-foot intervals;
               d.   Complete horizontal curve data for the proposed roads;
               e.   Intersection pavement and right-of-way radii;
               f.   Topography of all berms, ponds, swales, and drainage
adjacent to the right-of-way line;
               g.   The location, type, length, size, and slope of proposed
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and force mains together with all related
structures, including rim, invert elevations, and connections to off-site
collection systems;
               h.   The location and design of proposed sanitary sewer lift
stations;
               i.   The location and design of proposed wells, well houses,
storage tanks, and similar water works;
               j.   The type and inverts of all culverts with locations noted
by station and station offset; and
               k.   The type and inverts of all flared end sections with
locations noted by station and station offset.
            2.   Profile view.
               a.   The gradelines of existing and proposed road centerlines;
               b.   Elevations of existing and proposed centerlines at
corresponding stations;
               c.   Complete vertical curve data;
               d.   Complete storm sewer, sanitary sewer and water main
structures;
               e.   Complete storm sewer and sanitary sewer lines, water mains,
culvert, and utilities noting percent gradient; and
               f.   For subdivision with open drainage systems, the gradeline
of existing and proposed ditch lines on both sides of the road noting the
proposed percent gradient.
         (j)   Road cross-sections. This sheet shall be labeled “Road Cross-
Sections”. Cross-sections shall be prepared at a horizontal scale of one inch
equals ten feet and a vertical scale of one inch equals five feet and shall
contain the following information:
            1.   Road cross-sections shall be provided at each 100-foot road
centerline station point, each utility crossing, each crossroad culvert, and
the center of proposed cul-de-sacs and T-turnarounds.
            2.   Road cross-sections shall show the existing ground elevation
and topography together with all engineered improvements within and under the
right-of-way. The road cross-sections shall show proposed ground elevations
meeting existing ground elevations, whether inside or outside the right-of-way.
         (k)   Construction details and standards. This sheet shall be labeled,
“Construction Details and Standards” and shall contain all notes, details, and/
or specifications that are required by this and other applicable county
ordinances and/or that are needed for the construction of the proposed
subdivision and are not provided elsewhere in the final engineering improvement
plans. For street improvements, the following information shall be included on
this sheet:
            1.   Typical section for pavement design;
            2.   Typical section for shoulders, ditching, and slopes;
            3.   Special details; and
            4.   Summary of quantities.
         (l)   Pavement marking, sign location, and street lighting. This plan
shall be labeled, “Pavement Marking, Traffic Control, and Street Lighting” and
shall be prepared at a scale of no less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall
contain pavement markings, sign locations, and streetlight locations, and any
detail and standards related to this information.
         (m)   Landscape and recreational improvement plan. When required, a
landscape architect or landscape designer with the necessary knowledge of
plants and design skills shall provide a landscape plan and recreational
improvement plan that performs the following functions: treats all applicable
areas of the site required by §
151.167 of this chapter with suitable landscape material; and locates
recreational improvements to promote access and use by residents (see §
151.221). The plan shall be labeled “Landscape and Recreational Improvement
Plan” and shall include the following information:
            1.   Platted improvements. The location of proposed lots, road
rights-of-way and easements, including lot numbers and street names;
            2.   Engineered improvements. The location of proposed structures,
roads, sidewalks within the road right-of-way, and other impervious surfaces;
            3.   Phase limits. If the subdivision will be platted in phases,
the limits of each phase;
            4.   Landscaping. The location, size, and type of proposed
landscaping as required by §
151.167 of this chapter, if any, together with the location, number, species,
and size of required landscape plant material; the type and size of structures,
if any; and a landscape plant schedule;
            5.   Recreational improvements. The location and design of proposed
recreational improvements, if any, as required by this chapter;
            6.   Significant trees and woodlands. The location of significant
trees and woodlands as defined by §
151.071(I) of this chapter and their protection measures; and
            7.   Reforestation area. Reforestation area, if required, together
with the location, number, species, and size of required landscape plant
material.
      (5)   Cost estimate and schedule.
         (a)   Cost estimate. An estimate of probable expenditures necessary to
construct the proposed subdivision in full compliance with all applicable
standards shall be signed and sealed by the engineer of record. Unless
otherwise authorized by the Multi-Disciplinary Team, the cost estimate shall be
divided into: (1.) Subdivision Assurance Valuation, representing 120% of the
total cost of all subdivision improvements, and (2.) the Restoration Valuation,
representing 30% of the Subdivision Assurance Valuation estimate; at a minimum,
when applicable, the following information shall be included in the estimate.
            1.   Subdivision assurance valuation.
               a.   Mass grading and earthwork (i.e., clearing, grubbing, mass
grading, fine grading);
               b.   Drainage improvements (i.e., detention construction, storm
sewer, outlet control structures, end sections, and the like);
               c.   Roadway improvements (i.e., base, binder, surface
improvements, curb and gutter, sidewalks, signage, traffic control, and the
like);
               d.   Sanitary sewer and water main improvements;
               e.   Landscape improvements;
               f.   Retaining walls;
               g.   Recreational improve-ments;
               h.   Soil erosion sediment control and natural resource
protection measures and practices; and
               i.   Engineering and surveying consulting services (minimum 10%
of the total improvement costs).
            2.   Restoration valuation.  The valuation of the restoration
amount for any subdivision shall represent 30% of the total costs for the
subdivision improvements.
         (b)   Construction schedule. A construction schedule shall be provided
with the final engineering plans in the form of a time scale network. The time
scale network shall identify each critical task involved in the construction of
the subdivision and the beginning and completion of each task in relation to
each other task. Exact dates need not be identified during the review of final
engineering improvement plans; specific dates for the beginning and completion
of each task will be identified at the time of the preconstruction conference.
(Ord., § 10.9, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.194 STREETS.
   (A)   General. All streets shall conform to the applicable standards of
Illinois Department of Transportation, the Lake County Division of
Transportation (“County Engineer” in this section), and Township Road District,
hereafter defined as “Roadway Authority”. All required street improvements
shall be approved by the County Engineer as a condition of approval of the
final engineering plans.
   (B)   Modifications from street standards.  
      (1)   The County Engineer may grant modifications from the provisions of
this section in accordance with the minor modification procedures described in
§
151.192. Decisions rendered by the County Engineer shall take into
consideration existing conditions, site limitations, and whether in the
professional opinion of the County Engineer the modification will negatively
affect the function, structural composition, or the public health, safety, or
general welfare.
      (2)   If in the course of considering a modification request, the County
Engineer believes the public interest would be best achieved by consideration
of the modification before the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee, the
request may be returned to the Director with a request for formal action on the
modification by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee.
   (C)   Streets and stormwater conveyance. In no instance shall a 100-year
storm event be allowed to encroach upon any part of the pavement of any street.
   (D)   Access and improvement to external streets.
      (1)   Accessibility.  All land to be subdivided shall have access to a
public street that has been improved in accordance with the standards of this
chapter or standards provided by the relevant roadway authority having
jurisdiction over the street. The developer shall obtain approval from the
roadway authority having jurisdiction to provide access to the street.
      (2)   Compliance. If an existing public street which provides access to
the subdivision does not comply with the minimum standards required by this
chapter for the street classification, the developer shall be required to
improve the existing street to the minimum standards of this chapter, or
standards provided by the roadway authority. The type and extent of the
improvement shall be determined by the roadway authority with jurisdiction. The
final engineering plans shall include the proposed improvements to the existing
streets and financial assurances shall be provided for the cost of the
improvements in accordance with §
151.203.
      (3)   Subdivision access standards.
         (a)   Streets that intersect with arterial or collector streets that
are under the jurisdiction of the Lake County Division of Transportation shall
be subject to compliance with the Lake County Access Regulation Ordinance (see
Chapter 91).
         (b)   Streets that intersect with freeway, arterial or collector
streets that are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Department of
Transportation shall be subject to compliance with all Illinois Department of
Transportation standards.
         (c)   Streets that intersect with a strategic regional arterial route
shall be subject to compliance with the strategic regional arterial plan for
that route.
         (d)   Streets that intersect with an existing local street shall be
subject to compliance with the Access Regulation Ordinance (see
Chapter 91) if the agency having jurisdiction for the existing local street
does not have standards in place. The access location shall be approved by the
agency having jurisdiction for the local street.
         (e)   All street intersections shall be at right angles.
      (4)   Lot access requirements.
         (a)   In a subdivision containing internal local streets, access to
lots shall be from the local street contained within the subdivision.
         (b)   When lots border on an existing or proposed freeway, arterial,
or collector street, access to lots shall be provided by:
            1.   A marginal access street that is separated from the freeway,
arterial, or collector by landscaping and provides access to the higher
classification street at appropriate points; or
            2.   Shared driveways or access ways with the approval of the
roadway authority with jurisdiction.
   (E)   Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall not
be permitted.
   (F)   Street names. Street names shall not be similar to or duplicate any
other street in the township or adjacent townships and municipalities. New
streets that are extensions of or in alignment with existing streets shall bear
the name of the existing street. The names of all streets must be acceptable to
the Lake County Division of Transportation, the Township Highway Commissioner,
the local Fire Protection District and the U.S. Postal Service.
   (G)   Street signs.
      (1)   A sign study may be required upon completion of all streets in the
subdivision to at least the binder course. In order to obtain a sign study, the
Township Highway Commissioner shall submit a written request to the County
Engineer. The developer shall reimburse the road district 100% of the costs
related to the sign study, sign materials, and sign installation.
      (2)   Street name signs shall be erected at all street intersections
within the subdivision. Regulatory and directional signs shall be erected at
locations indicated by the Township Highway Commissioner or as shown on the
sign erection permit. Stop signs shall be erected at all locations where the
subdivision street exits onto an existing street. Signs and sign posts shall
meet the minimum requirements set forth in the Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (IMUTCD), latest edition, and
the policies and guidelines of the agency having jurisdiction of the road or
intersection. Only signs authorized by the highway authority having
jurisdiction and in compliance with the IMUTCD shall be permitted to be placed,
displayed, or maintained within the right-of-way.
   (H)   Utility placement. Utilities, including water mains and sanitary
sewers shall not be located beneath street pavement or associated curbs and
gutters. Utility crossings shall be permitted at right angles only or the
shortest distance under pavement as determined by the Lake County Division of
Transportation.
   (I)   Traffic signals.
      (1)   Traffic impact study; signalization warrants. A traffic impact
study shall be submitted in accordance with the guidelines established in the
Access Ordinance (
Chapter 91) to determine if signalization warrants, as established in the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways
(IMUTCD) are met. If the projected traffic generated by the subdivision meets
the warrants established in the IMUTCD it shall be documented in the traffic
impact study. The traffic impact study shall clearly demonstrate that the
traffic signal, if required, will not impede coordinated traffic flow, result
in undue delay or impair traffic operations or safety.
      (2)   Payment of signal costs.
         (a)   If the traffic impact study indicates that the subdivision’s
projected traffic meets or exceeds the signalization warrants established by
the IMUTCD, the developer shall be required to deposit funds in escrow with the
road district to pay for the future costs of installation of the traffic
signal.
         (b)   The escrow amount shall be equal to the current average
estimated cost of installing traffic control signals, plus an additional 30% to
cover the cost of engineering and administration.
         (c)   A cashier’s check, bank draft, certified check, or bank money
order in the required amount shall be made payable to the road district and
shall be submitted to the road districts for deposit in an escrow account to be
used only for the specified improvement. A certificate of deposit shall not be
acceptable.
   (J)   Haul streets. Haul streets may be required for construction access to
the subdivision in order to prevent damage to existing streets.
   (K)   Street layout.
      (1)   Arrangement. The arrangement of streets within a subdivision shall
be based on the following design criteria.
         (a)   Existing and proposed streets shall be extended to adjacent
developed or undeveloped property based on consideration of the following
factors:
            1.   The presence of protected natural resources (e.g., wetland,
creek);
            2.   Compatibility of land uses;
            3.   Availability and location of alternate access points;
            4.   Impact on circulation within an adjacent neighborhood; and
            5.   Ability to provide public services to the subdivision,
including the ability of the roadway authority to provide maintenance services
to area residents.
         (b)   The centerline of street pavements shall be centered in the
right-of-way.
      (2)   Topography.
         (a)   Streets shall be related appropriately to topography, soils,
drainage, and natural resources.
         (b)   They shall be arranged to obtain as many building sites as
possible at or above the grades of the streets.
         (c)   A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
      (3)   Streets along boundary lines.
         (a)   Streets may be laid out on the boundary of the subdivision.
         (b)   The Director shall notify the owner of property adjacent to the
proposed street.
         (c)   If the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee finds that the
neighboring property will be detrimentally affected by the creation of new
zoning nonconformities, neighbors’ written consent shall be required prior to
approval of preliminary plat or the final plat if a preliminary plat is not
required.
   (L)   Street design standards.
      (1)   Grades.
         (a)   The maximum grade for collector streets and streets of higher
classification shall not exceed 4%.
         (b)   The maximum grade for local streets shall not exceed 6%.
         (c)   The maximum grade for private streets shall not exceed 8%.
         (d)   The maximum grade for all driveways continuing outside of the
right-of-way shall not exceed 8% unless written approval is obtained from the
County Engineer.
         (e)   The grade of all streets shall not exceed 0.4%.
      (2)   Geometrics. Street geometrics shall conform to the design standards
established in the Illinois Department of Transportation’s Bureau of Local
Roads and Streets Manual (BLR). Streets shall be designed on the basis of the
following design speeds:
 
Collector street 50 miles per hour
Local streets    30 miles per hour
 
         (a)   Horizontal curvature. Angles on the centerlines of streets shall
not be permitted except at intersections. Centerline radii shall be as follows:
 
Collector streets Shall conform to standards set by the BLR Manual
Local streets     100-foot minimum
 
         (b)   Vertical curvature. Vertical curves shall be required at all
locations where the algebraic difference on the grades is 1% or greater.
Vertical curves shall be designed as follows:
 
Collector streets Shall conform to standards set by the BLR Manual
                  Crest vertical curves shall be designed with a minimum K
Local streets     value of 30. Sag vertical curves shall be designed with a
                  minimum K value of 50. In no case shall a vertical curve at a
                  street intersection be less than 50 feet.
 
         (c)   Cross-sections. Street cross-sections shall be built to the
specifications as shown on the typical cross-section (see
Appendix O, typical local road cross-sections, Figures 1 and 2, or typical
alternative local road cross-section, Figure 3).
         (d)   Minimum radii. Minimum intersection radii shall be as follows:
 
Intersection of: Local and Collector Local Streets Local and Major Arterial
                 Streets                           Streets
ROW line         35 feet             15 feet       As determined by the
                                                   Illinois Department of
                                                   Transportation and the Lake
Pavement         50 feet             30 feet       County Division of
                                                   Transportation
 
         (e)   Medians. Medians shall only be permitted with the written
approval of the Township Highway Commissioner. The Township Highway
Commissioner shall submit the written approval to the County Engineer.
   (M)   Right-of-way and pavement standards.
      (1)   General. Rights-of-way shall not be included within the dimensions
or areas of lots or parcels. With the exception of private streets, as provided
by §
151.190, all rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public.
      (2)   Rights-of-way and pavement width requirements.
         (a)   Applicability of standards. All streets contained in proposed
subdivisions, or streets contained in existing subdivisions that do not qualify
for development standards for unimproved existing rights-of-way defined in
subsection (R) of this section shall meet the right-of-way and pavement width
requirements specified in
Table 151.194(M).
         (b)   Establishment of standards. Minimum right-of-way and pavement
widths shall be as designated by the Illinois Department of Transportation,
Lake County Division of Transportation and, as noted in
Table 151.194(M), major arterial and collector streets maintained by the
Illinois Department of Transportation shall have a right-of-way width between
120 and 150 feet. The dedication of right-of-way for an expressway shall not be
required but shall be reserved as required by §
151.190 of this chapter.
            Table 151.194(M): Minimum Right-of-Way (R) and Pavement (P)
            Widths (Ft.)
            Detached House Lot Sizes (Sq.    Multi-   Commercial Industrial
Street Type Ft.)                             Dwelling
            20,000 or less 20,001 - 40,001 +
                           40,000
            R P            R P      R P      R P      R P        R P
            Table 151.194(M): Minimum Right-of-Way (R) and Pavement (P)
            Widths (Ft.)
            Detached House Lot Sizes (Sq.    Multi-   Commercial  Industrial
Street Type Ft.)                             Dwelling
            20,000 or less 20,001 - 40,001 +
                           40,000
            R  P           R  P     R  P     R  P     R        P  R        P
   Collector
Open        ––         ––   ––   ––   –      ––      –
drainage
Closed      ––         ––   ––   ––   100- 160 34 100- 160 34
drainage
   Local
Open        ––         ––   66 24    –      –      ––      –
drainage
Closed      60 24          60 24    60 24    60 24    60       24 60       24
drainage
   Local [1]*
Open        ––         ––   60 22    ––   –      ––      –
drainage
Closed      60 22          60 22    60 22    ––   –      ––      –
drainage
   Private
All         33 18          33 18    33 18    ––   –      ––      –
All pavement measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement.
[1] Five lots or less
* Right-of-way may be reduced to 50 feet based on topography if approval
obtained from the Lake County Division of Transportation and the Township
Highway Commissioner.
 
      (3)   Pavement structure. This section establishes material
specifications, as defined in the Illinois Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Street and Bridge Construction, as amended,
hereafter referred to as the Standard Specifications, for subdivision pavement
structure for detached house (single family) and multi-dwelling subdivisions.
It also establishes the minimum thickness of the pavement structure for
detached house (single family) and multi-dwelling subdivisions. The pavement
structure of all commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be designed on a
site-by-site basis, in accordance with Illinois Department of Transportation
standards for 80,000-pound weight limits. Once the binder course has been
placed, no open cutting of the pavement for the installation of storm sewer or
utilities shall be permitted.
      (4)   Pavement structure-material specifications and minimum pavement
thickness for detached house (single family) and multi-dwelling subdivisions.
         (a)   Collector street. Pavement structure requirements for a
collector street shall be in accordance with Illinois Department of
Transportation standards for 80,000-pound street limits.
         (b)   Local street.
 
Material                    Specifications                   Thickness
*Bituminous surface course: HMA, Mix D, N50                  2 in.
*Bituminous binder course:  HMA, IL 19.0, N50                7 in.
**Aggregate base course:    CA-6, Type A                     4 in.
                            IDOT Standard Specifications
Prime:                      Aggregate (prime coat)
                            Cleaning of bituminous materials
 
         (c)   Private street.***
 
Material                    Specifications  Thickness
*Bituminous surface course: HMA, Mix D, N50 2.5 in.
**Aggregate base course:    CA-6, Type A    10 in.
*Refer to Lake County Division of Transportation’s latest specification
revision on mixtures.
**Materials shall be limited to crushed gravel, crushed stone or crushed
concrete. Plasticity index requirements for adding water at the central
mixing plant will be waived.
***Permitted only in single family detached subdivisions with three lots or
less.
 
   (N)   Cul-de-sacs and turnarounds.
      (1)   General. Cul-de-sacs shall be provided for all streets where the
street terminus is a permanent dead-end. The center of the cul-de-sac shall not
be more than 30 feet from the centerline of the cul-de-sac street.
      (2)   “T” turnarounds. T-turnarounds are discouraged. The use of “T”
(shaped) turnarounds may be authorized in lieu of cul-de-sacs only when it is
determined that due to environmental factors, limited density, or other
conditions unique to the subdivision, their use is justified.
      (3)   Stub streets. A temporary cul-de-sac (standard or “T”) shall be
provided at the terminus of all stub streets. The right-of-way lines and
constructed pavement shall be extended to the boundary line of the proposed
subdivision if the adjacent property is undeveloped. Type III barricades and
“Street Closed” signs shall be erected at the terminus during the construction
phase. At the completion of the street construction, “End of Street” signs with
two reflective diamonds shall be erected at the terminus. The following
notation shall be placed on the subdivision plat: “Future access connection for
adjacent development. Right-of-way alignment may be changed upon the extension
of the street”. It also shall be noted on the plat that no direct access to the
“T” turnaround shall be permitted until such time as the temporary “T”
turnaround is removed and the street extended.
      (4)   Cul-de-sac standards.
         (a)   Geometric standards. Cul-de-sacs shall comply with the following
geometric standards:
 
                 Detached House Lot Sizes
                 (Sq. Ft.)                 Multi-Dwelling Commercial Industrial
                 <= 40,000 >40,000
ROW radius (ft.) 60        60              60             60         60
Pavement radius  40*       40              50*            50*        50*
(ft.)
Entrance radius  20        20              20             20         20
(ROW) (ft.)
Entrance radius  30        30              30             30         30
(PVT) (ft.)
 
 Off-Center** With Island***
                            Off-Center** With Island***
ROW radius (ft.)            60*- 65      80
Pavement radius (ft.)       45           58
Inside pavement radius                   35
Entrance radius (ROW) (ft.) 35           15
Entrance radius (PVT) (ft.) 40           35
*   Closed drainage
**   The maximum permissible offset is 30 feet
***   Cul-de-sac with an island shall only be permitted with the written
approval of the Township Highway Commissioner. The Township Highway
Commissioner shall submit the written approval to the County Engineer. The
center island with a radius of 26 feet or more shall not be dedicated for
public street purposes, but rather shall be owned and maintained privately be
the property owners’ association. Plantings shall only be permitted within
this center island. Type B-6.12 curb and gutter shall be required around the
center islands.
 
         (b)   Length. No more than 40 dwelling units may be served by a cul-
de-sac or a single point of access unless approved by the Planning, Building
and Zoning Committee.
   (O)   Curbs and gutters.
      (1)   When required. Curbs and gutters shall be required in the following
conditions:
         (a)   All subdivisions with a storm sewer drainage system; and
         (b)   All subdivisions except single family residential subdivisions
containing lots with an average area of 40,000 square feet or more.
      (2)   Specifications. Curbs and gutters may be either of the barrier type
(B6.12) with depressed entrances or the mountable type (M4.12). They shall
conform to the BLR Manual except that the mountable type may have a minimum
rise of four inches. When a depressed type of entrance is to be provided, the
width shall be specified by the maintaining agency.
   (P)   Shoulders. Unless otherwise waived by the roadway authority with
jurisdiction over a street, shoulders shall be required along all subdivision
streets not provided with curbs and gutters. The shoulder shall be of the same
material as the required aggregate base course and shall have a width extending
one foot beyond each edge of bituminous surface.
   (Q)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   General standards.
         (a)   When required. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all
streets except single family residential subdivisions containing lots with an
average area of 40,000 square feet or more.
         (b)   Sidewalk modifications. Upon considering the overall subdivision
design and the pedestrian circulation system provided elsewhere in the
subdivision and on adjacent properties, the Director may approve modifications
to the sidewalk requirement, provided all lots in the subdivision will have
access to the pedestrian system.
      (2)   Specifications. Sidewalks shall be located one to four feet inside
the right-of-way line and shall be at least five feet in width and five inches
in thickness. Sidewalks shall be constructed using five-inch thick concrete
with a four-inch aggregate base course, Type A. Sidewalks shall have curb ramps
or sloped areas where sidewalks cross curbs, as required by current Americans
with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). (Refer to Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard, Sidewalk Ramps). Inlets shall not be
located within sidewalks. Catch basin and manhole frames shall have closed lids
when located within the sidewalk. Construction shall be in accordance with the
Standard Specifications. (See subsection (M)(3) above.)
   (R)   Development standards for unimproved existing rights-of-way.
      (1)   Intent. The intent of this section is to provide development
standards and review procedures for the evaluation and construction of
unimproved rights-of-way located in recorded subdivisions so they can be
incorporated into a township district road system. The applicant for a building
permit or site development permit is responsible to ensure that the street to
which access will be taken meets the minimum standards of this chapter. Due to
the variability of site conditions, right-of-way dimensions, and the extent of
street systems, alternate standards have been created to incorporate
flexibility in the design process.
      (2)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to
unimproved street rights-of-way that are contained within platted subdivisions
existing prior to January 1, 1959. Unimproved rights-of-way that are contained
in recorded subdivisions platted subsequent to January 1, 1959 and have not
been accepted in to a township road system, shall be constructed in accordance
with the standards for a new subdivision.
      (3)   Right-of-way and pavement width requirements.
         (a)   Minimum right-of-way requirements. A street that satisfies the
applicability standards of this section shall have a right-of-way width of no
less than 40 feet. Any unimproved street consisting of a right-of-way width
that is less than 40 feet shall be widened to the minimum standard through
means of a plat of dedication prior to approving the final engineering plans
for construction of the street.
         (b)   Minimum pavement width requirements. The minimum pavement width
standards for qualifying streets shall be no less than 22 feet for rights-of-
way 50 feet or less, and 24 feet for rights-of-way greater than 50 feet, unless
otherwise approved by the County Engineer and the Township Highway Commissioner
of the road district containing the right-of-way.
      (4)   Construction standards.
         (a)   Applicants proposing to develop existing lots adjacent to
existing unimproved rights-of-way shall be required to improve the road across
the full width of the lot(s) from which access will be taken using the
guidelines established in subsection (K)(1) unless modified by the County
Engineer and Director.
         (b)   Unimproved rights-of-way that satisfy the applicability
standards of this section shall be constructed in accordance with the street
design standards of subsection (L), the pavement structure requirements of
subsection (M) and typical cross-sections specified in
Appendix O of this chapter. Adjustments in the width of pavement, the required
end treatment for a stub street, and the need for curb and gutter or sidewalks
will be determined at the time of a preapplication conference described in this
section. Unless otherwise provided for in this section, all waivers from the
minimum street standards shall be approved by the County Engineer.
      (5)   Procedure to construct substandard rights-of-way. Applications for
the construction of unimproved rights-of-way that qualify for alternate street
standards shall be processed as follows.
         (a)   Early Assistance meeting.
            1.   When access to lots is proposed from an unimproved right-of-
way, the building permit or site development permit applicant shall contact the
Director to determine the application procedure. Unless otherwise approved by
the Director, review of permit applications for development on the lots
adjacent to the unimproved right-of-way shall be suspended until a decision on
the development standards for the substandard right-of-way has been made by the
Township Highway Commissioner and the County Engineer, and final engineering
plans have been approved by the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
            2.   Following this meeting with the applicant, the Director shall
contact the County Engineer to arrange a preapplication conference meeting with
the applicant and applicable review and permitting authorities. The purpose of
this conference is for all permitting authorities, the Township Highway
Commissioner, and the applicant to evaluate the condition of the right-of-way
and to determine the requirements for the road cross-section.
            3.   Following the preapplication conference, and upon receipt of
written comments from the County Engineer and other permitting authorities, the
Director shall forward comments to the applicant to guide him or her in
preparing final engineering plans for the street improvements.
         (b)   Engineering plan review.
            1.   The engineering plans for the street shall be prepared in
accordance with the final engineering plan requirements specified in §
151.193(E) of this chapter.
            2.   Following a check-in meeting with the Director, and acceptance
of the plans for distribution to the Multi-Disciplinary Team along with payment
of applicable fees, the Director shall distribute the final engineering plans
to all affected review agencies for their review and comment. The initial
submission of the final engineering plans shall be subject to a 15-day review
period by the Multi-Disciplinary Team, followed by a ten-day review period for
all subsequent submissions of the final engineering plans until plans are
approved by the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
            3.   Engineering plans shall not be approved until the following
requirements have been met.
               a.   Notification. The Director has notified the applicant and
all affected review and permitting agencies that the final engineering plans
and cost estimate for the street have been approved.
               b.   Performance assurance. The applicant has filed a
performance assurance in acceptable form with the Director.
         (c)   Construction and funding of unimproved rights-of-way.
            1.   The right-of-way shall be constructed in accordance with the
approved final engineering plans and specifications for the road extension, and
§
151.202 of this chapter.
            2.   The applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated
with engineering, construction, and bonding for improvement of the street.
         (d)   Assurance of completion.
            1.   The applicant shall begin construction activities upon the
issuance of a site development permit, and approval by the County Engineer and
the affected Township Highway Commissioner of all traffic control devices and
construction activities associated with the street improvement plans.
            2.   Any modification or change in the approved plans shall be
evaluated in accordance with §
151.202 of this chapter. Unless an emergency exists, no field change shall
occur in constructing the improvements unless the change is approved by the
appropriate county representative. Any approved field change shall be reflected
on the record drawings submitted as a condition of releasing the performance
assurance for the street improvement plan.
            3.   Reductions, extensions, and releases of performance and
maintenance assurances shall follow the procedures contained in §
151.203 of this chapter.
   (S)   Seeding. All ground surfaces within the right-of-way disturbed by the
construction operations shall be fertilized, seeded, and mulched in accordance
with the Standard Specifications. (See subsection (M)(3).)
   (T)   Lighting. Lighting shall be provided at all intersections and at the
end of all cul-de-sacs and permanent T-turnarounds. The Township Highway
Commissioner may submit in writing to the County Engineer a request to waive or
revise these locations. The County Engineer shall make the final determination
regarding lighting locations. Lighting standards, including pole type,
brackets, luminaries, lamps, and underground wiring shall meet or exceed all
current utility provider and township lighting standards and be acceptable by
the current utility provider for service under the applicable energy and
maintenance contract. The proposed lighting details and standards shall be
provided on the final engineering plans and approved by the Township Highway
Commissioner.
(Ord., § 10.10, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.195 WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Design of water system. All water supply and distribution systems
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all applicable rules,
regulations, and standards contained in local ordinances of the Lake County
Health Department and the Lake County Public Works Department, the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, the American Water Works Association, and the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All
water supply and distribution systems shall be designed at a minimum to provide
adequate water pressure and flow for the intended use, including fire
protection.
      (2)   Availability. Unless otherwise provided in this section, all
residential subdivisions shall connect to a governmentally owned and operated
water system, if one is available. For the purpose of this chapter, a
governmentally owned and operated water system shall be considered available
when the following conditions exist:
         (a)   The closest pipe of the distribution system is located within
1,000 feet of the property to be subdivided;
         (b)   The distribution system has sufficient volume and quality to
serve the proposed subdivision; and
         (c)   The developer has received consent of the operator to connect to
the distribution system.
      (3)   Dedication and extension of governmentally owned and operated water
system. When connection to a governmentally owned and operated water system is
required, the developer shall dedicate the improvements to the owner of the
water system as part of final plat approval. In extending an existing
governmentally owned and operated water system, consideration shall be given to
future demands on the system which may require increasing system capacity and
extension of the system to adjoining parcels.
   (B)   Connection requirements.
      (1)   If the Lake County Public Works Department or the Lake County
Health Department determines that a governmentally owned and operated water
system is available, the developer shall be required to connect to the system
when the subdivision consists of a detached (single family) residential
subdivision containing at least 15 lots with an average area of less than
40,000 square feet or a gross density of greater than 1.1 dwelling units per
acre.
      (2)   In instances when a governmentally owned and operated water system
is not available, a privately owned and operated community water system (ex.,
owned by property owners’ association) shall be required to serve single family
residential subdivisions containing at least 15 lots with an average area of
less than 40,000 square feet or a gross density of greater than 1.1 dwelling
unit per acre and multifamily subdivisions.
   (C)   Ownership and maintenance responsibilities.
      (1)   Privately owned and operated water systems shall be owned and
maintained by a property owners’ association formed through covenants and
restrictions established during the platting process. The covenants and
restrictions shall be recorded with the final plat.
      (2)   Consideration shall be given to the future connection of the
privately owned and operated water system to a governmentally owned and
operated water system.
   (D)   Private water systems. Private water systems (private wells) may be
used in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Single family residential subdivisions having an average lot size
of at least 40,000 square feet, or a gross density of less than 1.1 dwelling
unit per acre;
      (2)   Single family residential subdivisions having fewer than 15 lots
and a gross density greater than 1.1 dwelling units per acre;
      (3)   Lots created by a plat amendment or lot split; or
      (4)   Multiple-family and nonresidential uses with Health Department
approval.
(Ord., § 10.11, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.196 SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   General. All sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with all applicable rules, regulations, and standards
contained in local ordinances of the Lake County Health Department and the Lake
County Public Works Department, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
the applicable sanitary districts and the Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. Plans, specifications, and construction
work shall be subject to the approval and inspection of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, the Lake County Health Department, and the
Lake County Public Works Department. If separate agencies operate or maintain
collecting sewers and/or treatment works, an approval shall be obtained from
each. Regardless of location, lot size, or number of lots, a subdivision shall
be disapproved when the Health Officer finds that the drainage, soil
conditions, disposal facilities, or other conditions may create a hazard to
public health.
   (B)   Public sewage collection and disposal systems. Subdivisions shall be
connected to public sanitary sewage collection and disposal systems when
required by this chapter. All subdivisions connecting to public sewage
collection and disposal systems shall consider the logical extension of
existing sewage systems and to the future extension of the sewage system into
adjoining parcels.
   (C)   Community sewage collection and disposal systems. Community sanitary
sewage collection and disposal systems may be developed in subdivisions only
when allowed by this chapter.
   (D)   Individual sewage disposal systems. Individual sewage disposal systems
may be used when permitted by this chapter. (See §
151.170.)
(Ord., § 10.12, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.197 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   Site development standards. All subdivisions shall be subject to the
site development regulations of §§
151.145 through
151.154.
   (B)   Modification of standards. The Director, after consultation with
relevant county staff, shall be authorized to modify the standards of this
section provided such modification is not in conflict with other provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   Outside the right-of-way.
      (1)   Storm sewer facilities.
         (a)   General. Storm sewer facilities shall be used for stormwater
management facilities only after conducting an analysis of the runoff reduction
hierarchy (see §
151.146(D)) and upon determination by the Multi-Disciplinary Team that
topography, poor drainage, or development intensity necessitate the use of
storm sewers.
         (b)   Specifications. Storm sewers shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the Standard Specifications, the Illinois Department of
Transportation Highway Standards and the Illinois Department of Transportation
Bureau of Design and Environmental Manual (Design Manual).
            1.   The storm sewer system shall be of sufficient capacity to
carry the discharge for a storm of ten-year frequency. Depending on site
characteristics, a greater frequency design may be required. Storm sewer
capacity calculations shall be required.
            2.   The engineer shall select coefficients of runoff based on the
types of development anticipated in all parts of the watershed affecting the
drainage structure. Information regarding the future development of the
watershed shall be obtained from the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
            3.   The system shall include all necessary appurtenances such as
inlets, catch basins, and manholes as may be required for proper operations and
maintenance.
            4.   In those cases where a subdivision is subject to stormwater
flow from adjoining land for a storm of 100-year frequency, the developer may
be permitted to substitute an open ditch for storm sewer. The ditch shall
comply with grading, seeding, sodding, and easement specifications of this
chapter. Ditch capacity calculations and typical ditch cross-sections shall be
required.
            5.   All storm sewers shall be at least 12 inches in diameter. The
material can be reinforced concrete pipe or plastic. If plastic is used,
manufacturer’s specifications (e.g., installation, depth of coverage) shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Multi-Disciplinary Team. All storm
sewer outfalls shall contain a concrete headwall or prefabricated end section.
A rip-rap-lined apron shall be provided. Rip-rap calculations shall be required
to determine the appropriate size. Special considerations shall be given to the
avoidance of problems which may arise from the concentration of stormwater
runoff onto adjacent property. All storm drainage shall be conducted and/or
connected to an approved outfall and shall be included in the developer’s plans
for stormwater management. The outfall shall be located at least ten feet from
the boundary of an adjacent property. The concentrated flow shall be
decentralized as sheet flow to adjacent properties unless connection approval
is obtained from appropriate authorities.
            6.   All stormwater detention basin outlet pipes shall be equipped
with anti-seep collars.
         (c)   Related structures. All manholes and catch basins (and any other
special juncture boxes) shall be constructed with concrete material only and
shall conform to the Illinois Department of Transportation Highway Standards
and Standard Specifications.
      (2)   Subsurface drain tiles. The following design and construction
guidelines shall be met:
         (a)   The main trunk line shall be a minimum six-inch diameter
perforated plastic pipe;
         (b)   The drain tile shall connect directly to the site’s storm sewer
system or discharge into the site’s proposed detention basin. The invert of the
outfall shall be above the normal water level;
         (c)   A minimum of four inches of crushed stone (CA-6 or equivalent)
shall be required around the outside diameter of the pipe. Silt sock or filter
fabric shall be provided within the trench or around the pipe to prevent
siltation;
         (d)   A four-inch diameter perforated plastic pipe shall be stubbed
for each proposed lot within the subdivision. The developer shall tie in sump
pumps to the storm sewer system prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. If no storm sewer exists, sump pump discharges shall be at least ten
feet from any property line. If discharges are located along side property
lines, they shall be designed to enter swales, not abutting property. A minimum
of 12 inches of fill shall be placed over the pipe;
         (e)   Drainage calculations shall be required for the sizing of the
trunk line; and
         (f)   The trunk line shall be contained within a drainage easement
with a minimum width of 15 feet.
      (3)   Swales and overland flow paths.
         (a)   Suitable means of soil erosion and sedimentation control shall
be provided if calculations indicate erosive velocities will be reached.
         (b)   All swales shall have a minimum slope of 2%.
         (c)   Subsurface drain tiles described above may be required for all
swales that traverse more than one lot and all overland flow paths.
      (4)   Field tiles. The following design and construction guidelines shall
be met.
         (a)   All on-site field tiles shall be properly abandoned prior to
mass grading of the site.
         (b)   A manhole shall be placed at a point where a field tile enters
the proposed development.
         (c)   When possible, flows entering the development via a field tile
shall be conveyed to its original point of discharge in a maintainable
stormwater conveyance system. The flows should be routed around the proposed
detention system as tile flow is not required to be detained.
         (d)   Standard engineering practices and the standards stated in this
chapter shall be used in designing the conveyance system.
         (e)   The developer may be required to conduct an off-site field tile
investigation to determine impacts on adjacent properties.
         (f)   Field tile systems disturbed during the site development process
must be reconnected by those responsible for their disturbance, unless the
approved drainage plan allows their relocation.
      (5)   Culverts. Material used for culverts that exceed 100 feet in length
shall be limited to those permitted for storm sewers as specified in the
Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, as amended. All
culverts shall have end protection in the form of either concrete headwalls or
prefabricated end sections. Flared end sections shall be required on all
culverts and at the ends of all storm sewer pipes. Grates shall be required on
all flared end sections.
   (D)   Inside the right-of-way.
      (1)   Storm sewer facilities.
         (a)   When required. Storm sewer facilities shall be required in all
subdivisions except single family residential subdivisions containing lots with
an average area of 40,000 square feet or more.
         (b)   Specifications. The design and construction of storm sewers
shall be in conformance with the Standard Specifications, the Illinois
Department of Transportation Highway Standards and the Illinois Department of
Transportation Bureau of Design and Environmental Manual. The storm sewer
system shall be designed by the “Rational Method” or another approved
hydrograph-providing method, with self-cleaning velocities in conformance with
the following requirements.
            1.   That part of the system which serves as the main or terminal
collector shall be of sufficient capacity to carry the maximum discharge for a
storm of ten-year frequency. Depending on the site characteristics, a greater
frequency design may be required.
            2.   The engineer shall select coefficients of runoff based on the
types of development anticipated in all parts of the watershed affecting the
drainage structure. Information regarding future development of the watershed
shall be obtained from the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
            3.   The system shall include all necessary appurtenances such as
inlets, catch basins, and manholes as may be required for proper operations and
maintenance.
            4.   In those cases where a subdivision is subject to stormwater
flow from adjoining land for a storm of 100-year frequency, the developer may
be permitted to substitute an open ditch for storm sewer. The ditch shall
comply with grading, seeding, sodding, and easement specifications of this
chapter. Ditch capacity calculations and typical ditch cross-sections shall be
required.
            5.   All storm sewers shall be at least 12 inches in diameter. All
storm sewers beneath the profile of the proposed street shall be load bearing
pipe as determined in the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications. If a storm sewer composed of material other than reinforced
concrete pipe is being proposed, the developer shall submit the manufacturer’s
specifications for review. The alternate storm sewer material shall be approved
by the County Engineer and the Township Highway Commissioner.
            6.   Special considerations shall be given to the avoidance of
problems which may arise from the concentration of the stormwater runoff onto
adjacent property. All storm drainage shall be conducted and/or connected to an
approved outfall and shall be included in the developer’s plans for stormwater
management. The outfall shall be located at least ten feet from the boundary of
an adjacent property.
            7.   Pipe flowing full shall have a minimum velocity of three feet
per second and a maximum velocity of ten feet per second.
            8.   If sump pumps and downspouts are designed to outlet into the
right-of-way, they shall be connected directly to the storm sewer system or
into a subsurface drain tile system, with highway authority approval, that
discharges directly into the site’s stormwater management system.
            9.   Sump pumps and downspouts shall be regulated in accordance
with §
151.146(H)(2).
         (c)   Related structures.
            1.   Catch basins, manholes, inlets, frames, and grates shall have
bicycle-safe grates and conform to the Illinois Department of Transportation
Highway Standards and Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications.
            2.   The spacing of pavement drainage structures shall be at
maximum intervals of 350 feet. When a crest lies between the drainage
structures, the maximum interval may be 700 feet. When a sag lies between
drainage structures at a maximum of 700 feet, double structures shall be added
at the lowest point in the sag. Structures without sumps shall not be connected
directly into the storm sewer.
      (2)   Subsurface drain tiles. The following design and construction
guidelines shall be met:
         (a)   The main trunk line shall be a minimum six-inch diameter
perforated plastic pipe.
         (b)   The drain tile shall directly connect to the site’s storm sewer
system or discharge into the site’s proposed detention basin (the invert of the
outfall shall be above the normal water level).
         (c)   A minimum of four inches of crushed stone (CA-6 or equivalent)
shall be required around the outside diameter of the pipe.
         (d)   A four-inch diameter perforated plastic pipe shall be stubbed
for each proposed lot within the subdivision.
         (e)   Drainage calculations shall be required for the sizing of the
trunk line.
         (f)   The trunk line shall be contained within a drainage easement
with a minimum width of 15 feet.
      (3)   Culverts. The size and capacity of all drainage structures shall be
computed using the “Rational Method” or another approved hydrograph-providing
method for tributary areas of 100 acres or less. For tributary areas of over
100 acres, an approved hydrologic and hydraulic analysis model shall be used.
No driveway culvert shall have a diameter of less than 12 inches, and no cross-
street culvert shall have a diameter of less than 15 inches. All culverts shall
have a minimum clearance of six inches between the top of the pipe and the
subgrade. In no case shall a driveway culvert be less than 20 feet in length.
Material used for culverts which exceed 100 feet in length shall be limited to
those permitted for storm sewers as specified in the Illinois Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications. Inspection and cleanout manholes shall
be required every 100 feet for culverts 100 feet or greater in length. All
culverts shall have end protection in the form of either concrete headwalls or
prefabricated end sections. Flared end sections shall be required on all
driveway culverts and at the ends of all storm sewer pipe. Grates shall be
required on all flared end sections 24 inches or larger located within the
right-of-way.
      (4)   Ditches.
         (a)   Drainage ditches shall be designed based on a minimum ten-year
storm frequency.
         (b)   Suitable means of soil erosion and sedimentation control shall
be provided if calculations indicate erosive velocities will be reached.
         (c)   All drainage ditches with a grade of 4% or greater shall be
sodded along the two-foot flat bottom ditch and for a distance of two feet up
each bank unless other approved means of soil erosion and sedimentation control
are provided.
         (d)   All ditches shall have a minimum slope of 2.0%.
         (e)   Subsurface drain tiles shall be required for all ditches where a
slope of 2.0% cannot be achieved.
      (5)   Field tiles. See §
151.193(E)(4)(f).
      (6)   Bridges. All bridges and culverts having a span of more than 20
feet shall be approved by a bridge consultant retained by the Lake County
Division of Transportation. The review period shall be 30 days. The developer
shall reimburse the Lake County Division of Transportation for all consultant
costs, plus an additional 5% for contract administration.
(Ord., § 10.13, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.198 DAMS AND IMPOUNDMENT STRUCTURES.
   (A)   General. Dams and berms for water impoundments shall be planned,
designed, and constructed under the supervision of a structural or professional
engineer and shall meet the requirements of §§
151.145 through
151.154. The Director, after consultation with relevant county staff, shall be
authorized to modify the standards of this section provided such modification
is not in conflict with other provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Stormwater detention basins. In addition to the requirements of §§
151.145 through
151.154, the following standards shall be met.
      (1)   Spillways. An emergency spillway shall be constructed that is
capable of passing the 100-year storm event, including any off-site flow that
will be bypassed over the spillway. It shall be designed and constructed at the
high water line for on-site detention requirements. Drainage calculations for
the sizing of the spillway shall be required. The slope from the top of berm to
the spillway shall not exceed 3:1. The emergency spillway shall be immediately
stabilized with sod, rip-rap, or permanent turf reinforcement matting and
native seeding as dictated by design velocities, based on the 100-year outflow.
      (2)   Freeboard. A minimum of one foot of freeboard above the water
surface in the reservoir with the emergency spillway flowing at design depth
shall be provided to the top of berm elevation.
   (C)   Existing dams. An engineering report shall be submitted to the
Director on all existing dams within a proposed subdivision. Any dam found to
be structurally unsafe shall be reconstructed or reinforced in accordance with
the existing standards. The modification of an existing dam may require a dam
safety permit from the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord., § 10.14, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.199 SUBDIVISION LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping within subdivisions shall be provided in accordance with the
standards of this section. Unless otherwise provided in this section, the
Director shall be authorized to modify the standards in this section.
   (A)   Street landscaping.
      (1)   Plant quantities shall be calculated using a minimum standard of
two trees for each 100 feet of street length. When applicable, each side of a
street shall be calculated independently. Trees shall be arranged along the
street right-of-way to create a natural-randomized appearance in the
streetscape.
      (2)   Tree species shall be limited to those listed in
Appendix A, and other tree types expressly approved by the Township Highway
Commissioner.
      (3)   Trees shall be at least three inches in caliper size.
      (4)   The trees shall generally be placed between the sidewalk and right-
of-way line for streets with closed drainage and at least 30 feet from the
centerline of the right-of-way for streets with open drainage. Tree locations
shall be approved by the Township Highway Commissioner and the County Engineer.
      (5)   All trees located in the street right-of-way shall be the property
of the Township Road District.
   (B)   Peripheral landscaping. Any proposed residential subdivision of 25
acres or greater which adjoins an existing residential development shall
install a landscape buffer consisting of one plant unit per 100 linear feet as
close to the common boundary as possible. Plant material existing on the
proposed subdivision site along the common boundary that has comparable
composition and density may be used to satisfy this requirement, as authorized
by the Director of Planning, Building and Development.
(Ord., § 10.15, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.200 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS AND TRAILS.
   (A)   Location.
      (1)   Pedestrian walkways or trails and multi-modal trails [trails] shall
be located outside the street right-of-way.
         (a)   In instances when a walkway or a trail crosses a street right-
of-way, that portion lying within the right-of-way shall be constructed using
the sidewalk standards of §
151.194(Q) or Option One in
Table 151.200(A) as required by the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
         (b)   All other walkway and trail systems shall be constructed using
Option One or Two in
Table 151.200(A).
      (2)   Pedestrian walkways or trails shall not be located within deed-
restricted open space. Pedestrian walkways or trails shall be a minimum of five
feet in width. The Director may require modification of walkways and trails to
improve the functionality of the trail system. The Director may increase the
width or composition of the trail when the trail contained in the subdivision
is part of a multi-modal trail system, a trail system integrated into more than
one subdivision, a mixed use development, or part of a regional trail system.
   (B)   Standards.
 
Table 151.200(A): Walkway and Trail Standards
Surface/Binder              Option One Option Two
Aggregate surface (special) –        7.0 inches
Aggregate base, Type B      6.0 inches –
Bituminous binder           1.5 inches –
Bituminous surface          1.5 inches –
 
(Ord., § 10.16, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.201 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Preservation of existing monuments. All federal, state, county, or
official benchmarks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the
subdivision shall be preserved. Before moving any benchmark, monument or
triangulation station, the authority having jurisdiction over the monument
shall be notified and given sufficient time to take appropriate action. All
elevations shall be referred to National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD
88), which supersedes the NGVA 29 datum used prior to September 18, 2013.
   (B)   Placement of new monuments. Permanent monuments shall be erected in
all places and manner prescribed in 765 ILCS 205/1.
(Ord., § 10.17, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.202 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Commencement of subdivision construction activities. The developer
shall commence construction of subdivision improvements after the final plat
has been approved by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee and all
prerequisites to commencement of construction (as set out in subsection (A)(1)
below) have been met. The developer may begin construction of subdivision
improvements prior to approval of the final plat, provided written notification
has been received from the Planning, Building and Development Director that the
final engineering plans for the subdivision have been approved by the Multi-
Disciplinary Team and all required performance assurances have been provided.
      (1)   Prerequisites to commencement of subdivision construction.
Regardless of whether the final plat has been approved, construction of
subdivision improvements may not begin until the developer has satisfied all of
the following:
         (a)   A preconstruction conference is held in accordance with
subsection (A)(2) below;
         (b)   A restoration assurance has been posted with the county in
accordance with §
151.203;
         (c)   An access permit has been issued by the highway authority
controlling access to the subdivision;
         (d)   A site development permit has been issued by the Director;
         (e)   Construction of public or community sanitary sewer and water
facilities shall not begin until all required Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency permits have been obtained; and
         (f)   All other local, state, or federal permits have been obtained.
      (2)   Preconstruction conference. Prior to the commencement of any
construction activities, a preconstruction conference shall be held between the
Multi-Disciplinary Team, the developer, the engineer of record, and the general
contractor unless the Multi-Disciplinary Team determines that a preconstruction
conference is not necessary.
         (a)   Purpose. The preconstruction conference is established to afford
the developer, the engineer of record, and the contractor the opportunity to
meet with the Multi-Disciplinary Team to discuss construction methods,
construction schedules, inspection requirements and subdivision assurance
procedures.
         (b)   Scheduling. The developer may request a preconstruction
conference at any time after receiving written notice from the Director that
the Multi-Disciplinary Team has approved the final engineering plans. Upon
receipt of a request for a preconstruction conference, the Director shall place
the subdivision on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Multi-
Disciplinary Team meeting if the meeting will not be conducted on the site of
the subdivision or development. The Director shall notify Multi-Disciplinary
Team and the developer of the date, time, and place of the meeting.
         (c)   Required information. The developer shall be prepared to present
all of the following information and documentation at the preconstruction
conference:
            1.   Copies of the approved final engineering plans and
specifications (signed, sealed, and marked “For Construction”);
            2.   Copies of the construction schedule approved during the review
of final engineering plans, revised to include actual dates for the beginning
and completion of each identified critical construction activity; and
            3.   Names, addresses, and phone numbers of the developer, the
engineer of record, the general contractor and subcontractors contracted to
install and construct required subdivision improvements.
   (B)   Construction of subdivision improvements.
      (1)   Responsibility for improvements.
         (a)   Developer. The developer shall be responsible for all of the
following:
            1.   Installing all subdivision improvements in accordance with the
standards of this chapter, Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and the approved final
engineering plans and specifications for the subdivision;
            2.   Maintaining all subdivision improvements in accordance with
subsection (C) below;
            3.   All costs associated with inspections and field modifications
during the subdivision guarantee period;
            4.   Submitting all test reports, plan amendments, as-built plans,
and any other documentation required to verify the proper installation and
functioning of subdivision improvements as required by this section; and
            5.   Contracting the services of the engineer of record to fulfill
the responsibilities listed in this section.
         (b)   Engineer of record. The engineer of record shall be responsible
for all of the following:
            1.   Assuming perpetual responsibility for the design of
engineering improvements;
            2.   Assuring that all subdivision improvements are installed in
accordance with the standards of this chapter, and the approved final
engineering plans, and specifications for the subdivision;
            3.   Providing the personnel necessary on the site during all
aspects of construction to monitor and inspect the installation and
construction of required subdivision improvements;
            4.   Attending all inspections required by this section;
            5.   Preparing amendments and obtaining necessary approvals to the
final engineering plans and associated documents necessitated by field
modifications;
            6.   Preparing and obtaining approval of the proposed grading plans
and changes in tops of foundation that differ from the approved final
engineering plans;
            7.   Preparing as-built plans and providing written certification
that all subdivision improvements have been completed in accordance with the
standards of this chapter, the Illinois Department of Transportation’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and the approved final
engineering plans and specifications for the subdivision;
            8.   Submitting cost estimates for reductions on subdivision
assurances; and
            9.   Signing and sealing all required documents.
      (2)   Field modifications. During the course of construction, the
developer may encounter situations where field conditions and/or unforeseen
circumstances require deviation from the approved final engineering plans and/
or specifications for the subdivision.
         (a)   Emergency modifications.
            1.   Definition. An emergency modification   is a field
modification to the design or specification of a subdivision improvement that
is required to alleviate an imminent threat to the public’s health, safety,
and/or general welfare.
            2.   Review and approval procedure. Upon the identification of the
need for an emergency modification, the developer immediately shall implement
all necessary field modifications as recommended by the engineer of record. As
soon as possible after identifying the need for an emergency modification, the
developer also shall notify the Director that emergency field modifications
are, or soon will be, under construction. Emergency modifications shall be
reviewed and approved, after installation, as major modifications.
         (b)   Minor modification.
            1.   Definition. A minor modification is a field modification to
the design or specification of a subdivision improvement that involves only a
minor deviation in the size, elevation, or location of the improvement or a
change in the type, material, or manufacturer of the improvement. A minor
modification shall not lower the ultimate level of performance for the subject
improvement, result in higher maintenance costs or impair the function or
purpose of any other platted or engineered improvement.
            2.   Review and approval procedure. The developer shall comply with
the following review and approval procedure upon the identification of the need
for a minor modification.
               a.   The developer shall contact the appropriate Multi-
Disciplinary Team agency. If the reviewing agency finds that the proposed
modification is a major modification, the developer shall be directed to follow
the review and approval procedures outlined for major modifications below.
               b.   The reviewing agency shall determine what information and
documentation is required in order to adequately review the proposed
modification. Following a review period, not to exceed ten days, the reviewing
agency shall, in writing, approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the
proposed modification. The developer shall not commence implementation of the
proposed modification until, and unless, written approval has been received.
The reviewing agency also shall forward a copy of the approval to the Director.
         (c)   Major modification.
            1.   Definition. A major modification is a field modification to
the design or specification of a subdivision improvement that involves a
significant deviation in the size, elevation, or location of the improvements.
A major modification may impact the size, elevation, or location of other
engineered improvement and also may affect the location of lots, outlots,
easements, or other platted improvements.
            2.   Review and approval procedure. The developer shall comply with
the following review and approval procedure upon the identification of the need
for a major modification or after the implementation of an emergency
modification.
               a.   Application. The following information shall be submitted
to the Director:
                  (i)   A letter from the developer or engineer of record
requesting the amendment accompanied by an application fee as set by the County
Board;
                  (ii)   A narrative prepared by the engineer of record
describing the reason, nature and extent of the change and its impact on the
functioning and affect on the overall improvements in the subdivision; and
                  (iii)   All pertinent information related to the proposed
modification, including but not limited to design calculations, revised final
engineering plans, cost estimates, and any other information or documentation
required by the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
               b.   Review. Upon receipt of all required application materials,
the Director shall forward the submittal to the Multi-Disciplinary Team. The
Multi-Disciplinary Team shall have ten days to review the submittal and to
provide written comments to the Director. Upon receipt of comments, the
Director shall compile the comments for presentation to the developer at the
Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting and shall place the subdivision on the agenda
of the next regularly scheduled Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting. The Director
shall notify the Multi-Disciplinary Team and the developer of the date, time,
and place of the meeting.
               c.   Approval. The Multi-Disciplinary Team shall approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove the proposed modification. No
modification of the right-of-way or road-related standards of this subchapter
shall be approved unless the proposal complies with Illinois Department of
Transportation Standards and Specifications and has been approved by the
Township Highway Commissioner and the County Engineer. The developer shall not
commence implementation of the proposed modification until and unless written
approval has been received from the Director.
               d.   Additional approvals required. In instances where federal,
state, and/or other local agencies are involved in approving the proposed
modification, the developer shall be responsible for notifying these agencies
and obtaining their approval.
         (d)   Documentation of modifications. All deviations from the approved
final engineering plans shall be identified by the engineer of record on the
letter of certification and reflected on the as-built plans for the
subdivision.
      (3)   Maintenance during construction.  
         (a)   Damage during construction. The developer shall repair, replace,
and/or adjust any existing public improvement, disturbance to any private
property and/or improvements on private property, or proposed subdivision
improvements damaged during the construction of the subdivision within the time
period specified by the appropriate Multi-Disciplinary Team agency. All
corrective actions taken shall be completed in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications for the subdivision.
         (b)   Erosion control/natural resource protection. The developer shall
maintain all soil erosion sediment control and natural resource protection
measures as required by §§
151.070 through
151.072 and §§
151.145 through
151.154 of this chapter and the approved final engineering plans throughout the
duration of the guarantee period.
         (c)   Debris removal. The developer shall keep all rights-of-way,
sanitary sewers, water mains, stormwater management facilities, and open space
areas free from junk and debris or other extraneous material during the
construction of the subdivision. All adjoining roads shall be kept free of mud
and construction debris. Any mud or construction debris tracked on adjoining
roads shall be removed by the developer at least once a day or as needed to
keep the pavement clean.
         (d)   Snow removal.  The developer shall post on the property the 24-
hour phone number and contact information for the contact person responsible
for snow plowing services on all subdivision roads and sidewalks until the
improvements are accepted by the Township Highway Commissioner or other agency
having jurisdiction over the roads.
         (e)   Emergency work. Upon receiving notice from the Planning,
Building and Development Director, the developer shall initiate an immediate
response to address an emergency associated with the failure of any subdivision
improvement which may jeopardize the public’s health, safety, and/or general
welfare. The developer’s failure to initiate an immediate response may result
in the Planning, Building and Development Director authorizing the county
agencies to initiate action to correct the noted failure and to draw on the
restoration assurance to cover the costs associated with taking the corrective
actions.
(Ord., § 10.18, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.203 ASSURANCES.
   Three types of subdivision assurances are established for the purpose of
assuring proper, safe, and timely installation and maintenance of required
subdivision improvements: restoration assurances; performance assurances; and
maintenance assurances. Assurances shall be required for all subdivisions. The
assurance requirement may be waived by the Director when no engineered
improvements are required or if other means are available to ensure compliance
with the standards of this chapter.
   (A)   General requirements. All restoration, performance, and maintenance
assurances shall be prepared in accordance with the approved formats provided
in
Appendix P of this chapter, and shall be submitted to the Director prior to
approving a final plat. The county shall not accept any assurance that fails to
meet the formats approved by the county, or a form acceptable to the State’s
Attorney’s Office. The County Treasurer shall be the beneficiary of all
assurances.
   (B)   Forms of assurances. The following forms of assurances may be used to
fulfill the assurance obligation of this section.
      (1)   Cash bond. A cash bond shall be made payable to “Treasurer, County
of Lake”. Cash bonds may be provided in the form of a cashier’s check, bank
draft, certified check, or bank money order. A certificate of deposit is not an
accepted form of assurance.
      (2)   Irrevocable letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit will
be accepted, provided that the bank securing the letter of credit and upon whom
presentation shall be made is located within the Chicago metropolitan area and
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
      (3)   Surety bonds. Surety bonds shall be provided by a surety or
insurance company that is authorized by the Illinois Department of Insurance to
sell and issue sureties in this state and the surety or insurance company must
have a claims office located in the Chicago metropolitan area. At the time the
principal offers the bond to the county, and prior to acceptance of the bond by
the county, the principal shall provide the name and contact information of the
attorney and bond agent associated with the surety for communication purposes
in the event of a default on the terms of the bond.
   (C)   Restoration assurances.
      (1)   Purpose. Restoration assurances are established for the following
purposes:
         (a)   In the event the developer has commenced construction of
subdivision improvements but has failed to obtain final plat approval within
the time period specified by this chapter, the county may draw on the assurance
and use the funds to stabilize the construction site;
         (b)   If at any time during the construction of subdivision
improvements a clear threat to the public’s health, safety, and/or general
welfare is identified by the county on the construction site, the county may,
after appropriate notice and demand requirements, draw on the assurance and use
the funds to correct the identified threat;
         (c)   In the event the developer fails to complete all subdivision
improvements within the term of the performance assurance and the county draws
on the performance assurance, the county shall also draw on the restoration
assurance and may use the funds to complete any subdivision improvements; and
         (d)   In the event the developer fails to provide a maintenance
assurance as required by this chapter, the county may draw on the restoration
assurance and may use the funds to establish a maintenance assurance.
      (2)   Amount. The amount of the restoration assurance shall be 30% of the
engineer’s estimate of the probable cost of subdivision improvements, as
approved during the review of final engineering plans.
      (3)   Term. The restoration assurance shall be posted as a prerequisite
to commencement of construction activities or final plat approval, whichever
comes first. The assurance shall be posted for a minimum two-year period unless
reduced by the Director after assessing the size of the subdivision, the
complexity of the subdivision improvements, and consultation with the Multi-
Disciplinary Team. However, should the end of the restoration period fall
between December 1 and June 14, the assurance shall expire the first business
day after June 14. In accordance with subsection (F)(3) below, the Director,
for good cause and with the approval of the provider of the assurance, may
extend the term of the assurance.
   (D)   Performance assurances.
      (1)   Purpose. Performance assurances are established for the purpose of
assuring that the developer properly installs all proposed subdivision
improvements in accordance with the approved final engineering plans and
specifications for the subdivision. Should the developer fail to properly
install all improvements within the term of the assurance, the county may draw
on the assurance and use the funds to complete the improvements. The county
also may draw on the performance assurance if the developer fails to provide a
maintenance assurance to the county, if the maintenance assurance is required.
The county may use the funds to ensure proper maintenance of the subdivision
improvements.
      (2)   Amount. The amount of the performance assurance shall be 100% of
the engineer’s estimate of the probable cost of subdivision improvements, as
approved during the review of final engineering plans. The amount of the
performance assurance is in addition to the amount of the restoration
assurance.
      (3)   Term. The performance assurance shall be posted as a prerequisite
to approval of the final plat of subdivision. The assurance for each phase of
the subdivision shall be posted for a minimum two-year period unless reduced by
the Director after assessing the size of the subdivision, the complexity of
subdivision improvements, and consultation with the Multi-Disciplinary Team.
However, should the end of the two-year period fall between December 1 and June
14, the assurance shall expire the first business day after June 14. In
accordance with subsection (F)(3) below, the Director, for good cause and with
the approval of the provider of the assurance, may extend the term of the
assurance.
   (E)   Maintenance assurances.
      (1)   Purpose.  
         (a)   Maintenance assurances are established for the purpose of
assuring that the developer maintains the structure, function and integrity of
all subdivision improvements in accordance with the approved final engineering
plans and specifications for the subdivision during the term of the assurance.
In the event the developer has failed to maintain subdivision improvements
within the term of the assurance, the county may draw on the assurance and use
the funds to correct the deficiencies.
         (b)   Furthermore, if at any time during the term of the maintenance
assurance the county identifies that the developer’s failure to maintain
subdivision improvements has created a clear threat to the public’s health,
safety, and/or general welfare, the county may, after delivering notice and
meeting demand requirements in accordance with the terms of the assurance
documents and this chapter, draw on the maintenance assurance and use the funds
to correct the identified threat.
      (2)   Amount. The amount of the maintenance assurance shall be determined
by the Multi-Disciplinary Team. Generally, the maintenance assurance shall be
15% of the engineer’s estimate of the probable cost of subdivision
improvements, as approved during the review of final engineering plans. The
Director may waive the requirement for a maintenance assurance when it finds
that the assurance is not necessary.
      (3)   Term. The maintenance assurance shall be posted as a prerequisite
to releasing the performance assurance, unless waived or simultaneously held
with a portion of the performance improvements upon approval by the Director.
The assurance shall be posted for a period of one to three years, and the term
may be reduced or extended based on the size, complexity, or phasing of the
subdivision, as deemed necessary by the Director. However, should the end of
the maintenance period fall between December 1 and June 14, the assurance shall
expire the first business day after June 14. In accordance with subsection (F)
(3) below, the Director, for good cause and with the approval of the provider
of the assurance, may extend the term of the assurance.
   (F)   Reduction, extension, and release of assurances.
      (1)   Procedure. 
         (a)   Initiation. Actions to reduce, extend, or release subdivision
assurances may be initiated by the developer or the county as follows:
            1.   The developer may initiate an action to reduce, extend, or
release a subdivision assurance by submitting the following information and
documentation to the Director:
               a.   A letter requesting the reduction, extension, or release;
               b.   All plans, cost estimates, test reports, certifications,
construction schedules, and/or other documentation necessary to justify the
request; and
               c.   A subdivision inspection fee shall be paid. A copy of the
current subdivision fee schedule is available in the office of the Director.
            2.   The Director shall initiate the process to call on the
assurance as established in subsection (G) below should the developer fail to
request the extension.
         (b)   Inspection notice. Upon receipt of a request for the reduction
or release of a subdivision assurance, or in the absence of a request, the
Director shall schedule an inspection of the subdivision. The Director shall
provide written notice to the developer and all affected reviewing agencies at
least seven days prior to a scheduled inspection. The notice shall contain the
name and location of the subdivision, the time and date of the inspection, the
type and status of the assurance, the purpose of the inspection, and the date
that inspection comments and recommendations are due.
         (c)   Inspection standards and procedures.
            1.   Scheduling limitations. Unless otherwise approved by the
Multi-Disciplinary Team, subdivision assurance inspections shall not be
performed prior to May 1 nor later than November 30 in any year.
            2.   Inspection attendance. The engineer of record shall be present
at all subdivision inspections. The developer’s failure to have the engineer of
record attend the inspection may provide just cause for the Director to
terminate the inspection and may serve as just cause to deny the request. All
agencies notified by the Director shall be present at the scheduled inspection
or shall provide written comments to the Director prior to the inspection.
            3.   Inspection protocol. During the inspection, each reviewing
agency shall be responsible for inspecting the improvements within their
jurisdiction. At the conclusion of their inspection, each agency shall be
prepared to discuss their concerns and note outstanding deficiencies with
developer and the engineer of record. In circumstances where additional
information is required by an agency in order to formulate a recommendation,
that agency shall request this information from the developer. The developer’s
failure to provide the requested information in the time period specified by
the agency may provide just cause to deny the request.
         (d)   Multi-Disciplinary Team comments and recommendation.
            1.   Inspection comments. Each agency shall forward a written
inspection report and recommendation to the Director within seven days
following the inspection. Comments shall identify all deficiencies noted during
the inspection or in the review of test reports and/or as-built plans. If no
deficiencies are noted, this shall so be stated in the report. For performance
assurance reduction requests, each agency also shall identify a dollar amount
reduction for each applicable line item of the cost estimate. Upon receipt of
all inspection comments, the Director shall forward the comments to the
developer.
            2.   Corrective actions. The developer shall be responsible for
correcting all deficiencies and/or addressing all comments identified by the
Multi-Disciplinary Team. In circumstances where additional engineering and/or
improvements are required in order to correct noted deficiencies, the developer
shall comply with the review and approval procedures for field modification as
established in §
151.202(B)(2).
            3.   Follow-up inspection. If the developer has taken actions to
correct noted deficiencies prior to the expiration date of the subdivision
assurance, a follow-up inspection may be scheduled provided an inspection fee
is paid. Unless approved by the reviewing agency responsible for inspection of
the deficient areas, a follow-up inspection shall not be conducted less than
ten days prior to the expiration date of the assurance. To initiate a follow-up
inspection developer shall follow the requirements of this section.
         (e)   Action by the Director. Upon receipt of Multi-Disciplinary Team
comments, the Director shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the requested subdivision assurance action. After taking action, the
Director shall provide the developer and the surety written notification of the
action taken. The developer may appeal the Director’s decision to the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee in accordance with the procedures of §
151.192 of this chapter.
      (2)   Reduction of subdivision assurances. Restoration, performance, and
maintenance assurances shall be reduced only when the Director finds that the
following conditions have been satisfied.
         (a)   Limitations on reductions. Permitted reductions shall be limited
by the following.
            1.   Restoration assurance. The restoration assurance shall not be
reduced at any time during the term of the performance assurance unless
approved by the Director following consultation with relevant members of the
Multi-Disciplinary Team.
            2.   Performance assurance. The Director, following consultation
with relevant members of the Multi-Disciplinary Team, may allow incremental
reductions in the performance assurance subject to the following limitations:
               a.   No reduction shall be granted for the costs associated with
erosion control, natural resource and open space protection measures until
erosion control and natural resource protection measures are properly
implemented and the site is stabilized as determined by the Multi-Disciplinary
Team.
               b.   With approval of the Director in consultation with the
relevant Multi-Disciplinary Team members, the costs associated with the
engineer's consulting fees may be reduced in proportion to the value of the
overall subdivision improvements.
            3.   Maintenance assurance. The Director, in consultation with the
relevant Multi-Disciplinary Team members, may reduce the maintenance assurance
in proportion to the current value of the improvements remaining to be
completed.
         (b)   Standards for reduction requests. The performance assurance may
be reduced only pursuant to the following standards.
            1.   First reduction. The first reduction shall be considered only
after substantial completion of the following subdivision construction
improvements:
               a.   Installation of all erosion control fences and construction
fences for the protection of natural resource and open space areas in
accordance with approved plans and specifications for the subdivision;
               b.   Mass grading operations including the clearing of
vegetation, stripping and stockpiling of topsoil, and the rough cutting of
roads and stormwater management facilities;
               c.   Installation of all storm sewer, stormwater management
outlet structures, sanitary sewer and water main improvements, if any. The
storm sewer system shall be televised. The sanitary sewer system shall be
televised and air tested. Water mains shall be pressure tested and chlorinated;
               d.   Partial as-built plans of the stormwater detention basins
and storm sewer system, showing the invert elevations of inlets and outlet
control structures, stormwater basin volumes, and normal and high water
elevations of each basin.
               e.   Road rights-of-way shall be completed per the approved
final engineering plans up to, and including, the binder course. All curb and
gutter, if applicable, shall be installed and all required testing and
documentation shall be submitted in accordance with subsection (F)(2)(c) below.
            2.   Second reduction.
               a.   Topsoil shall be respread and final grades established for
all disturbed areas. Sod or seed and mulch shall be applied to all disturbed
areas.
               b.   The stormwater manage-ment system shall be complete and
functional.
               c.   With the exception of sidewalks, when applicable, and the
surface course for roads, all right-of-way improvements shall be complete and
properly stabilized.
               d.   All recreational trail systems shall be complete and the
pads for the parks and recreational open space shall be prepared for the
installation of the park improvements.
               e.   Landscape improvements for streets, open space areas, and
transition areas shall be complete for those areas where construction activity
has ceased.
         (c)   Application requirements for reduction requests. In addition to
a letter requesting a specific reduction amount the developer shall submit the
following information to justify the request.
            1.   Cost estimate. A cost estimate, based on the subdivision’s
original cost estimate approved during the review of the final engineering
plans, amended to show the quantity and value of work completed and the
quantity and value of work remaining for each line item.
            2.   Test reports.
               a.   Pressure and chlorination test reports, air test reports
and television tapes for all sanitary sewer and water main, if applicable,
shall be prepared and submitted. All storm sewers shall be televised and test
reports shall be submitted. For items within the proposed rights-of-way for
which a reduction is being requested, all documentation and material inspection
reports, as defined and outlined in the Illinois Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Illinois Department
of Transportation Construction Manual and Illinois Department of Transportation
Project Procedures Guide shall be submitted for review.
               b.   At the required station, one core shall be taken
approximately 18 inches in from the edge of the pavement alternating between
the left side and right side of the pavement. The number of cores required
shall be determined by the length of the road, in accordance with the following
schedule:
 
Length of Road (Feet) Coring Schedule
0 to 1,000            One every 100 feet
1,001 to 3,000        One every 150 feet (minimum of 10 cores)
3,001 +               One every 200 feet (minimum of 20 cores)
Cul-de-sac            One at 9:00, 12:00 and 3:00 o’clock
 
               c.   A core and density report for the binder course shall be
submitted for review and approval prior to the placement of the surface course.
The core and density report shall indicate the thickness, density, and percent
compaction of each individual core sample. A map shall be provided showing the
station of each core and the station offset.
               d.   When a nuclear density gauge is used to verify the required
density of the binder course lifts, a minimum of eight cores shall be taken per
day and tested for comparison to the densities obtained by the nuclear density
gauge.
               e.   Testing of the surface course shall be done using a nuclear
density gauge to verify density. Readings shall be taken at approximately the
same locations as the binder course cores. In the event nuclear density gauge
readings indicate an undesirable percent compaction, cores may be required to
verify density. Coring of the surface course to verify density must be approved
by the Lake County Engineer.
               f.   Weight tickets for all bituminous courses shall be
submitted for review and confirmation.
      (3)   Extension of subdivision assurances. Restoration, performance, and
maintenance assurances shall be extended only when the Director finds that the
following conditions have been satisfied. The developer may appeal the
Director’s decision to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee in
accordance with the procedures of §
151.192 of this chapter.
         (a)   Standards for extension requests. Subdivision assurances may be
extended only pursuant to the following standards:
            1.   The developer shall demonstrate that the extension will not be
detrimental to the development of the area in which the subdivision is located
and will not in any manner jeopardize the public’s health, safety, or general
welfare. Furthermore, the developer shall document that the extension is
justified by one or more of the following conditions:
               a.   There exist unique or unforeseen conditions or
circumstances, beyond the developer’s control, that have precluded the
completion of subdivision improvements in a timely manner;
               b.   There exists justification for delay in the construction of
subdivision improvements to facilitate better coordination of improvements
between adjacent developments and/or separate phases of the same subdivision;
or
               c.   There exist pending administrative or legislative actions
associated with the subdivision that may affect the design, location, and/or
function of platted or engineered improvements within the subdivision.
            2.   The Multi-Disciplinary Team has determined that sufficient
progress has been made to complete the subdivision improvements and/or to
correct any previously identified deficiencies within the time period specified
by the developer’s revised construction schedule.
         (b)   Application requirements for extension requests. In addition to
a letter requesting an extension to a specific date, the developer shall submit
the following information:
            1.   A revised construction schedule; and
            2.   Written justification for the request in terms of the
standards for extensions established in subsection (F)(3)(a)1.
         (c)   Increase in amount of assurance. As a condition of extending the
assurance, the Multi-Disciplinary Team has the right to request an increase in
the amount of the assurance, if in the opinion of the Multi-Disciplinary Team a
sufficient amount of time has passed or the values of the improvements and/or
labor have changed to warrant an increase.
      (4)   Release of subdivision assurances. Restoration, performance, and
maintenance assurances shall be released only when the Director finds that the
following conditions have been satisfied. Developers may appeal the Director’s
decision to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee in accordance with the
procedures of §
151.192 of this chapter.
         (a)   Standards for release requests. Subdivision assurance may be
released only pursuant to the following standards:
            1.   Restoration assurance.  The restoration assurance shall be
released only upon the Director's determination that the development site is
stabilized, there is no threat to the public's health, safety and general
welfare if the assurance is released, and there are sufficient funds in the
performance assurance to correct all remaining improvements.
            2.   Performance assurance.  
               a.   The performance assurance may be released only upon the
developer demonstrating that the subdivision improvements have been completed
in accordance with the standards of this chapter and the approved final
engineering plans and specifications for the subdivision and a maintenance
assurance, if required by the county, has been deposited with the county.
               b.   The Director may authorize a release of the performance
assurance and acceptance of a maintenance assurance when a portion of the
performance-related improvements are not complete, when the Multi-Disciplinary
Team can demonstrate the public’s health, safety, and general welfare will not
be compromised. When a release is granted, all outstanding performance
improvements shall be completed within one year of the release of the
performance assurance. Granting the release may also extend the term of the
overall maintenance period for the subdivision.
            3.   Maintenance assurance. The maintenance assurance may be
released only upon the developer demonstrating that:
               a.   The structure, function, and integrity of all subdivision
improvements have been properly maintained throughout the term of the
assurance; and
               b.   A property owners’ association, if required, has been
chartered with the Secretary of State for the purpose of maintaining all
subdivision improvements not to be maintained by the public.
         (b)   Application requirements for release requests.
            1.   Restoration and performance assurances. The developer shall
submit the following information for all requests to release the restoration
and performance assurances:
               a.   Notification. The developer shall submit written
notification that all subdivision improvements have been completed in
accordance with the standards of this chapter and the approved final
engineering plans and specifications for the subdivision.
               b.   Certification. The engineer of record shall provide written
certification that all subdivision improvements have been completed in
accordance with the standards of this chapter and the approved final
engineering plans and specifications for the subdivision. The engineer of
record shall further certify that the as-built plans are a true and accurate
depiction of the as-built conditions of the subdivision.
               c.   As-built plans. The engineer of record shall prepare as-
built plans for the subdivision. The as-built plans shall be submitted in the
same form and content as the original final engineering plans and shall bear
the seal and signature of the engineer of record. All field modifications shall
appear on the as-built plans. The plans shall verify all improvements,
including but not limited to rim and invert elevations, spot elevations at 20-
foot intervals along top of berm for detention facilities (including at least
two spot elevations for emergency spillways), spot elevations in 100-year
overland flow paths, spot elevation at 100-foot intervals along the centerline
of streets, spot elevations at 100-foot intervals along the bottom of ditches,
and random spot elevations throughout the subdivision.
               d.   Test reports. All required test reports not previously
submitted shall be prepared and submitted.
               e.   Acceptance of improve-ments. For each subdivision
improvement to be maintained by a public agency, a letter shall be on file with
the Planning, Building and Development Director indicating that the agency will
accept the improvement upon release of the performance assurance.
               f.   Maintenance assurance. A maintenance assurance, if
required, shall be on file in an acceptable form.
            2.   Maintenance assurances. The developer shall submit the
following information for all requests to release the maintenance assurance:
               a.   Notification. The developer shall submit written
notification that the structure, function and integrity of all subdivision
improvements have been properly maintained throughout the term of the
assurance.
               b.   Property owners’ association. If a property owners’
association is required, the developer shall submit a copy of the property
owners’ association’s articles of incorporation along with the names,
addresses, and telephone numbers of the association’s current officers.
   (G)   Default provisions for subdivision assurances. Upon a recommendation
by the Multi-Disciplinary Team and approval by the State’s Attorney’s Office,
the Director may, after appropriate notice, initiate default proceedings in
accordance with the provisions of this section and the terms of the assurance
documents in the event any one of the following deficiencies exist.
      (1)   Default. A developer shall be considered in default if the
developer:
         (a)   Fails to perform or maintain the work due to insufficient number
of workers and equipment or with insufficient materials to ensure the
completion or maintenance of the work within the specified time;
         (b)   Performs the work unsuitably, as determined by the Multi-
Disciplinary Team, the Township Highway Commissioner, or other affected agency;
         (c)   Neglects, refuses materials, performs, or maintains anew any
work that shall be rejected as defective and unsuitable;
         (d)   Discontinues the execution of work;
         (e)   Does not (for any other cause whatsoever) carry on or maintain
the work in an approved manner; or
         (f)   Fails to provide a maintenance assurance in acceptable form to
the county within the timeframe established by the Director. The county may use
the funds to ensure proper maintenance of subdivision improvements.
      (2)   Notice of default. When the Director finds that a developer is in
default, and following consideration of the issues with the State’s Attorney’s
Office, the Director shall be directed to give notice by registered mail to the
developer and to the issuer of the subdivision assurance of the county’s intent
to call on the subdivision assurance. The notice shall state the reasons for
the default and the conditions established by the Multi-Disciplinary Team to
remedy the default.
      (3)   Calling on a subdivision assurance. If, upon receipt of a notice of
default, the developer fails to correct the noted deficiencies and/or to honor
the terms and conditions specified in the notice, the Director shall present a
demand for payment on the assurance. The Director shall deliver the funds from
the subdivision assurance to the Lake County Treasurer, and the Lake County
Treasurer shall deposit the funds into an account designated for the funds.
      (4)   Appeals. All appeals of the Director’s decision to draw on an
assurance shall be presented to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee in
accordance with §
151.192 of this chapter.
      (5)   Utilization of funds from defaulted assurance. Upon the calling of
a subdivision assurance, the Director shall be authorized to utilize these
funds to cause compliance with the terms of the assurance. All costs, including
the county’s administrative expenses associated with causing compliance, shall
be deducted from the funds on deposit with the Lake County Treasurer.
      (6)   Return of unused funds. When compliance with the terms of a
subdivision assurance has been achieved, the Director shall authorize the Lake
County Treasurer to return to the developer or approved beneficiary of the
funds all remaining funds from the assurance, if any.
(Ord., § 10.19, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.204 VACATIONS.
   This section sets out the required review and approval procedures for
vacating plats, portions of plats that include rights-of-way, or rights-of-way
contained in plats recorded with the Lake County Recorder.
   (A)   Authority to file vacation application. The following groups and
individuals shall have standing to file a vacation application.
      (1)   The owner of the property that is the subject of the vacation
request may file a vacation application.
      (2)   Property owners adjoining unimproved public street rights-of-way
within their subdivision may file for the vacation of the rights-of-way. For
rights-of-way internal to a subdivision, the adjoining property owners on both
sides of the right-of-way to be vacated shall be required to jointly file for
the vacation of the right-of-way. For rights-of-way which form the edge of a
subdivision, only the adjoining property owners within the subdivision shall be
required to file for the vacation of the right-of-way.
      (3)   In accordance with state statutes, a bona fide association of
property owners may file to vacate any unimproved street right-of-way within
their subdivision provided the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The association shall be registered with the state and be
organized to receive, hold, and convey real property; and
         (b)   The association undertakes to develop the property for the use
and benefit of the association in a manner that is compatible with the existing
adjoining land uses.
   (B)   Application filing. Applications for vacations shall be submitted to
the Planning, Building and Development Department on forms available from that
Department.
   (C)   Liability. As part of a vacation application, the applicant(s) shall
indemnify and hold the county harmless for damages resulting to any person as a
result of the vacation.
   (D)   Vacation procedure.
      (1)   Right-of-way vacations. The following procedure shall be used for
vacation applications involving unimproved public rights-of-way (i.e., street
or alley).
         (a)   Distribution of application. In instances when a vacation
petition involves an unimproved right-of-way, the Vacation Officer shall
distribute the application to all affected reviewing agencies, including the
affected Township Highway Commissioner, and place the application on the agenda
of the Board of Vacations.
         (b)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper and neighbor notice of the
Board of Vacations’ public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of §
151.045(G) of this chapter. Written notice of the hearing shall also be
provided to the applicant. The costs of publication shall be borne by the
applicant(s).
         (c)   Board of Vacations’ review and recommendation. The voting
members of the Board of Vacations shall inspect the property proposed to be
vacated and hold a public hearing on the proposed vacation. As part of the
testimony, the Vacation Officer shall announce the purchase price of area
contained in the right-of-way involved in the vacation, which shall be
established in accordance with the procedures of the County Board. Following
the public hearing and before consideration by the Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee, the Board of Vacations shall recommend approval, approval in
part or with conditions, or denial of the vacation. A member of the Board of
Vacations who did not attend the public hearing may vote on the matter,
provided that the Board of Vacations member has studied the minutes and visited
the site. The Vacation Officer shall be responsible for preparing a record of
the testimony received at the public hearing and preparing a written report of
the findings and recommendations of the Board of Vacations to the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee.
         (d)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee and Finance and
Administrative Committee review and recommendation. The Vacation Officer shall
present the recommendation of the Board of Vacations to the Planning, Building
and Zoning Committee and the Finance and Administrative Committee, after which
the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee and the Finance and Administrative
Committees shall act to recommend that the County Board approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the vacation.
         (e)   Payment of purchase price. Prior to County Board action on the
vacation application, the applicant shall deposit the purchase price (if any)
for the area contained in the vacated right-of-way with the Vacation Officer.
The Vacation Officer shall return these funds to the applicant if the vacation
is denied by the County Board. Upon approval of the vacation by the County
Board, funds will be deposited in the appropriate county account.
         (f)   County Board review and action. The County Board shall vote on
the recommendation and resolution of the vacation from the Planning, Building
and Zoning Committee and the Finance and Administrative Committee. An
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the County Board is required to
grant a vacation.
         (g)   Recordation. After County Board approval of a vacation, the
Vacation Officer shall obtain the County Board resolution and shall obtain the
Plat Officer’s signature on the deed of vacation (quit claim deed). The
petitioner, in the presence of the Vacation Officer, shall present the County
Board resolution, the deed of vacation and all other documents required to meet
the conditions of approval of the County Board Resolution for recording with
the Lake County Recorder.
      (2)   Plat vacations. The following procedure shall be used for
applications involving the vacation of a plat or a portion of a plat.
         (a)   Distribution of application. Upon receipt of an application for
the vacation of a plat or a portion of a plat, the Vacation Officer shall
distribute the application to all affected reviewing agencies in accordance
with the review and approval process for a final plat as outlined in §
151.191(F)(2) of this chapter.
         (b)   Planning, Building and Zoning Committee recommendation. The
Vacation Officer shall present the recommendation of the Multi-Disciplinary
Team and reviewing agencies to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee. The
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee shall act to approve, or deny the
vacation.
            1.   Approval.
               a.   Upon Planning, Building and Zoning Committee approval of a
plat vacation, the plat of vacation together with any other documents required
by this chapter to be recorded with the plat, shall remain in the custody of
the Director unless other arrangements are authorized by the Committee.
               b.   Within ten days following approval, the applicant shall
have the sole responsibility for recording the plat vacation and associated
documents with the Lake County Recorder and for paying all costs associated
with the recording of the documents.
               c.   Upon recording the plat vacation, the Mylar shall be
returned to the applicant or surveyor of record for the subdivision. The
official record of the plat vacation and associated documents shall be kept in
the custody of the county.
            2.   Denial. If the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee denies
the plat vacation, the applicant may:
               a.   Amend the final plat or obtain the additional information
and documentation requested by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee and
resubmit the subdivision for further review in accordance with §
151.191(F)(2); or
               b.   Appeal the decision of the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee in accordance with the standards of §
151.192.
   (E)   Effect of vacation. The vacation of any subdivision plat or right-of-
way shall not be deemed to be a vacation of the rights of any other individual
or agency in, or related to, the subdivision plat or right-of-way. The approval
of a vacation does not, for example, vacate the rights of a public utility with
facilities in the subject right-of-way.
(Ord., § 10.20, passed 10-13-2009)
SCHOOL AND PARK CONTRIBUTIONS
§ 151.220 SCHOOLS.
   This section addresses school contributions related to school land needs to
accommodate additional student population generated by proposed residential
development. Nonresidential developments are exempt from the requirements of
this section.
   (A)   School contribution types. Whenever a school district is entitled to a
contribution pursuant to subsection (A)(2) below, the contributions shall be
limited to the two following options.
      (1)   Ordinance-based school contributions. The developer shall
contribute the requisite amount of land, cash, or a combination of land and
cash, in accordance with the procedures established under subsection (C)
herein.
      (2)   Private agreement-based school contributions.
         (a)   A school district may waive all rights to any ordinance-based
contribution.
         (b)   Notwithstanding any waiver, a school district may enter into a
private agreement with the developer.
         (c)   The administration and enforcement of private agreements shall
follow the procedure established under subsection (D) herein.
 
COMMENTARY:
To ensure timely and thorough consideration of all relevant issues, the
developer and affected school district(s) are urged to discuss the available
school contribution options as early as possible in the county’s development
review process.

Upon receipt of the preliminary plat or, when a preliminary plat is not
applicable, a preapplication conference submission, a copy of which submission
is forwarded by the Planning, Building and Development Director to the Regional
Superintendent of Schools and to the affected school district(s). This
information is used, in part, to assist in the calculation of school
contributions, as provided below.
 
   (B)   Applicability. No school land dedication or cash contribution in lieu
of land dedication shall be required unless the Lake County Regional
Superintendent of Schools has determined that there is an existing or projected
need for school lands to accommodate the additional student population within
the district. The Regional Superintendent of Schools shall make the decision in
accordance with the procedures of subsection (B)(1), below.
      (1)   School land needs determination.
         (a)   The school land needs determination shall be based upon the
existing or future school land needs within the affected school district(s).
The determination shall be based upon a review of available data studies and
literature on the subject, including but not limited to information provided by
the State Superintendent of Education and the unique characteristics of this
county. Projected enrollments shall be based upon current tables of estimated
ultimate population per dwelling unit type, as prepared by Associated Municipal
Consultants, Inc. or comparable data recognized by the Plat Officer. The
affected school district(s) may provide data to the Lake County Regional
Superintendent of Schools to assist in this determination.
         (b)   Following receipt of the school district’s assessment, the
Regional Superintendent of Schools shall submit a final determination to the
Planning, Building and Development Director prior to preliminary plat approval
whether the affected school district(s) in fact faces an existing or projected
need for school lands to accommodate additional student population, and
therefore would be eligible to receive school contributions pursuant to this
subsection (B). The Regional Superintendent of School’s final determination
shall also indicate whether a contribution of land, cash, or a combination of
land and cash shall be required of the developer, in accordance with the
following considerations:
            1.   Land contribution. The contribution may consist of land that
is suitable for intended school purposes, in accordance with subsection (C)(2)
(a)2., below.
            2.   Cash contribution. Where the residential development is small
and the resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available land
is inappropriate for a school site, the developer may be required to pay a cash
contribution for the use in acquisition of land for school sites, or for the
improvement to any existing school site, or for the construction of school
buildings or additions thereto in accordance with Public Act 93-0330.
            3.   Combined land and cash contribution. A combination of land
dedication and a cash contribution in lieu of land may both be necessary when
only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a
school site; or a major part of the local school site has already been acquired
by the particular district and only a small portion of land is needed from the
developer to complete the site. In these cases, the remaining portion shall be
required as a cash contribution in lieu of land.
      (2)   Notice to parties. Following receipt of the Regional Superintendent
of Schools’ school land needs determination, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall notify the developer and the affected school
district(s) of the decision in writing.
   (C)   Ordinance-based school contribution procedure. The following
procedures govern ordinance-based school contributions.
      (1)   Calculation of required contribution. The following procedure
governs the calculation of required contributions.
         (a)   Calculation by contribution type.
            1.   Land contribution calculation. The amount of land required to
be contributed shall be determined by multiplying the “estimated ultimate
school population per dwelling unit” (see “Estimated Ultimate School
Population” Table in
Appendix P) by the “site area” requirements for the school site (see “School
Classification” Table in
Appendix P), then dividing by the “maximum number of students” (see “School
Classification” Table in
Appendix P). If the development will be age-restricted (i.e., an exclusively
active adult, independent living, or assisted/supported living facility)
through restrictive covenants or other similar means, the amount of land
calculated above shall be multiplied by a factor of 0.25 to account for the
reduced likelihood of any student generation from the development.
            2.   Cash contribution calculation. The cash contributions in lieu
of land shall be based on the fair market value, as described in this section,
of the gross site valued as improved land in the area that otherwise would have
been dedicated in accordance with subsection (C)(2)(a). To determine the amount
of cash contribution, multiply the “estimated ultimate school population per
dwelling unit” (see “Estimated Ultimate School Population” Table in
Appendix P) by the “site area” requirements for the school site (see “School
Classification” Table in
Appendix P), then divide by the “maximum number of students” (see “School
Classification” Table in
Appendix P). Multiply the resulting acreage by the fair market value of the
land within the area to determine the per lot cash contribution. If the
development will be age-restricted (i.e., an exclusively active adult,
independent living, or assisted living facility) through restrictive covenants
or other similar means, the cash contribution calculated above shall be
multiplied by a factor of 0.25 to account for the reduced likelihood of any
student generation from the development.
 
COMMENTARY:
For purposes of this subsection, active adult developments are generally
synonymous with senior housing that is not accommodated by nursing or other
medical care; independent living developments may or may not provide those
services; and assisted/supported living facilities that are accommodated by that
care. The age-restricted multiplier, above, applies to all such developments.

The restrictive covenants should incorporate provisions to ensure that an
affected school district’s school land needs are sufficiently addressed in the
event the age-restricted development ultimately generates students or otherwise
no longer qualifies as an age-restricted development at any point following
final plat approval (or initial contribution).   
 
               a.   Fair market value determination. The cash contributions in
lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of land in the area that
otherwise would have been dedicated as school sites. In calculating the fair
market value on a per acre basis, the following assumptions about the land
shall be made: that it is zoned in the Residential-1 (R-1) Single Family
Residential Zoning District consistent with the county’s development standards;
that it is developed with appropriate frontage on a dedicated street, stubbed
with county sewer and water and has all appropriate utilities available; that
it is improved as set forth in subsection (C)(2)(a)1. herein; and that it is
property otherwise capable of being used for one-acre single family residential
development. This fair market value shall be determined by one of the two
following methods:
                  (i)   The affected school district(s) and the developer may
execute an agreed-upon statement of fair market value; or
                  (ii)   The developer may provide copies of a fair market
value appraisal of land in the area of the proposed subdivision to the
Planning, Building and Development Director for distribution to each affected
school district and the Regional Superintendent of Schools.
               b.   Consumer price index adjustment to fair market value. The
fair market value identified in this section shall be subject to a “CPI
adjustment” which shall be calculated annually and which adjustment shall go
into effect on February 1, 2009, and on the first day of February in each year
thereafter or as soon thereafter as the data becomes available. The CPI shall
be based on the annual percentage change as published by the United States
Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for All
Urban Consumers (“CPI-U”) for the Chicago-Gary-Kenosha, IL-IN-WI Area
(Identification Number CUURA207SAO). The index base period of 1982-84=100 shall
be used. If the CPI for this particular regional designation is changed,
discontinued, or replaced, any other governmental cost of living index or
computation that replaces the CPI shall be used in order to obtain
substantially the same result as would be obtained if the CPI had not been
discontinued or replaced.
            3.   Combined land and cash contribution calculation. The
calculation of combined land and cash contributions shall follow the
calculation methodology in subsections (C)(1)(a)2.a. and b. of this section,
above.
         (b)   Administration of contribution calculation.
            1.   Signed copies of any ordinance-based contribution agreements
between any affected school district(s) and the developer relating to the use
of land and/or money accepted pursuant to this section shall be provided by the
developer to the Planning, Building and Development Director prior to final
plat approval. The agreements shall be recorded together with the final plat. A
note shall be placed on the plat referencing their existence. Any final
agreement dated more than one year prior to the date of final plat approval
shall be considered null and void and the school contribution process shall be
re-initiated.
            2.   Concurrent with the developer’s submission of the executed
agreement pursuant to subsection 1. above, the affected school district(s)
shall execute an indemnification agreement pursuant to subsection (C)(3)(a)
herein and shall provide an executed copy to the Planning, Building and
Development Director. If a developer’s delayed payment agreement has also been
executed, it should also be submitted to the Director at this time.
            3.   Following submission of the executed contribution agreement,
the Regional Superintendent of Schools shall provide written certification
prior to final plat approval that the terms of this subchapter have been
satisfied. For purposes of this subsection (C)(1), the Regional Superintendent
shall also obtain assurances that good, merchantable title to any relevant
school sites will be conveyed, as verified through warranty or trustee’s deed
and a valid plat of survey for the sites.
      (2)   Procedures for land dedication/ contribution payment. All land
dedication and cash contributions, or combinations thereof, imposed by this
chapter shall be made to the affected school district(s) prior to final plat
approval unless provided for otherwise as noted below.
         (a)   Land dedication procedures.
            1.   Reservation of land. Whenever all or part of the land to be
developed is shown on an officially adopted state, county, or municipal plan
for a school site, the developer shall show all lands so designated as
dedicated or reserved for that purpose in accordance with the provisions of §
151.190(A)(2) herein.
            2.   Dedicated land.  
               a.   The topography, soils, and natural features present on
dedicated school sites and surrounding areas must be suitable for their
intended use.
               b.   All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full
service of electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television, water and
sewer, streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter, where
applicable), and sidewalks and landscaping, all as applicable to the location
of the site, and shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this Lake
County Unified Development Ordinance. The site shall have direct access to a
fully improved street. Where appropriate, new school sites should be accessible
by a bicycle/pedestrian trail. Any vehicular access route leading to or on the
site shall be of sufficient size and good geometry to properly accommodate
vehicles that will access and traverse the site, including but not limited to
good principles of traffic circulation, accommodation of one-way and/or two-way
drives for school buses, separation of bus traffic from passenger automobile
traffic, bus drop-off areas separate from publicly dedicated streets, guest and
employee parking areas, and the like.
            3.   Designation on plat.  Land to be dedicated for public school
purposes shall be labeled on the final plat, “Hereby Dedicated to the (School
District) for Public School Purposes”.
         (b)   Cash payment procedures. Cash contributions shall be payable to
the affected school district(s) which will serve the students from the
development and shall be submitted to the school district(s). When payment is
made to the affected school district(s), receipt for payment shall be provided
by the school district(s).
            1.   Payment at time of platting. In calculating the cash
contributions to be paid at the time of platting, the county will assume that
four-bedroom single family units and/or three-bedroom multifamily units will be
constructed. The school district(s) will then hold sufficient funds pending
issuance of the building permit to enable it to refund any overpayments
resulting from the fact that units with fewer bedrooms are constructed. Refunds
shall be made at time of issuance of the building permit upon application by
the property owner to the affected school district(s).
            2.   Payment at time of building permit issuance. With the written
agreement of the affected school district(s), the county may agree that payment
of the cash contributions may be made at the time of building permit issuance.
In consideration for delayed payment, the developer shall execute a developer’s
delayed payment agreement, largely similar in form and content to
Appendix P of this Unified Development Ordinance, as provided under subsection
(C)(3)(b), herein. Proof of payment to the affected school district(s) shall be
provided to the county. The proof of payment must be signed by the affected
school district(s) indicating the receipt of the cash contribution, the name of
the development, the lot number, and the dwelling unit type. Any delayed
payment of fees or cash contributions shall be calculated based upon the “CPI
Adjustment” provided under subsection (C)(1)(a)2.b. herein, which shall be
calculated based on the time at which the building permit is issued.
            3.   Expiration. If any portion of a cash contribution is not
expended for the purposes stated above within ten years from the date of final
plat approval or payment pursuant to an agreement for deferred payment of cash
contributions until the time of building permit issuance pursuant to subsection
(C)(2)(b)2. herein, whichever is later, it shall be subject to refund. Refunds
shall only be provided when the property owner at the time of expiration
presents a written request addressed to the affected school district(s) or
Regional Superintendent of Schools within the eleventh year following the
payment. If the request is not made during the eleventh year, at the
commencement of the twelfth year the school district(s), to the extent
permitted by law, shall be authorized to declare the funds abandoned and use
the money for any legitimate purpose.
      (3)   Limitations on county liability.
         (a)   School district indemnification agreement. Before the county
will impose any payment or dedication requirements on a developer pursuant to
this subchapter, the affected school district(s) shall execute an
indemnification agreement largely similar in form and content to that set forth
in
Appendix P of this Unified Development Ordinance. This indemnification
agreement shall be executed on or before June 1 of each year. Following
execution of an indemnification agreement by the affected school district(s),
the agreement shall be furnished to the county. In the event the affected
school district(s) fails to furnish the executed indemnification agreement as
required in this section, the county reserves the right to refuse to impose any
land dedications and/or cash contributions on behalf of that affected school
district(s) until the time that the executed indemnification agreement is
furnished by the affected school district(s).
         (b)   Developer’s delayed payment agreement. If the school district(s)
and the developer agree to defer the payment of cash contributions to the time
of building permit issuance, the developer shall execute a developer’s delayed
payment agreement prior to final plat approval which shall provide that the
developer agrees: that the cash contributions payable will be adjusted in
accordance with the “CPI Adjustment” requirements herein; that the cash
contributions may be expended for the purposes described in
Appendix P; and to accept the validity of the Unified Development Ordinance and
the cash contributions as calculated. The developer’s delayed payment
agreement, or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded along with the plat of
subdivision upon approval by the county.
      (4)   Objection procedures.
         (a)   Applicability. The developer or affected school district(s) may
file objections to the contribution calculations (subsection (C)(1)) as
provided for in this section. Requests to modify any other provision of this
section shall follow the major modification procedure of §
151.192(C) herein.
         (b)   Time of filing. Prior to final plat approval, the developer or
school district(s) shall, in writing, either concur with the application of the
school contribution provisions of this subchapter or file an objection or
request a waiver thereto, as applicable under subsection (C)(4)(a) above.
Failure to file a concurrence, objections or waiver request with the Planning,
Building and Development Director within the specified time period shall
operate as a concurrence with the application of these provisions.
         (c)   Form of filing. An objection shall be submitted in a format as
provided in
Appendix P. The form shall be accompanied by an alternate determination or set
of contribution calculations and filing fee, as applicable.
         (d)   Scheduling of hearing. Upon receipt of a valid objection, the
Planning, Building and Development Director shall schedule a hearing before the
Planning, Building and Zoning Committee to occur within 60 days of receipt of
the written objection and shall inform the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee of the hearing.
         (e)   Notices.
            1.   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall notify
the developer, the affected school districts and the Regional Superintendent of
Schools by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the filing of the
objection and of the date, time, and place of the public hearing regarding
same.
            2.   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall provide
public notice of the hearing date to consider the objection at least 15 days
before the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in which the
affected school district(s) are located. The notice shall:
               a.   Indicate the date, time, and place of the public hearing;
               b.   Identify the school district(s)s affected by the objection;
               c.   Describe the nature, scope, and purpose of the objection;
and
               d.   Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
         (f)   Information and services to be used. The Planning, Building and
Development Director shall make available to the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee a copy of the written objection and any supporting documentation
thereto, in addition to any other relevant available information relating to
the objection. The Planning, Building and Zoning Committee may also retain the
services of professionals (attorneys, appraisers, statisticians, and the like)
to assist in its review of issues raised by any objection.
         (g)   Procedure for resolving an objection. The Planning, Building and
Zoning Committee shall conduct the public hearing to resolve a properly filed
objection, in accordance with the following procedure.
            1.   A public hearing shall be held for the consideration of the
objection. The developer, the affected school district(s) and the Regional
Superintendent of Schools shall be allowed to participate in the hearing as a
party thereto to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and make arguments
to the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee regarding the issues raised in
the objection. The public shall be allowed to provide comments relating to the
objection.
            2.   At the request of the developer or affected school district
(s), the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee may continue the hearing to a
later date, but in no event shall the hearing be continued beyond 45 days of
the original hearing date.
            3.   Following the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning,
Building and Zoning Committee shall make a decision and shall make a written
report within 30 days after the hearing.
            4.   The hearing shall be recorded by a certified shorthand
reporter and a written transcript of the recording shall be provided to the
Planning, Building and Development Director.
            5.   Within ten days following the Planning, Building and Zoning
Committee decision, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall
provide the developer, affected school district(s), and Regional Superintendent
of Schools with written notice of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee’s
decision.
         (h)   Costs and fees. The objector shall bear all costs of the hearing
before the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee, including but not limited
to publication costs, professional consultants, shorthand reporter services and
transcript costs, and any other expenses of the county.
         (i)   Appeals of Planning, Building and Zoning Committee actions.
Appeals of actions or decisions of the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
under the school contribution provisions of this §
151.220 shall be filed within 15 days of the date on the notice of the action
or decision. With the exception of this filing deadline, appeals shall be made
in accordance with §
151.192(D)(2) of this chapter.
   (D)   Private agreements for school contributions. This subsection (D)
governs the administration and enforcement of private agreements for school
contributions not subject to the requirements of subsection (C) above.
      (1)   Applicability. This subsection (D) shall apply whenever an affected
school district(s) and the developer reach a private agreement regarding school
contributions in lieu of following the ordinance-based school contribution
provisions contained in subsection (C) of this section.
      (2)   Administration.
         (a)   Signed copies of the private agreement(s) between any affected
school district(s) and the developer, dated not more than one year prior to the
date of final plat approval, shall be forwarded to the Planning, Building and
Development Director prior to final plat approval. The agreement(s) shall be
recorded together with the final plat. A note shall be placed on the plat
referencing their existence. Any final agreement dated more than one year prior
to the date of final plat approval shall be considered null and void for
purposes of this chapter and the school contribution process shall be re-
initiated.
         (b)   Prior to final plat approval, the Regional Superintendent of
Schools shall provide written certification that the terms of this section
governing private agreements has been satisfied for the subject development.
      (3)   Payment procedures.  
         (a)   Generally. Any private agreement shall provide that the cash
contributions shall be payable directly to the school district(s) which will
serve the students from the subdivision and be submitted to the school district
(s). When payment is made to the affected school district(s) pursuant to a
private agreement, the school district(s) shall provide a receipt for the
payment to the developer.
         (b)   Time of payment.
            1.   Payment upon final plat approval. All land dedications and
cash contributions imposed by private agreement shall be due and payable to the
affected school district(s) upon final plat approval unless otherwise specified
by the terms of the private agreement.
            2.   Payment at time of building permit issuance. With the written
agreement of the affected school district(s), payment of cash contributions
pursuant to the private agreement may be made at the time of building permit
issuance. In the event of this deferred payment pursuant to private agreement,
proof of payment to the affected school district(s) shall be provided to the
county prior to building permit issuance. The proof of payment must be signed
by the affected school district(s) indicating the receipt of the cash
contribution, the name of the development, the lot number, and the dwelling
unit type.
      (4)   Limitations on county liability. Although the county may require
proof of payment for contributions on behalf of a school district pursuant to a
private agreement between the school district and the developer, the county
shall not be considered a party to the agreement, nor shall the private
agreement place any responsibility or liability upon the county for the content
of any of the provisions or terms contained therein for any reason, including
but not limited to the extent that the provisions or terms are not authorized
by the school contribution requirements of this subchapter. Consistent with
this limitation on county liability, the following agreements shall be executed
in conjunction with a private school contribution agreement:
         (a)   School district indemnification agreement.
            1.   If a private agreement is reached between the developer and
the affected school district, the affected school district shall execute an
indemnification agreement largely similar in form and content to that set forth
in
Appendix P of this Unified Development Ordinance. This agreement shall be
executed on or before June 1 of each subsequent year. Following execution of
this agreement by the affected school district, this indemnification agreement
shall be furnished to the county and the Regional Superintendent of Schools. In
the event the affected school district fails to furnish the executed agreement
as required in this section, the county reserves the right to forego
enforcement of the proof of payment procedure set forth in subsection (D)(3)
above.
            2.   Any private agreement shall provide that the cash
contributions shall be payable directly to the school district(s) which will
serve the students from the subdivision and be submitted to the school district
(s). When payment is made to the affected school district(s) pursuant to a
private agreement, the school district(s) shall provide a receipt for the
payment to the developer upon receipt of payment.
         (b)   Developer’s county liability waiver agreement. In consideration
for the county’s agreement to permit a developer to enter into a private
agreement with an affected school district(s), the developer shall execute a
waiver agreement, largely similar in form and content to the county liability
waiver agreement in
Appendix P of this Unified Development Ordinance.
            1.   The waiver agreement shall provide that the developer agrees:
               a.   That the county is not a party to the private agreement and
is not responsible or liable for the terms of the private agreement for any
reason, including but not limited to the extent that the private agreement
provides for contributions beyond what is authorized by the contribution
requirements of §
151.220 of this County Unified Development Ordinance; and
               b.   That the developer and the developer’s successors and
assigns waive any future right to object to any aspect of this chapter or
institute any legal action against the county with respect to any aspect
thereof as it applies to the development under review.
            2.   This developer’s county liability waiver agreement, or
memorandum thereof, shall be recorded along with the plat of subdivision upon
approval by the county.
(Ord., § 11.1, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.221 PARK AND RECREATION AREAS.
   (A)   Purpose. As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision of
any parcel of land within unincorporated Lake County, in order to provide
proximate recreation land for the residents of the subdivision, qualifying
developers shall be required to:
      (1)   Permanently set aside land for active or passive recreation
purposes;
      (2)   Provide a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication; or
      (3)   Provide a combination of both.
   (B)   Applicability. The recreation land dedication or cash contribution in
lieu thereof shall apply to all residential land developments with two
exceptions.
      (1)   Subdivisions composed entirely of single family detached houses
having a net density equal to or less than 1.25 dwelling units per acre shall
not be required to dedicate land or contribute cash; and
      (2)   Subdivisions which would be required to provide less than one-
fourth acre of recreation land shall not be required to dedicate land or
contribute cash.
   (C)   Calculations. The recreational land requirement is determined by the
site capacity regulations of §
151.070(D).
   (D)   Design guidelines.
      (1)   Recreation improvements shall be accessible to all residents of the
subdivision.
      (2)   Access to recreation areas shall be provided from internal
subdivision streets.
      (3)   Recreation improvements shall be designed so they maximize their
use and enjoyment for the population served.
      (4)   Proposed subdivisions may provide passive and active recreation
improvements. Passive recreation improvements may consist of trails, picnic
areas and benches. Active recreation improvements may consist of sports fields,
game tables, tennis courts, sand boxes, and other playground equipment.
      (5)   Landscaping within recreation areas shall be designed to be
aesthetically pleasing and functionally usable for the specified purpose.
      (6)   All sites shall be ready for full service of electrical, gas,
water, sewer, sidewalk, streets and storm drainage where those services are
included in the subdivision and as applicable to the location of the site.
      (7)   When appropriate, recreation improvements may be combined with that
of an adjoining subdivision in order to produce more useable recreation areas
or trail linkages.
   (E)   Review requirements.
      (1)   The proposed recreation areas shall be designated on the
preliminary plat.
      (2)   Plans, cost estimates, and other information necessary to ensure
the proper designation, use, maintenance, ownership, and installation of all
recreation improvements required by this chapter shall be submitted as part of
the final engineering plans.
      (3)   Recreation improvement plans shall include but shall not be limited
to the following:
          (a)   Site location;
         (b)   Points of access;
         (c)   Site design, including landscaping; and
         (d)   Equipment specifications.
   (F)   Installation. The recreation improvements shall be installed in
accordance with the approved final engineering plans. The installation of
recreation improvements shall be guaranteed by including costs of the
improvements in the performance assurance deposited with the county.
   (G)   Maintenance.  
      (1)   The maintenance of recreation improvements shall be guaranteed by
providing the county a maintenance assurance for the amount and term specified
by the county.
      (2)   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
improvements until the time that 80% of the lots in the subdivision have been
sold. However, the developer shall not transfer the improvements for the
purpose of maintenance until all maintenance assurances are released by the
county.
      (3)   The maintenance and improvement responsibilities for the recreation
areas shall be determined based upon the form of ownership and finalized at the
time of the final plat review.
      (4)   Maintenance of the recreation improvements shall consist of all
acts necessary to ensure that they remain usable and that no hazards,
nuisances, or unhealthy conditions exist.
   (H)   Ownership.
      (1)   Recreation improvements shall be either publicly dedicated or
commonly owned.
         (a)   The developer may dedicate the sites to any suitable public or
not-for-profit entity approved by the Planning, Building and Development
Director; or
         (b)   If the developer does not choose to dedicate the sites or if
there is no public agency willing to accept the dedication, provisions shall be
made for a compulsory homeowners’ association as a means of assuring that the
land will be maintained and preserved in perpetuity as commonly held
recreational open space.
      (2)   The developer shall be responsible for conveying good, marketable
title to the sites and shall be responsible for payment of all real estate
taxes to date of conveyance.
      (3)   Articles of agreement for a homeowners’ association, or any other
necessary documents, shall specify the appropriate maintenance responsibilities
for all active and passive recreation improvements. These shall be approved by
the Planning, Building and Development Director and shall be recorded with the
final plat with a notation on the plat referring to the documents.
   (I)   Cash contributions.
      (1)   General. In the following situations the county may require the
developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication:
         (a)   A previously established public park is in the immediate
vicinity of the proposed subdivision. The park shall be less than a mile from
the proposed subdivision and shall be accessible by either a sidewalk or a
trail;
         (b)   The subdivision is small and the resulting recreation area is
too small to be practical; or
         (c)   The available land is inappropriate for a recreation area.
      (2)   Criteria. The cash contributions shall be based on the fair market
value of the gross site valued as improved land in the area that otherwise
would have been dedicated as a recreation area.
      (3)   Fees and costs. The cost of all appraisals shall be the
responsibility of the parties submitting them.
      (4)   Determination of fair market value. The fair market value shall be
determined in the following manner:
         (a)   After preliminary plat approval and prior to submission of the
proposed final plat, the developer shall submit to the Planning, Building and
Development Director a statement as to the fair market value of the improved
land in the area and state the evidence or reasons for this.
         (b)   If the Planning, Building and Development Director does not
agree with the statement of fair market value, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall notify the developer who shall then submit a fair
market value appraisal prepared by a certified appraiser of improved land in
the area of the proposed development. The applicant shall be responsible for
paying all costs of the required appraisal.
         (c)   If the Planning, Building and Development Director does not
agree with the certified appraisal submitted by the applicant, the Planning,
Building and Development Director shall, within 15 days from the receipt of
such, notify the developer of this disagreement in writing. The county shall
then have a fair market value appraisal prepared by a certified appraiser of
the improved land in the area of the proposed development.
         (d)   The final determination of the fair market value per acre of the
improved land shall be made by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee
based upon the information submitted by the developer, any appraisers involved
and from any other sources that may be involved.
      (5)   Administration. Any local public agency that provides recreation
land and facilities may be eligible for the cash contribution. The Planning,
Building and Development Director shall approve of the agency. The cash
contribution shall be held in a special fund by the county or other public body
designated by the county. The fund shall be used to cover only those costs
specifically and uniquely attributable to the subject subdivision.
Specifically, the funds shall be used to purchase recreation land that will
serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of the proposed
subdivision or for the improvement of recreation land existing within one mile
of the proposed subdivision.
      (6)   Expiration. If any portion of a cash contribution is not expended
for the purposes set forth herein within ten years of the date of receipt, it
shall be refunded to the present owner of the property for which the
contribution was made.
   (J)   Criteria for combined land dedication and cash contribution. There may
be situations in subdivisions when a combination of land dedication and a cash
contribution are necessary. These combinations may be permitted in the
following instances:
      (1)   The local park district indicates that the proposed subdivision
overlaps a proposed park. The portion of the subdivision falling within the
park shall be dedicated as a recreation improvement. The remainder of the
required donation shall be in the form of a cash contribution; or
      (2)   When the Planning, Building and Development Director determines
that due to site design constraints, the entire required land area cannot be
accommodated in the subdivision, the remainder of the required donation shall
be in the form of a cash contribution.
(Ord., § 11.2, passed 10-13-2009)
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 151.230 GENERAL.
   (A)   Introduction. The regulations of this subchapter govern uses,
structures, lots, and other situations that came into existence legally but
that do not comply with one or more requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   This subchapter applies to nonconformities created by initial
adoption of or amendments to this chapter.
      (2)   It also applies to nonconformities that were legal nonconformities
under previously applicable ordinances, even if the type or extent of
nonconformity is different.
   (C)   Increase prohibited. A nonconformity shall not be increased except to
the extent otherwise specifically authorized by this subchapter.
   (D)   Continuation permitted. Any nonconformity that legally existed on the
date of adoption of this chapter or that becomes nonconforming upon the
adoption of any amendment to this chapter may be continued in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   Determination of nonconformity status. The burden of establishing that
any nonconformity is a nonconformity shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of
the nonconformity.
   (F)   Replacement values.
      (1)   Replacement value for all structures shall be interpreted as three
times the assessed valuation of the improvement (based on information obtained
from the Township Assessor) unless the applicant provides replacement valuation
data prepared by a certified appraiser.
      (2)   When assessed valuation data is not available and the subject owner
has not provided appraisal data, the Planning, Building and Development
Director shall be authorized to determine replacement value based on the best
available data.
   (G)   Repairs and maintenance. Incidental repairs and normal maintenance of
nonconforming situations shall be permitted unless the repairs increase the
extent of nonconformity or are otherwise expressly prohibited by this chapter.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent structures from being
structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition, in accordance with
an official order of a public official.
   (H)   Tenancy and ownership. The status of a nonconformity is not affected
by changes of tenancy, ownership or management.
(Ord., § 12.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.231 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Definition. A nonconforming use is a use that was legally established
but which no longer complies with the use regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located.
   (B)   Expansion.
      (1)   A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or expanded unless the
expansion eliminates or reduces the nonconforming aspects of the situation.
      (2)   Subsection (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed as
prohibiting additions to any dwelling regardless of the zoning district in
which the dwellings are located, nor shall any provision of this subchapter be
construed as prohibiting the construction of any use that is accessory to a
dwelling unit regardless of the zoning district in which the dwelling is
located.
      (3)   Expansion for the sole purpose of complying with off-street parking
standards of this chapter shall not be considered expansion of a nonconforming
use.
      (4)   No temporary use permit shall be issued for a site containing a
nonconforming use, if the proposed temporary use or event has the potential to
generate additional traffic, noise, or other adverse impacts on the surrounding
area.
   (C)   Change of use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use
other than a use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located.
   (D)   Loss of nonconformity status.
      (1)   Abandonment. If a nonconforming use ceases for any reason for a
period of more than one year, the use shall be considered abandoned. Once
abandoned, the use’s nonconforming status shall be lost and reestablishment of
the use shall be prohibited. Any subsequent use of the property shall comply
with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
      (2)   Damage or destruction. If a structure containing a nonconforming
use is destroyed by disaster to the extent of more than 50% of the replacement
cost of the structure located above the average ground elevation, the use shall
not be reestablished except in compliance with all regulations applicable to
the zoning district in which it is located. Any proposed improvement unrelated
to damage sustained from a disaster may exceed 50% of the replacement cost of
the structure. Replacement cost calculations will consist of the following
process:
         (a)   Submission of complete stamped engineering or architectural
drawings showing an itemized list of all materials involved in the project
(excluding open appliances); and
         (b)   Submission of at least two contractor’s cost estimates based on
the architectural drawings, consisting of labor and all materials. The
Planning, Building and Development Director may waive the above submission
requirement upon a determination that the extent of damage or destruction
appears to be significantly below the 50% threshold based on available
information.
   (E)   Accessory uses. No use that is accessory to a principal nonconforming
use shall continue after the principal use has ceased or terminated.
(Ord., § 12.2, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-
2019)
§ 151.232 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Definition. A nonconforming structure is any building or structure
that was legally established but which no longer complies with any of the
following:
      (1)   The density and dimensional standards of §
151.125; and
      (2)   The floodplain development standards of §
151.147.
   (B)   Use. A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the
underlying zoning district, subject to all applicable standards of §§
151.110 through
151.114.
   (C)   Expansion. A nonconforming structure may be enlarged or expanded if
the expansion does not increase the extent of nonconformity.
 
COMMENTARY:
All building alterations or additions that violate a zoning district
dimensional standard shall be prohibited. This is interpreted, for example, to
mean that no additions, including a second-story addition, will be allowed
within a required setback, except as described in subsection (H)(2) below.
 
   (D)   Moving. A nonconforming structure may be moved if the movement or
relocation eliminates the nonconformity. This provision shall not be
interpreted as prohibiting the elevation of a nonconforming structure for the
purpose of floodproofing or repair.
   (E)   Loss of nonconforming status; damage or destruction. If a
nonconforming structure is destroyed by disaster to the extent of more than 50%
of the replacement cost of the structure located above the average ground
elevation, it may not be reestablished except in compliance with all
regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it is located, or in
compliance with subsection (H) below.
      (1)   Replacement cost calculations will consist of the following
process:
         (a)   Submission of complete stamped engineering or architectural
drawings showing an itemized list of all materials involved in the project
(excluding open appliances);
         (b)   Submission of at least two contractor’s cost estimates based on
the architectural drawings, consisting of labor and all materials. The
Planning, Building and Development Director may waive the above submission
requirement upon a determination that the extent of damage or destruction
appears to be significantly below the 50% threshold based on available
information.
   (F)   Nonconforming structures within floodplains. The owner of a
nonconforming structure that has been removed from a floodplain may apply for a
permit to re-establish the structure outside the floodplain, provided that a
permit application for the re-establishment is submitted within one year of the
date that the structure was demolished. Once a permit has been approved, the
structure must be reestablished before expiration of the permit.
   (G)   Accessory structures. No structure that is accessory to a principal
nonconforming structure shall continue after the principal structure has been
destroyed by disaster to an extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost of
the structure located above the average ground elevation, unless the accessory
structure complies with all applicable regulations of this chapter.
   (H)   Nonconforming single family dwelling and accessory structures.
      (1)   A legal nonconforming single family dwelling or an accessory
structure on a foundation may be restored if deteriorated, damaged, or
destroyed to an extent greater than 50% of the replacement cost of the
structure, provided that the following standards are met:
         (a)   The restored structure does not extend further into any required
setback than the existing structure prior to improvement or rebuilding;
         (b)   The restored structure is located at least ten feet from the
street lot line and at least four feet from the side and rear lot lines;
         (c)   Any proposed improvement unrelated to damage sustained from a
disaster may exceed 50% of the replacement cost of the structure;
         (d)   Any proposed addition or expansion to the existing structure
beyond a repair, remodel, or restoration must meet the setback requirement of
the underlying zoning district or the setback requirement for a nonconforming
lot, whichever applies; and
         (e)   If the structure is located in the floodplain and if the
restoration constitutes “substantial improvement”, the entire structure shall
be brought into conformance with the floodplain provisions of §§
151.145 through
151.154.
      (2)   A legal nonconforming single family dwelling may be allowed a
second story, provided the following standards are met:
         (a)   The second story does not extend further into any required
setback than the existing structure;
         (b)   The existing structure is located at least ten feet from the
street lot line and at least four feet from the side and rear lot lines;
         (c)   The structure complies with the maximum height requirement;
         (d)   If the proposed improvement constitutes “substantial
improvement” (see §
151.271), the water’s edge setback requirement shall apply; or
         (e)   If the structure is located in the floodplain and if the
improvement constitutes “substantial improvement” (see §
151.271), the entire structure shall be brought into conformance with the
floodplain provisions of §§
151.145 through
151.154.
   (I)   Nonconforming multi-dwelling structures. A multi-dwelling structure
that was legally established in accordance with all regulations in effect at
the time of establishment shall not be deemed nonconforming solely due to the
fact that it does not comply with the maximum density standards of this
chapter. If such a structure is destroyed by disaster, it may be rebuilt,
provided that the number of dwelling units does not exceed the number that
existed prior to destruction or the maximum density limit of the subject zoning
district, whichever is greater.
   (J)   Structures rendered nonconforming due to right-of-way acquisition. If
a structure has been rendered nonconforming or made more nonconforming by a
public agency’s acquisition of a portion of the lot upon which the structure is
located, the structure shall have the status of a legal nonconforming
structure. If the structure consists of a single family dwelling and is
subsequently destroyed by disaster, the owner of the single family dwelling may
apply for a permit to reestablish the single family dwelling at the same
location. Upon notice that the single family dwelling has been destroyed by
disaster and that the owner wishes to reestablish the single family dwelling at
the same location, the county shall inform the owner in writing that the permit
application for the reestablishment shall be submitted within one year of the
date of the notification letter. Once a permit has been approved, the single
family dwelling must be reestablished before expiration of the permit. All
other structures shall be subject to the nonconforming structure provisions of
this subchapter.
   (K)   Structures rendered nonconforming due to consolidation. If a structure
is rendered nonconforming or made more nonconforming by consolidation of
parcels required pursuant to this chapter, the structure shall have the status
of a legal nonconforming structure.
   (L)   Structures rendered nonconforming due to rezoning action. If a
structure has been rendered nonconforming or made more nonconforming by a
rezoning action, the structure shall have the status of a legal nonconforming
structure.
(Ord., § 12.3, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed - - ; Ord.
19-1378, passed 9-10-2019)
§ 151.233 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Definition. A nonconforming lot is a tract of land, designated on a
duly recorded subdivision plat, or by a duly recorded deed, or by other lawful
means that complied with the lot area, lot width, and other dimensional
standards of the zoning district in which it was located at the time of its
creation, but that does not comply with the minimum lot area, lot width, or
other dimensional requirement of the zoning district in which it is now
located. If a lot is rendered nonconforming or made more nonconforming by a
public agency’s acquisition of a portion of the lot or by the rezoning of the
lot, the lot shall have the status of a nonconforming lot.
   (B)   Uses.
      (1)   In AG, RE, E, R1–6, and RR Districts, vacant nonconforming lots may
be developed with a detached house, government uses or structures containing no
assembly space, basic utility structures, local food gardens, or ground-mounted
solar energy systems provided that the use complies with the minimum standards
of this section and the requirements of the Lake County Health Department or
other agency providing sewer service.
 
COMMENTARY:
It is the county’s desire to integrate necessary governmental use and
structures and utility structures into unincorporated areas as seamlessly as
possible to avoid potential land use conflicts. To that end, the county
encourages new governmental uses and structures and basic utility structures to
be located on conforming lots already containing the uses or structures. When
this is not possible or practical, a conforming nonresidentially-zoned lot is
the most desirable location. A nonconforming nonresidentially zoned lot or a
conforming residentially-zoned lot is the next most desirable location. The
least desirable location is a nonconforming, residentially-zoned lot.
 
      (2)   In AG, RE, E, R1–R6, and RR Districts, an accessory detached garage
not to exceed 576 square feet in size, underground utilities, or a boathouse
may be constructed at or after the time of issuance of a building permit for a
principal dwelling on a nonconforming parcel under the same ownership on the
opposite side of an alley, easement, or right-of-way. The placement of a new
septic system or an addition to an existing septic system other than the repair
of an existing septic system located on a parcel on the opposite side of an
alley, easement or right-of-way shall require written approval from the highway
authority having jurisdiction over the subject right-of-way and shall require
consolidation through the covenant method as specified in subsection (D)(3)(b)
below.
      (3)   In all other districts, vacant nonconforming lots may be developed
with uses allowed in the underlying zoning district, provided that the uses or
structures containing the uses comply with the minimum standards of this
section and the requirements of the Lake County Health Department or other
agency providing sewer service. If the underlying zoning district allows a
variety of uses or a variety of intensities of uses and one or more uses or
intensities would comply with applicable lot area, lot width or other
dimensional and use standards, while others would not, then only the uses or
intensities that comply with applicable dimensional and use standards shall be
permitted.
   (C)   Dimensional standards. Development on nonconforming lots shall comply
with the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district, except as
expressly stated in this section.
      (1)   Agricultural and residential zoning districts. The following
dimensional standards shall apply to development on nonconforming lots located
in AG, RE, E, R1–6, or RR Districts.
         (a)   Front setbacks. The minimum front setback shall be 20% of the
lot depth or the underlying zoning district setback, whichever is less. Double-
frontage (through) lots shall maintain a front setback from both streets.
         (b)   Interior side and rear setbacks. The minimum interior side and
rear setback for principal structures shall be four feet or 10% of the lot
width, whichever is greater. This provision shall not be interpreted as
requiring a greater setback than specified for the underling zoning district.
The minimum interior side and rear setbacks for accessory structures shall be
four feet.
         (c)   Street side setbacks. The minimum street side setback shall be
four feet, plus one-half foot of additional setback for each foot lot width
above 28 feet. However, if the Planning, Building and Development Director
determines that the abutting road right-of-way is currently unimproved and is
likely to remain unimproved, the street side setbackshall be the same as an
interior side setback. Setbacks from alleys shall be the same as otherwise
applicable side or rear setbacks. In all cases, structures shall comply with
the intersection visibility standards of §
151.172.
 
COMMENTARY:
Street Side Setbacks
   The minimum street side setback on nonconforming lots is four feet, plus
one-half foot for each foot of lot width above 28 feet.
Examples:
   Lot Width (Ft.)   Minimum Setback (Ft.)
      28      4
      29      4.5
      30      5
      31      5.5
      40      10
      50      15
 
         (d)   Setback from water bodies. All structures except those expressly
exempted in §§
151.125 through
151.132, shall be set back from all water bodies in accordance with §§
151.145 through
151.154.
         (e)   Impervious surface. Lots that are nonconforming due to
insufficient area shall be allowed an impervious surface ratio (ISR) of 0.50,
provided that, for lots located within the Agricultural, Rural Estate, Estate,
and Residential-1 Zoning Districts, in no event shall the impervious surface
exceed the impervious surface threshold for a minimally conforming lot in the
underlying zoning district. The Planning, Building and Development Director may
allow an increase in ISR to a maximum of 0.60 provided an on-site inspection is
conducted to determine that there shall be no adverse impact resulting from
flooding or drainage on the neighboring properties due to increase in
impervious surface. In the event of an anticipated adverse impact, the
Planning, Building and Development Director shall either deny the increase or
shall approve the increase subject to additional engineering requirements and
improvements that will mitigate the impact. All other nonconforming lots shall
comply with the impervious surface requirements of the underlying zoning
district. ISR shall be calculated by dividing the total area of all impervious
surfaces on the site by the site’s base site area.
 
COMMENTARY:
Impervious Surface Threshold for Nonconforming Lots
   The impervious surface for nonconforming lots in the Agricultural, Rural
Estate, Estate and Residential-1 Zoning Districts shall not exceed the
impervious surface threshold for a minimally conforming lot in the underlying
zoning district.
   Examples:
   Zoning District   Impervious Surface Threshold (Sq. Ft.)
      AG, RE      20,000
      E      12,000
      R-1      8,000
 
         (f)   Height.
            1.   The maximum height of principal structures on nonconforming
lots of less than 60 feet in width shall be 30 feet plus one-third foot for
each foot of lot width above 40 feet up to the maximum height allowed in the
underlying zoning district, except in the AG zone or on lots equal to or
greater than 40,000 square feet in area. Accessory structures shall not exceed
12 feet in height at the minimum side and rear setback of four feet.
            2.   For each one foot of additional setback beyond four feet, the
height of the accessory structure may be increased by two feet, to a maximum
height of 20 feet or 25 feet in the AG District.
 
COMMENTARY:
   Height
   Lot Width (Ft.)   Maximum Height (Ft.)
      30      30
      40      30
      45      31 ft., 8 in.
      50      33 ft., 4 in.
      55      35
      60      40
 
         (g)   Floor area of accessory structures. The combined floor area of
all accessory structures on the subject parcel shall not exceed one and one-
half times the floor area of the principal structure on the parcel.
      (2)   Nonresidential zoning districts. The following dimensional
standards shall apply to development on nonconforming lots located in all
zoning districts except AG, RE, E, R1–6, or RR Districts.
         (a)   Front setbacks. The minimum front setback shall be 20% of the
lot depth or the required zoning district setback, whichever is less. In all
cases, the minimum front setback shall be at least ten feet. Double-frontage
(through) lots shall maintain a front setback from both streets.
         (b)   Interior side setbacks. No side setback shall be less than ten
feet unless expressly allowed by the underlying zoning district.
         (c)   Rear setback. Nonconforming lots shall comply with the rear
setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
         (d)   Street setback. The minimum street side setback shall be four
feet, plus one-half foot of additional setback for each foot of lot width above
28 feet. In all cases, structures shall comply with the intersection visibility
standards of §
151.172.
COMMENTARY:
Street Side Setbacks
   The minimum street side setback on non-conforming lots is four feet, plus
one-half foot for each foot of lot width above 28 feet.
Examples:
Lot Width (Ft.) Minimum Setback (Ft.)
28              4
29              4.5
30              5
31              5.5
40              10
50              15
 
         (e)   Setback from water bodies. All structures except those expressly
exempted in §§
151.125 through
151.132, shall be set back from all water bodies in accordance with §§
151.145 through
151.154.
         (f)   Height, impervious surface, and floor area ratio. Nonconforming
lots shall comply with the height, impervious surface, and floor area ratio
requirements of the underlying zoning district. An accessory structure on a
nonconforming lot that abuts a residential zoning district shall not exceed 12
feet in height at the minimum side and rear setback. For each one foot of
additional setback beyond the minimum required setback, the maximum height of
the accessory structure may be increased by two feet, to a maximum height of 25
feet.
      (3)   Detached house (single family) dwellings. If there is an existing
detached house (single family) dwelling located on a nonconforming lot in a
zoning district other than an AG, RE, E, R1–6, or RR District, any addition to
a principal or accessory building or any new accessory building thereto shall
be governed by the setbacks in subsection (C)(2)(a) above, rather than
subsection (C)(2)(b) above. However, no single family dwelling or accessory
building shall be converted to a nonresidential use permitted in that zoning
district unless it complies with the setback requirements of subsection (C)(2)
(b) above.
   (D)   Development standards for nonconforming recorded lots.
      (1)   Standards. The following standards shall apply to the development
of a single nonconforming lot in platted subdivisions. These standards shall
apply to the establishment of principal or accessory structures.
         (a)   Minimum requirements of the Lake County Health Department for
individual sewage disposal system and individual well shall be met if sewer is
not present.
         (b)   Each lot shall have direct access to an improved street approved
by the relevant highway authority.
         (c)   Drainage improvements consistent with the site development
standards of §§
151.145 through
151.154 shall be met.
      (2)   Consolidation of parcels.  
         (a)   A consolidation of parcels shall be required in the following
instances when it is necessary to use any contiguous nonconforming recorded
parcel(s) held in common ownership:
            1.   For construction of a new principal residential or
nonresidential structure that does not meet the setback from the common parcel
line unless the structure straddles the common parcel line;
            2.   For construction of an addition to an existing residential or
nonresidential structure that will not meet the setback from a common parcel
line unless the structure or addition straddles the same common parcel line;
            3.   For construction of an accessory residential building on the
same parcel on which the principal residential structure exists that will not
meet the setback requirement from the common parcel line unless the existing
principal residential structure straddles the same common parcel line;
            4.   For any new residential or nonresidential construction that
will not meet the impervious surface ratio requirement if the ISR was
calculated only on one parcel; or for any new nonresidential construction that
will not meet the floor area ratio requirement if the FAR was calculated only
on one parcel;
            5.   For construction of any of the following improvements on a
parcel on which the principal residential structure is not located:
               a.   More than one accessory residential building;
               b.   An accessory residential building larger than 576 square
feet in size;
               c.   A new septic system; or
               d.   An addition to an existing septic system.
            6.   For construction of any of the following improvements on a
parcel on which the principal nonresidential structure is not located:
               a.   Any new nonresidential accessory building;
               b.   A new septic system; or
               c.   An addition to an existing septic system.
         (b)   Construction of accessory structures such as decks, porches,
gazebos, pergolas, sheds, ground-mounted solar energy systems, and pools shall
be exempt from the consolidation requirement, provided that these structures
meet the setback requirement from the common lot line.
         (c)   Improvements such as reroofing, residing, electrical upgrades,
interior alterations, installation of exterior air conditioning/heating units,
seawalls, retaining walls, the repair of failing septic systems, driveways, and
fences shall be exempt from the consolidation requirement.
         (d)   The adjustment or movement of a common boundary line between two
or more contiguous parcels under common ownership, consisting of at least one
nonconforming recorded lot, may be accomplished through a consolidation (in
lieu of the lot split subdivision requirements of §
151.186(B)(3)(b)), provided that the adjustment or movement does not increase
the extent of nonconformity of either lot (i.e., the extent of nonconformity
remains the same or decreases for each resulting parcel).
      (3)   Required method of consolidation; covenant.
         (a)   A consolidation of parcels through covenant refers to any
required consolidation within the boundaries of a platted subdivision, of metes
and bounds parcels, not within the boundaries of a platted subdivision, or the
consolidation of one or more metes and bounds parcels with a parcel, located
within the boundaries of a platted subdivision, that has been vacated through a
written vacation instrument in accordance herewith.
         (b)   A consolidation by covenant shall be executed through a signed,
notarized, and recorded covenant on forms available from the Planning, Building
and Development Department.
         (c)   Through the covenant, the applicant shall agree that all parcels
comprising the consolidation of parcels shall remain in common ownership in
perpetuity, and shall henceforth be considered one zoning lot for development
purposes.
         (d)   The covenant would be binding on the applicant’s successors and
assigns.
         (e)   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall have the
authority to approve a consolidation through covenant as contemplated in this
subsection (D)(3) and to execute the written covenant instrument on behalf of
the county.
 
COMMENTARY:
The Lake County Health Department approval is required for individual sewage
disposal systems and individual wells if public sewer and water are not
present. In accordance with §
151.169 , each lot is required to have direct access to an improved, approved
street. Compliance with the requirements of the site development standards of
§§
151.145  through
151.154  is required.
 
(Ord., § 12.4, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 19-1378, passed
9-10-2019)
§ 151.234 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Definition. A nonconforming sign is a sign that was legally
established but which no longer complies with the sign regulations of this
chapter.
   (B)   Expansion. A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged, expanded or
otherwise improved except for the purpose of normal maintenance.
 
COMMENTARY:
For the purpose of this subsection (B), otherwise improved shall include the
addition of lighting or new colors. “Normal maintenance” shall include
replacement of rotting or dilapidated materials with equivalent materials,
painting (with the same color), and other restorative measures.
 
   (C)   Moving. A nonconforming sign shall not be moved in whole or in part to
any other location unless the move results in the entire sign being brought
into compliance with all applicable regulations of this chapter.
   (D)   Loss of nonconforming status. If a sign is destroyed by any means by
more than 50% of its value, it shall not be reestablished except in compliance
with all applicable regulations of this chapter.
   (E)   Signs accessory to nonconforming uses and structures. Signs accessory
to nonconforming uses and structures shall be permitted, subject to the
applicable sign standards of §
151.173.
(Ord., § 12.5, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.235 NONCONFORMING LANDSCAPING.
   A use that was legally established in accordance with all landscaping
regulations in effect at the time of establishment shall not be deemed
nonconforming solely due to the fact that it does not comply with the
landscaping regulations of §
151.167.
(Ord., § 12.6, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.236 AMORTIZATION.
   The County Board shall be authorized to order the amortization of existing
nonconformities in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
(Ord., § 12.7, passed 10-13-2009)
VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.250 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   The Planning, Building and Development Director shall be responsible for
enforcing this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated.
(Ord., § 13.1, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.251 VIOLATIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this chapter or state law, any
violation of this chapter, including but not limited to the following, shall be
subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter:
   (A)   To use land or buildings in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this chapter;
   (B)   To erect a building or other structure in any way not consistent with
the requirements of this chapter;
   (C)   To engage in the development or subdivision of land in any way not
consistent with the requirements of §§
151.185 through
151.204;
   (D)   To transfer title to any lots or parts of a development unless the
land development plan or subdivision has received all approvals required under
§§
151.185 through
151.204 and an approved plan or plat, if required, has been filed in the
appropriate county office;
   (E)   To submit for recording with a county office any subdivision plat,
land division, or other land development plan that has not been approved in
accordance with the requirements of §§
151.185 through
151.204 or that does not qualify for an exemption under the Plat Act;
   (F)   To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the
requirements of §
151.173;
   (G)   To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of
a sign, the subdivision or development of land or any other activity requiring
one or more permits or approvals under this chapter without obtaining all the
required permits or approvals;
   (H)   To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of
a sign, the subdivision or development of land or any other activity requiring
one or more permits under this chapter in any way inconsistent with any permit
or approval or any conditions imposed thereon;
   (I)   To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
chapter or any condition imposed on the permit or approval;
   (J)    To obscure, obstruct, or destroy any notice required to be posted or
otherwise given under this chapter;
   (K)   To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this
chapter; or
   (L)   To continue any violation as defined above, with each week of
continued violation to be considered a separate violation for purposes of
computing cumulative civil or criminal penalties.
(Ord., § 13.2, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.252 CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   Each week that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of the
violation from the county shall constitute a separate violation of this
chapter.
(Ord., § 13.3, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.253 REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT POWERS.
   The county shall have the following remedies and enforcement powers:
   (A)   Withhold permit.
      (1)   The Planning, Building and Development Director may deny or
withhold all permits, certificates, or other forms of authorization on any land
or structure or improvements thereon upon which there is an uncorrected
violation of a provision of this chapter or of a condition or qualification of
a permit, certificate, approval, or other authorization previously granted by
the county. This enforcement provision shall apply regardless of whether the
current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation in question.
      (2)   The Planning, Building and Development Director may deny or
withhold all permits, certificates, or other forms of authorization on any land
or structure or improvements owned or being developed by a person who owns,
developed or otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of this
chapter or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval
or other authorization previously granted by the county. This provision shall
apply regardless of whether the property for which the permit or other approval
is sought is the property in violation.
      (3)   The Planning, Building and Development Director may deny or
withhold temporary use permits on any land or structure or improvements owned
or being developed by a person who owns, developed or otherwise caused a
violation of a previous temporary use permit. This provision shall apply
regardless of whether the property for which the temporary use permit sought is
for the property on which the previous violation occurred.
   (B)   Permits approved with conditions. Instead of withholding or denying a
permit or other authorization, the Planning, Building and Development Director
may grant the authorization subject to the condition that the violation be
corrected.
   (C)   Revoke permits. Any development permit or other form of authorization
required under this chapter may be revoked by the Planning, Building and
Development Director when the Planning, Building and Development Director
determines: that there is departure from the plans, specifications, or
conditions as required under terms of the permit; that the development permit
was procured by false representation or was issued by mistake; or that any of
the provisions of this chapter are being violated. Written notice of the
revocation shall be served upon the owner, the owner’s agent or contractor, or
upon any person employed on the building or structure for which the permit was
issued, or shall be posted in a prominent location; and, thereafter, no such
construction shall proceed.
   (D)   Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the Planning, Building
and Development Director may stop work on any building or structure on any land
on which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this chapter or of
a permit or other form of authorization issued hereunder.
 
COMMENTARY:
Issuance of a “red tag” or other violation tag constitutes a “stop work order”.
 
   (E)   Revoke plan or other approval. Where a violation of this chapter
involves a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to which the
approval of the plans was made subject, the Planning, Building and Development
Director may, upon notice to the applicant and other known parties in interest
(including any holders of building permits affected), revoke the plan or other
approval or condition its continuance on strict compliance with this chapter,
the provision of security to ensure that construction is completed in
compliance with approved plans, or any other conditions as the Planning,
Building and Development Director may reasonably impose.
   (F)   Revoke preliminary plat approval. Revocation of preliminary plat
approval may be made by the Planning, Building and Zoning Committee at any time
if it finds that errors or omissions were made on any of the submitted
documents which may significantly affect the design or engineering of the
subdivision or the owner’s legal right to divide the property.
   (G)   Injunctive relief. The county may seek an injunction or other
equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this chapter or of a permit,
certificate, or other form of authorization granted hereunder.
   (H)   The county may enforce violations of this ordinance in accordance with
the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.66).
   (I)   Forfeiture and confiscation of signs. Any sign installed or placed on
public property, except in compliance with the regulations of §
151.173 shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In
addition to other remedies and penalties of this section, the county shall have
the right to recover, from the sign owner or person who placed the sign, the
full costs of sign removal and disposal.
   (J)   Abatement. The county may seek a court order in the nature of
mandamus, abatement, injunction, or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the
condition in which they existed prior to the violation.
   (K)   Penalties. The county may seek any other penalties as are provided by
the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.66) and Illinois law.
   (L)   Other remedies and powers. The county shall have any other remedies
and enforcement powers as are and as may be from time to time provided by state
law for the violation of zoning, subdivision, sign, or related provisions.
(Ord., § 13.4, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.254 CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the continuation of previous
enforcement actions, undertaken by the county pursuant to previous and valid
ordinances and laws.
(Ord., § 13.5, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.255 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   The remedies and enforcement powers established in this chapter shall be
cumulative, and the county may exercise them in any order.
(Ord., § 13.6, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.256 PERSONS SUBJECT TO PENALTIES.
   The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof,
and any architect, builder, contractor, or agent, or other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains the violations may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and be subject to the above penalties.
(Ord., § 13.7, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.257 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Non-emergency matters.
      (1)   In the case of violations of this chapter that do not constitute an
emergency or require immediate attention, the Planning, Building and
Development Director shall give notice of the nature of the violation to the
property owner or to any other person who is party to the agreement or to any
applicant for any relevant permit in the manner hereafter stated, after which
the persons receiving notice shall have ten days to correct the violation
before further enforcement action shall be taken.
      (2)   Notice shall be given in person, by U.S. mail, or by posting notice
on the premises. Notices of violation shall state the nature of the violation
and the time period for compliance and may state the corrective steps necessary
and the nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the
situation not be corrected.
   (B)   Emergency matters. In the case of violations of this chapter that
constitute an emergency situation as a result of safety or public concerns, or
violations that will create increased problems or costs if not remedied
immediately, the county may use the enforcement powers available under this
chapter without prior notice, but the Planning, Building and Development
Director shall attempt to give notice simultaneously with beginning enforcement
action. Notice may be provided to the property owner, to any other person who
is party to the agreement and to applicants for any relevant permit.
   (C)   Appeals. Enforcement actions taken by the Planning, Building and
Development Director may be appealed by the affected party to the Zoning Board
of Appeals in accordance with §
151.058. In the case of a violation of §§
151.185 through
151.204 or §§
151.220 through
151.221, appeals of enforcement actions shall be processed in accordance with §
151.192(D).
(Ord., § 13.8, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 151.258 WIND ENERGY FACILITIES, ACCESSORY.
   (A)   General. The provisions in this section are in addition to the general
violation, penalties and enforcement provisions of this subchapter. Lake County
shall retain authority to enforce the height and setbacks and operating
requirements for accessory wind facilities in §
151.113(P), and additional requirements and standards for wind energy
facilities as identified in
Appendix Q.
   (B)   Violation, cessation and remedy.
      (1)   Should an accessory wind energy facility, or should any part of the
facility, violate the Operating Requirements of this section, or become
inoperable, the owner shall cease operations immediately.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a complaint or the notice of a complaint from the
owner, the Director of Planning, Building and Development shall make a
determination as to whether there is a violation of the permit or Operating
Requirements requiring immediate cessation of operation.
      (3)   Once violations have been remedied, as determined by the Director
of Planning, Building and Development, the facility may resume operations.
   (C)   Finding of default and abandonment.
      (1)   The owner must remedy any condition in which the accessory wind
energy facility has become inoperable, or otherwise violated the operating
requirements defined under §
151.113(P) for accessory wind energy facilities within 180 days of the issue
date on written notice from Lake County or be considered to be in default and
the facility considered to be abandoned.
      (2)   The Planning, Building and Development Director may authorize an
extension based on extenuating circumstances. All requests for extension must
be made in writing, prior to the expiration of the 180-day remedy period, and
provide the basis for the request and the amount of additional time requested.
   (D)   Decommissioning of wind facilities. If an accessory wind energy
facility is not completely removed within 90 days of the finding of
abandonment, Lake County may remove all facility components at the owner’s
expense. In the case of such removal, Lake County has the right to file a lien
for reimbursement, for any and all expenses incurred by Lake County without
limitation, including attorney fees and accrued interest.
(Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 151.259 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS, ACCESSORY.
   (A)   General. The provisions in this section are in addition to the general
violation, penalties, and enforcement provisions of this subchapter. Lake
County shall retain authority to enforce the height and setbacks for solar
energy systems in §
151.113(U), and additional requirements and standards for solar energy systems
as identified in
Appendix T.
      (1)   Decommissioning plan and assurances.
         (a)   Prior to permit issuance, the operator shall prepare a
decommissioning plan which shows the final site conditions after an accessory
medium/large scale ground-mounted solar energy system has been removed from the
property. Decommissioning shall include the removal of all elements listed in §
121.259(A)(2)(a) below. Access roads, fencing, groundcover, and landscaping may
remain only if it can be shown to be compatible with the future use of the
property.
         (b)   Prior to permit issuance, the operator shall submit an
engineer's estimate of probable cost for decommissioning the accessory medium/
large scale ground-mounted solar energy system and restoring the site in
accordance with the approved decommissioning plan. Upon review and approval of
the estimate by the Planning Director, the operator shall obtain a bond, letter
of credit, or other form of surety that meets the requirements of §
151.203(A) in the amount of 130% of the engineer’s estimate.
      (2)   Removal requirements.
         (a)   Any ground-mounted solar energy system which has reached the end
of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be removed. The owner or
operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after
the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the
county by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and
plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
            1.   Physical removal of all solar energy systems, structures,
equipment, security barriers and electrical wiring lines from the site; and
            2.   Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations; and
            3.   Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The county may allow the owner or operator to leave
landscaping or designated below-grade foundations or electrical wiring in order
to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
         (b)   Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written
notice of extenuating circumstances, an accessory use medium/large scale
ground-mounted solar energy system shall be considered abandoned when it fails
to operate for more than one year without the written consent of the county. If
the owner or operator of the solar energy system fails to remove the
installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within 150
days of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the county may
seek a court order to require the property owner to remove an abandoned,
hazardous, or decommissioned ground-mounted solar energy system. The county
also retains the right, after the receipt of an appropriate court order, to
enter and remove the ground-mounted solar energy system and lien the property
for such costs. As a condition of site plan and/or special/conditional use
permit approval, the applicant and landowner shall agree to allow entry to
remove an abandoned or decommissioned installation.
(Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 151.260 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS, COMMERCIAL.
   The provisions in this section are in addition to the general violation,
penalties, and enforcement provisions of this subchapter. Lake County shall
retain authority to enforce the height and setbacks for solar energy systems in
§
151.112(XX) and additional requirements and standards for solar energy systems
as identified in
Appendix T.
   (A)   Decommissioning plan and assurances. The applicant (or owner, if
different from applicant) must submit a decommissioning plan with cost
estimation to the county as part of the siting application and provide
testimony supporting the calculation of costs provided in said plan during the
public hearing on the application. Prior to receiving any building permit for
the commercial solar energy facility, the applicant or owner shall provide a
decommissioning agreement and post the required financial assurances for the
benefit of the county. Periodically, and as required by the Agricultural Impact
Mitigation Agreement, the owner must update the decommissioning plan, cost
estimations, and provide updated financial assurances to the benefit of the
county.
 
COMMENTARY:
The Decommissioning Agreement and financial assurances shall comply with 55
ILCS 5/5-12020 and the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement.
 
   (B)   Removal requirements.
      (1)   Any ground-mounted solar energy system which has reached the end of
its useful life or has been abandoned shall be removed. The owner or operator
shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the date
of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the county by
certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for
removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
         (a)   Physical removal of all solar energy systems, structures,
equipment, security barriers and electrical wiring lines from the site; and
         (b)   Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations; and
         (c)   Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The county may allow the owner or operator to leave
landscaping in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
      (2)   Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written
notice of extenuating circumstances, a commercial ground-mounted solar energy
system shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one
year without the written consent of the county. If the owner or operator of the
solar energy system fails to remove the installation in accordance with the
requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed
date of decommissioning, the county may seek a court order to require the
property owner to remove an abandoned, hazardous, or decommissioned ground-
mounted solar energy system. The county also retains the right, after the
receipt of an appropriate court order, to enter and remove the ground-mounted
solar energy system and lien the property for such costs. As a condition of
site plan and/or special/conditional use permit approval, the applicant and
landowner shall agree to allow entry to remove an abandoned or decommissioned
installation.
(Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024)
§ 151.261 WIND ENERGY FACILITIES, COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   General. The provisions in this section are in addition to the general
violation, penalties and enforcement provisions of this subchapter. Lake County
shall retain authority to enforce the height and setbacks and operating
requirements for commercial wind facilities in §
151.112(DDD), and additional requirements and standards for wind energy
facilities as identified in
Appendix Q.
   (B)   Violation, cessation and remedy.
      (1)   Should a commercial wind energy facility, or any part of the
facility, violate the operating requirements of this section, or become
inoperable, the owner shall cease operations immediately.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a complaint or the notice of a complaint from the
owner, the Director of Planning, Building and Development shall make a
determination as to whether there is a violation of the permit or operating
requirements requiring immediate cessation of operation.
      (3)   Once violations have been remedied, as determined by the Director
of Planning, Building and Development, the facility may resume operations.
   (C)   Finding of default and abandonment.
      (1)   The owner must remedy any condition in which the commercial wind
energy facility has become inoperable, or otherwise violated the operating
requirements defined under §
151.112(DDD) for commercial wind energy facilities within 180 days of the issue
date on written notice from Lake County or be considered to be in default and
the facility considered to be abandoned.
      (2)   The Planning, Building and Development Director may authorize an
extension based on extenuating circumstances. All requests for extension must
be made in writing, prior to the expiration of the 180-day remedy period and
provide the basis for the request and the amount of additional time requested.
   (D)   Decommissioning of wind facilities. The applicant (or the owner, if
different from the applicant) must submit a decommissioning plan with cost
estimation to the county as part of the siting application and provide
testimony supporting the calculation of costs provided in said plan during the
public hearing on the application. Prior to receiving any building permit for
the commercial wind energy facility, the applicant or owner shall provide a
decommissioning agreement and post the required financial assurances for the
benefit of the county. Periodically, and as required by the Agricultural Impact
Mitigation Agreement, the owner must update the decommissioning plan, cost
estimations and provide updated financial assurances to the benefit of the
county.
 
COMMENTARY:
The Decommissioning Agreement and Financial Assurances shall comply with 55
ILCS 5/5-12020 and the AIMA.
 
(Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024)
§ 151.262 MAJOR FILL/GRADE OPERATIONS.
   (A)   General. The provisions in this section are in addition to the general
violation, penalties, and enforcement provisions of this subchapter. Lake
County shall retain authority to enforce the height and setbacks and operating
requirements for major fill/grade operations in §
151.112(JJ).
   (B)   Final stabilization plan and assurances.
      (1)   Final stabilization shall consist of stabilization or re-vegetation
of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. A layer of soil capable of
supporting vegetation (to a depth sufficient to provide permanent
stabilization, as determined by staff) shall be spread over the premises and
shall be seeded with grass or other groundcover or by using an appropriate
measure as approved by the Planning, Building and Development Director. Final
stabilization shall also include the removal of all access equipment, roads,
fencing and other onsite equipment and related temporary materials.
      (2)   Prior to site development permit issuance, a final stabilization
plan shall be submitted which shows the final site conditions after fill/grade
operation has been completed.
      (3)   Prior to site development permit issuance, an engineer's opinion of
probable construction cost (EOPCC) shall be submitted for final stabilization
of the fill/grade operation and finalizing the site in accordance with the
approved final stabilization plan. The exact amount of the EOPCC and a
termination date for the completion of operations and the finalization of the
site shall be established as part of the permit review process and imposed at
the time of permit approval, based upon the estimated costs of finalizing the
site and the estimated length of time the operation will be conducted. Upon
review and approval of the EOPCC by the Planning, Building, and Development
Director, the operator shall obtain a bond, letter of credit, or other form of
surety that meets the requirements of §
151.203(A) in the amount of 130% of the EOPCC.
 
COMMENTARY:
A separate performance assurance may be required by the highway authority for
maintenance and repair of the main road from which access is taken, including
asphalt patching and shoulder maintenance, as needed either during operation or
finalization of the site.
 
   (C)   Final stabilization requirements.
      (1)   Any fill/grade operation which has reached the limits of fill or
has otherwise discontinued operations shall be stabilized as provided for in
the final stabilization plan. The owner or operator shall physically stabilize
the site no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The
owner or operator shall notify the county by certified mail of the proposed
date of discontinued operations and plans for stabilization.
      (2)   A fill/grade operation shall be considered discontinued when it
fails to operate for more than 150 days. This timeframe can be extended with
written consent of the county upon notice of a proposed date of final
stabilization or written notice of extenuating circumstances.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of the fill/grade operation fails to
execute the stabilization plan in accordance with the requirements of this
section within 150 days of discontinued operations or the proposed date of
final stabilization, the county may seek a court order to require the property
owner to stabilize the site and/or remove all remaining equipment and
structures associated with the active operation. The county also retains the
right, after the receipt of an appropriate court order, to enter and stabilize
the site. The county will draw on the performance assurance and/or lien the
property for all stabilization costs it incurs.
   (D)   Violations, cessation, and remedy.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complaint, the Director of Planning, Building and
Development shall make a determination as to whether there is a violation of
the permit or Operating Requirements requiring immediate cessation of
operation.
      (2)   Once violations have been remedied, as determined by the Director
of Planning, Building and Development, the facility may resume operations.
(Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024)
DEFINITIONS
§ 151.270 USE CATEGORIES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Basis for classifications. Use categories classify land uses and
activities into use categories based on common functional, product, or physical
characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the
type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered and
site conditions. The use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning
present and future land uses into appropriate zoning districts.
      (2)   Principal uses. Principal uses are assigned to the category that
most closely describes the nature of the principal use. The “characteristics”
subsection of each use category describes the common characteristics of each
principal use.
      (3)   Developments with multiple principal uses. When all principal uses
of a development fall within one use category, the entire development is
assigned to that use category. A development that contains a coffee shop,
bookstore, and bakery, for example, would be classified in the retail sales and
service category because all of the development’s principal uses are in that
category. When the principal uses of a development fall within different use
categories, each principal use is classified in the applicable category and
each use is subject to all applicable regulations for that category.
      (4)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses are allowed by right in conjunction
with a principal use unless otherwise stated in the regulations. Also, unless
otherwise stated, accessory uses are subject to the same regulations as the
principal use. Common accessory uses are listed as examples in the use category
descriptions.
      (5)   Use of examples. The “examples” subsection of each use category
lists common examples of uses included in the respective use category. The
names of these sample uses are generic. They are based on common meanings and
not on what a specific use may call itself. For example, a use that calls
itself “wholesale warehouse” but that sells mostly to consumers, is included in
the retail sales and service category rather than the wholesale sales category.
This is because the actual activity on the site matches the description of the
retail sales and service category.
   (B)   Similar use interpretations. The standards of this section shall guide
officials in making similar use interpretations.
      (1)   Authority. If an application is submitted for a use type not listed
in §
151.111, the Planning, Building and Development Director shall be authorized to
make a similar use interpretation, based on the following considerations:
         (a)   The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in
relationship to the stated characteristics of each use type;
         (b)   The relative amount of site area or floor space and equipment
devoted to the activity;
         (c)   Relative amounts of sales from each activity;
         (d)   The customer type for each activity;
         (e)   The relative number of employees in each activity;
         (f)   Hours of operation;
         (g)   Building and site arrangement;
         (h)   Vehicles used with the activity;
         (i)   The relative number of vehicle trips generated by the use;
         (j)   Signs;
         (k)   How the use advertises itself; and
         (l)   Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the
other activities on the site.
      (2)   Use interpretation standards.
         (a)   No similar use interpretation shall allow a use in a zoning
district when that use is a permitted or a conditional use in any other zoning
district.
         (b)   No similar use interpretation shall permit any use in any zoning
district unless evidence shall be presented demonstrating that it will comply
with all applicable use standards and all other applicable requirements and
standards of this chapter.
         (c)   No similar use interpretation shall permit any use in a zoning
district unless the use is more similar to those uses than to permitted and
conditional uses allowed in other zoning districts.
         (d)   If the proposed use is more similar to a use allowed only as a
conditional use in the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located,
then any similar use interpretation permitting that use shall require a
conditional use permit.
      (3)   Effect of similar use interpretation. No similar use interpretation
finding a particular use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specific district shall authorize the establishment of the use or the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and
processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required
by the codes and ordinances of the county or other governmental agencies having
jurisdiction. These permits and approvals include but are not limited to
conditional use permits, building permits, and certificates of occupancy.
   (C)   Residential use categories.
      (1)   Household living.
         (a)   Characteristics. Household living is characterized by the
residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Tenancy is arranged on
a month-to-month or longer basis. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a
shorter period are not considered residential. They are considered a form of
transient lodging (see the retail sales and service and community service
categories).
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses commonly associated with
Household Living are recreational activities, raising of pets, hobbies and
parking of the occupants’ vehicles. Home occupations are accessory uses that
are subject to additional regulations.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of household living use (structure) types
include: atrium house, attached dwelling (attached to nonresidential use),
duplex, detached house, lot line house, mobile home park, multi-dwelling
structure, multiplex, patio house, townhouse, twinhouse, and village houses.
         (d)   Exceptions. Lodging in a multi-dwelling structure or where fewer
than two- thirds of the units are rented on a monthly or longer basis is
considered a hotel or motel use and is classified in the retail sales and
service category.
   (D)   Public, civic, and institutional use categories.
      (1)   Assisted living.
         (a)   Characteristics. Assisted living is characterized by occupancy
of a structure by a group of people with developmental disabilities. The
residents may receive care, training, or treatment. Caregivers may (or may not)
reside at the site.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include offices, cafeterias,
parking, maintenance facilities.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of assisted living include nursing and
convalescent homes; certain group homes for the physically disabled, mentally
retarded, or emotionally disturbed; and some residential programs for drug and
alcohol treatment.
      (2)   Colleges.
         (a)   Characteristics. This category includes colleges and other
institutions of higher learning that offer courses of general or specialized
study leading to a degree or professional accreditation. Colleges tend to be in
campus-like settings or on multiple blocks.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include offices, housing for
students, food service, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters,
meeting areas, parking, maintenance facilities, and support commercial.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include community colleges, liberal arts
colleges, medical schools not accessory to hospitals, personnel training
centers, seminaries, and universities.
         (d)   Exceptions. Business and trade schools are classified as retail
sales and service.
      (3)   Community service.
         (a)   Characteristics. Community services are uses of a public, non-
profit, or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of
the community. Generally, they provide the service on-site or have employees at
the site on a regular basis. The service is ongoing, not just for special
events. Community services or facilities that have membership provisions are
open to the general public to join at any time, (for instance, any senior
citizen could join a senior center). The use may provide special counseling,
education, or training of a public, non-profit, or charitable nature.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include offices; meeting
areas; food preparation areas; parking, health and therapy areas; and athletic
facilities.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the community service uses “not otherwise
classified” include the following: libraries, museums, neighborhood or
community centers, senior centers, and youth club facilities.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Private lodges, clubs and private or commercial athletic or
health clubs are classified as retail sales and service.
            2.   Public parks and recreation are classified as parks and open
space.
      (4)   Day care.
         (a)   Characteristics. Day care uses provide care, protection, and
supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary
residence for less than 24 hours per day.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include offices, recreation
areas, and parking.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include adult day care programs (for more
than seven individuals), child care center (for more than seven individuals),
day care facility (seven plus children or adults), family child care, group
child care (for more than seven individuals), nursery schools (for more than
seven individuals), and preschools (for more than seven individuals).
         (d)   Exceptions. Day care does not include public or private schools
or facilities operated in connection with an employment use, shopping center,
or other principal use, where children are cared for while parents or guardians
are occupied on the premises or in the immediate vicinity. Day care for seven
or fewer individuals at any one time is considered “babysitting” and is
regulated as a home occupation.
      (5)   Ecotherapy facilities.
         (a)   Characteristics. Ecotherapy facilities offer mental and physical
therapeutic activities that require a natural setting and a large area of land.
Generally, they provide on-site service to the local community on a regular and
ongoing frequency and may be operated by a public, nonprofit, or private
entity.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include offices, parking, outdoor
health, therapy and recreation areas, gardens, meeting areas, animal care
facilities, maintenance facilities, and caretaker's housing.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of operational therapeutic activities include
but are not limited to animal assisted therapy, gardening, outdoor exercise,
art, music, meditation, and counseling.
         (d)   Exceptions. Equine assisted activities on sites of at least
200,00 square feet are classified as agricultural uses.
      (6)   Group living.
         (a)   Characteristics. Group living is characterized by the occupancy
of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of household
living. Tenancy is arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Uses where tenancy
may be arranged for a shorter period are not considered group living. They are
considered to be a form of lodging (see the “retail sales and service” and
“community service” categories). Generally, group living structures have a
common eating area for residents.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses commonly associated with group
living are recreational facilities and parking of vehicles for occupants and
staff.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of group living include convents or
monasteries, dormitories, fraternities, and sororities.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than
30 days is to be considered a hotel or motel use and classified in the retail
sales and service category.
            2.   Lodging where the residents meet the definition of household
and where tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period
is classified as household living.
      (7)   Hospital.
         (a)   Characteristics. Hospitals include uses providing medical or
surgical care to patients and offering overnight care.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include out-patient clinics,
offices, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, parking,
emergency heliports, maintenance facilities, and housing facilities for staff
or trainees.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include hospitals, trauma centers, and
medical centers.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Uses that provide exclusive care and planned treatment or
training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are
residents of the program, are classified in the assisted living category;
            2.   Medical clinics or offices that provide care where patients
are generally not kept overnight are classified as offices; and
            3.   Emergency medical clinics are classified as retail sales and
service.
      (8)   Parks and open space.
         (a)   Characteristics. Parks and open space are uses of land focusing
on natural areas, large areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping,
community gardens, or public squares. Land tends to be occupied by few
structures.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include club houses,
maintenance facilities, concessions, caretaker’s quarters, and parking.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the parks and open space uses “not
otherwise classified” include the following: botanical gardens, nature
preserves, park/playgrounds, non-commercial parks, pet cemeteries, playgrounds,
plazas, public open lands, nature preserves, and recreational trails.
      (9)   Religious institutions.
         (a)   Characteristics. Religious institutions primarily provide
meeting areas for religious activities.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include Sunday school facilities,
parking, caretaker’s housing, and group living facilities such as convents.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include churches, temples, synagogues, and
mosques.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Preschools are classified as day care uses; and
            2.   Schools are classified as schools.
      (10)   Schools.
         (a)   Characteristics. This category includes schools at the primary,
elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level that are recognized by
the State Board of Education.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias,
recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school day
care.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include daytime schools, boarding schools,
and military academies.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Preschools are classified as day care uses; and
            2.   Business, music, art, martial art, trade, and other similar
schools are classified as schools, private.
      (11)   Schools, private.
         (a)   Characteristics. This category includes schools that are not
recognized by the State Board of Education.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include cafeterias, auditoriums,
and offices.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include business schools, trade schools,
music schools, art schools, and martial arts schools.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Public schools are classified as schools; and
            2.   Preschools are classified as day care uses.
      (12)   Utility, major.
         (a)   Characteristics. Major utilities are major, countywide
infrastructure services that typically have employees at the site. Services may
be public or privately provided.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include parking and control,
monitoring, data or transmission equipment.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the utility, major uses “not otherwise
classified” include the following: electrical substations; electrical switching
facilities and primary substations; water and wastewater treatment plants;
water tanks; and similar facilities of agencies that are under public franchise
or ownership to provide the general public with electricity, gas, heat, steam,
water, sewage collection, or other similar service.
         (d)   Exceptions. For government uses see “community service”.
   (E)   Retail, service, and commercial use categories.
      (1)   Entertainment event, major.
         (a)   Characteristics. Major entertain-ment event uses are
characterized by activities and structures that draw large numbers of people to
specific events or shows. Activities are generally of a spectator nature.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include restaurants, bars,
concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include amphitheaters, stadiums, sports
arenas, coliseums, auditoriums, exhibition and meeting areas, and fairgrounds.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Exhibition and meeting areas with less than 20,000 square feet
of total event area are classified as retail sales and service.
            2.   Banquet halls that are part of hotels or restaurants are
accessory to those uses, which are included in the retail sales and service
category.
            3.   Theaters, including drive-in theaters, are classified as
retail sales and service.
            4.   Recreation or entertainment uses conducted on a continuous
basis are classified as outdoor recreation and entertainment or retail sales
and service uses.
      (2)   Office.
         (a)   Characteristics. Office uses are characterized by activities
conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government,
professional, medical, or financial services.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, health
facilities, gift shops, dry cleaning pick-up stations, parking, or other
amenities primarily for the use of employees or customers of permitted primary
uses.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the office uses “not otherwise classified”
include the following: professional services such as lawyers, accountants,
engineers, or architects; financial businesses such as lenders, brokerage
houses, bank headquarters, or real estate agents; data processing; sales
offices; government offices and public utilities offices; TV and radio studios;
medical and dental clinics (including minor emergency centers), medical and
dental labs; and blood-collection facilities.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Offices that are part of and located with a principal use in
another category are considered accessory to the firm’s primary activity.
Headquarters offices, when in conjunction with or adjacent to a principal use
in another category, are considered part of the other category.
            2.   Contractors and others who perform services off-site are
included in the office category if equipment and materials are not stored on
the site and fabrication, services, or similar work is not carried on at the
site.
      (3)   Parking, commercial.
         (a)   Characteristics. Commercial parking facilities provide parking
that is not accessory to a specific use. A fee may or may not be charged. A
facility that provides both accessory parking for a specific use and regular
fee parking for people not connected to the use is also classified as a
commercial parking facility.
         (b)   Examples. Examples include short- and long-term fee parking
facilities, park-and-ride facilities, and mixed parking lots (partially
accessory to a specific use, partly for rent to others).
         (c)   Exceptions.
            1.   Parking facilities that are accessory to a use, but that
charge the public to park for occasional events nearby, are not considered
commercial parking facilities.
            2.   Parking facilities that are accessory to a principal use are
not considered commercial parking uses, even if the operator leases the
facility to the principal use or charges a fee to the individuals who park in
the facility.
      (4)   Recreation and entertainment, outdoor.
         (a)   Characteristics. Outdoor recreation and entertainment uses are
large, generally commercial uses that provide continuous recreation or
entertainment-oriented activities. They primarily take place outdoors. They may
take place in a number of structures that are arranged together in an outdoor
setting.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include concessions,
restaurants, parking, caretaker’s quarters, and maintenance facilities.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the recreation and entertainment, outdoor
uses “not otherwise classified” include the following: archery ranges
(outdoor), commercial parks/playgrounds, miniature golf course, recreational
uses (outdoor), skating rinks (outdoor), ski or toboggan clubs, polo clubs,
commercial swimming pools, outdoor theaters, theme parks, and zoos.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Golf courses are classified as parks and open space.
            2.   Uses that draw large numbers of people to periodic events,
rather than on a continuous basis, are classified as major entertainment
events.
      (5)   Retail sales and service.
         (a)   Characteristics. Retail sales and service firms are involved in
the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products to the general public. They
may also provide personal services or entertainment, or provide product repair
or services for consumer and business goods.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include offices, storage of
goods, manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale and parking.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the retail sales and service uses “not
otherwise classified” include uses from the three following groups:
            1.   Neighborhood-oriented. Animal grooming, art supply stores,
barber shops, beauty shops, book stores, banks, camera shops, cigar/cigarette/
tobacco stores, clothing stores, currency exchanges, dairy products sales, drug
stores, dry cleaning drop-off/pickup with on-site services, electronic
equipment stores, electronics/computer sales and service, fabric stores,
florist sales, fruit and vegetable markets (retail), grocery stores, hair
salons, hardware stores, health food stores, hearing aid sales, hobby shops,
jewelry stores, laundry drop-off, laundromats, leather goods sales, liquor
stores, locksmiths, magazine and newsstands, music, musical instrument, and
records sales and service, paint and wallpaper sales, personal care services,
pet food stores, pet shops, pharmacies, photography studios, picture frame
sales and service, shoe repair, stationery stores, tailors and clothing repair,
tanning salons, toy stores, video stores, watch and clock sales and repair.
            2.   General (shall include all neighborhood-oriented uses and the
following). Appliance sales and repair, business machine sales and service,
catering services, department stores, exterminators, farriers, firewood sales,
fish markets, floor covering sales, funeral homes, furnace/water heater sales,
furniture stores, furniture repair, golf-cart sales and service, home
improvement stores, household product stores, meat markets, mortuaries, pawn
shops, plumbing supplies and fixture sales/service (retail), rental of
equipment and supplies, shopping centers, taxidermists, union halls,
upholsterers, and water softening equipment sales/service.
            3.   Recreational-oriented. Amusement arcades, archery ranges
(indoor), bait shop, bars, billiard parlors, bowling alleys, dance halls,
lodges, nightclubs, pool halls, private clubs, recreational uses (indoor),
resorts, shooting ranges (indoor), skating rinks (indoor), taverns, and
theaters (indoor).
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Lumber yards and other building material sales that sell
primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are classified as
wholesale sales.
            2.   Repair and service of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles and
light and medium trucks is classified as vehicle service/repair. Repair and
service of industrial vehicles and equipment and heavy trucks is classified as
industrial sales and service.
            3.   Sales, rental, or leasing of heavy trucks and equipment or
manufactured housing units are classified as wholesale sales.
            4.   Hotels, restaurants, and other services that are part of a
truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop which is classified as
industrial sales and service.
            5.   In certain situations, hotels and motels may be classified as
a community service use, such as short-term housing or mass shelter. See
“community service”.
      (6)   Self-service storage.
         (a)   Characteristics. Self-service storage uses provide separate
storage areas for individual or business uses. The storage areas are designed
to allow private access by the tenant for storing or removing personal
property.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include living quarters for a
resident manager or security and leasing offices. Use of the storage areas for
sales, service and repair operations, or manufacturing is not considered
accessory to the self-service storage use. The rental of trucks or equipment is
also not considered accessory to a self-service storage use.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include facilities that provide individual
storage areas for rent. These uses are also called mini-warehouses.
         (d)   Exceptions. A transfer and storage business where there are no
individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods
to be stored or transferred is in the warehouse and freight movement category.
      (7)   Vehicle repair.
         (a)   Characteristics. Vehicle repair firms, service passenger
vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer motor vehicles such as
motorcycles, and recreational vehicles. Generally, the customer does not wait
at the site while the service or repair is being performed.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include offices, sales of
parts, and vehicle storage.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include alignment shop, auto body shop, auto
detailing and tire sales and mounting, auto repair, auto upholstery shop,
motorcycle, lawnmower and other small engine repair, recreational vehicle
service, transmission or muffler shop.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Repair and service of boats and equipment are classified as
boat sales/ rental/storage/service.
            2.   Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment and of
heavy trucks; towing and vehicle storage; and vehicle wrecking and salvage are
classified as industrial sales and service.
      (8)   Vehicle service, limited.
         (a)   Characteristics. Limited vehicle service uses provide direct
services to motor vehicles where the driver or passengers generally wait in the
car or nearby while the service is performed.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include auto repair and tire
sales.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include car washes, quick lubrication
services and service stations (full-service or self-service).
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Truck stops are classified as industrial sales and service.
            2.   Refueling facilities for vehicles that belong to a specific
use (fleet vehicles) are considered accessory uses if they are located on the
site of the principal use.
   (F)   Industrial use categories.
      (1)   Industrial sales and service.
         (a)   Characteristics. Industrial sales and service firms are engaged
in the repair or servicing of industrial, business or consumer machinery,
equipment, products or by-products. Firms that service consumer goods do so by
mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors
and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site.
Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory activities may include offices,
parking, and storage.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the industrial sales and service uses “not
otherwise classified” include uses from the two following groups:
            1.   Commercial service-oriented. Agricultural implement sales/
service, auto and truck salvaging and wrecking, carpet/rug cleaning plants, dry
cleaning/dyeing plants (wholesale), fuel oil distributors, fuel sales
(wholesale), gas/butane and propane sales, furniture refinishing, janitorial
and building maintenance services, metal and building material sales, mobile
home sales, repair of scientific or professional instruments, tool repair,
towing service and vehicle storage, truck (heavy) servicing and repair, truck
stops, truck/trailer sales, repair or rental, and well drilling services; and
            2.   General (shall include all commercial service-oriented uses
and the following). Heavy machinery sales, machine shops, rendering or tanning
plants, sewage disposal (individual), systems sales/service, tire re-treading
or recapping, and welding shops.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Contractors and others who perform services off-site are
included in the office category, if major equipment and materials are not
stored at the site and fabrication, or similar work is not carried on at the
site.
            2.   Hotels, restaurants, and other services that are part of a
truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop.
      (2)   Manufacturing and production.
         (a)   Characteristics. Manufacturing and production firms are involved
in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods.
Natural, man-made, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be
used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the
wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or
consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they
are a subordinate part of sales. Relatively few customers come to the
manufacturing site.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory activities may include offices,
cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage
yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, and caretaker’s quarters.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the manufacturing and production uses “not
otherwise classified” include the following: advertising display construction/
sign shop; bakery; concrete batching and asphalt mixing; custom boatworks; food
and related products processing; food processing and packing; lumber mills;
manufacture or production of artwork and toys; manufacture or production of
chemical, rubber, leather, mulch, clay, bone, plastic, stone, or glass
materials or products; manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment,
instruments, including musical instruments, vehicles, appliances, precision
items and other electrical items; manufacture, production or fabrication of
metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing, manufactured
housing unit production and fabrication; monument works; movie production
facilities; ornamental iron work shop; printing, publishing and lithography;
pulp and paper mills and other wood products manufacturing; research
laboratory, including but not limited to pure research, product development,
pilot plants and research manufacturing facilities; sign making;
slaughterhouse; meat packing; weaving or production of textiles or apparel; and
woodworking, including cabinet makers.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the
general public are classified as retail sales and service.
            2.   Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic
material is classified as waste-related uses.
      (3)   Warehouse and freight movement.
         (a)   Characteristics. Warehouse and freight movement firms are
involved in the storage, or movement of goods for themselves or other firms.
Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for
some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the
customer present.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet
parking, and maintenance areas.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include machinery storage yard, recreational
vehicle storage, utility service yard or garage, bulk materials storage, bus
barns, cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers, freight terminal,
motor/rail, grain elevators, moving companies and general freight storage,
parcel services, post office (main), post offices, main, sand, gravel, or other
aggregate materials stockpiling, truck, or air freight terminals, warehouse,
warehouses (separate from retail business) used by retail stores such as
furniture and appliance stores, and wholesale distribution centers.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid
wastes are classified as waste-related uses.
            2.   Mini-warehouses are classified as self-service storage uses.
      (4)   Waste-related.
         (a)   Characteristics. Characterized by uses that receive solid or
liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another
location, uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or
produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include recycling of
materials, offices, and repackaging and transshipment of by-products.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the waste-related uses “not otherwise
classified” include the following: energy recovery plants, hazardous-waste
collection sites, sanitary landfills, and waste composting.
      (5)   Wholesale sales.
         (a)   Characteristics. Wholesale sales firms are involved in the sale,
lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or
commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order taking and
often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general
public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up
on-site or delivered to the customer.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include offices, product
repair, warehouses, parking, minor fabrication services, and repackaging of
goods.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include auction houses, mail order houses and
wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts, building hardware.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public or
on a membership basis are classified as retail sales and service.
            2.   Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on-site
business activity are classified as warehouse and freight movement.
   (G)   Other use categories.
      (1)   Agriculture.
         (a)   Characteristics. Agriculture includes activities that primarily
involve raising, producing, or keeping plants or farm animals.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include dwellings for proprietors
and employees of the use and animal training. Private stables are a permitted
accessory use in the AG, RE, E, and R-1 Districts. Equine assisted activities
for people with disabilities are a permitted accessory use to stables on sites
of at least 200,000 square feet.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of the agriculture uses “not otherwise
classified” include the following: animal (farm animal) breeding or raising;
dairy farms’ farming; value added agricultural processing, truck gardening;
tree farming; non-retail greenhouse/nursery; plant nurseries (wholesale); and
riding academies.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Uses involved in the processing of animal or plant products
are classified as manufacturing and production.
            2.   Livestock auctions are classified as wholesale sales.
            3.   Plant nurseries that are oriented to retail sales are
classified as sales-oriented retail sales and service.
            4.   Value added agricultural processing is not considered
manufacturing and production.
      (2)   Aviation and surface transportation facilities.
         (a)   Characteristics. Aviation and surface transportation facilities
includes facilities for the landing and takeoff of flying vehicles, including
loading and unloading areas. Aviation facilities may be improved or unimproved.
Aviation and surface transportation facilities also includes passenger
terminals for aircraft, regional bus service, and regional rail service.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include freight handling areas,
concessions, offices, parking, and maintenance and fueling facilities.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include airports, bus passenger terminals,
bus terminal, helicopter landing facilities, and railroad passenger stations.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Bus and rail passenger stations for subregional service such
as mass transit stops and park-and-ride facilities are classified as basic
utilities.
            2.   Private helicopter landing facilities that are accessory to
another use are considered accessory uses. However, they are subject to all the
regulations and approval criteria for helicopter landing facilities, with the
exception of helicopter landing facilities for hospitals.
            3.   Helicopter landing facilities that are established and
operated by or on behalf of a governmental agency acting pursuant to its
statutory purpose are classified as governmental uses.
      (3)   Mining.
         (a)   Characteristics. Mining includes mining or extraction of mineral
or aggregate resources from the ground for off-site use.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses include storage, sorting,
stockpiling, or transfer off-site of the mined material.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include mining and resource extraction; oil,
gas, or geothermal drilling; and quarrying or dredging for sand, gravel, or
other aggregate materials.
      (4)   Rural business.
         (a)   Characteristics. Rural businesses are small scale, lower
intensity commercial uses that are compatible with rural residential and
agricultural areas and do not create a nuisance of residents in the area
through excessive traffic, smoke, or noise. The business activity may involve
contractors’ offices and equipment storage, production of goods or product
repair. Rural businesses are similar to rural home occupations except the
business activity can occur as the principal use. Few customers visit the site.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory activities may include offices,
parking, and storage.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include but are not limited to small-scale
operation of contracting businesses such as masonry, plumbing, painting,
electrical or general; repair of small engines, appliances, or office
machinery; woodworking; furniture or upholstery repair; and artisan workshops.
      (5)   Telecommunications facilities.
         (a)   Characteristics. Tele-communications facilities are signal
distribution systems used or operated by a telecommunications carrier under a
license from the Federal Communications Commission consisting of a combination
of improvements and equipment including one or more antennas; a supporting
structure and the hardware by which antennas are attached; equipment housing;
and ancillary equipment such as signal transmission cables and miscellaneous
hardware. (For related definitions, see 55 ILCS 5/5-12001.1.)
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include transmitter facility
buildings.
         (c)   Examples. Examples include broadcast towers, attached
telecommunications facilities, telecommunications support towers, and point-to-
point microwave towers.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   Receive-only antennas are not included in this category and
amateur radio facilities that are owned and operated by a federally-licensed
amateur radio station operator are not included in this category.
            2.   Radio and television studios are classified in the office
category.
      (6)   Wind apparatus.
         (a)   Characteristics. Wind apparatus consists of tower-mounted
equipment designed and operated for the purpose of generating electricity
through wind-power.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses may include ground-based power-
storage equipment, monitoring equipment, and transmission equipment.
         (c)   Examples. Examples of wind apparatus include windmills, wind
turbines, and other similar structures.
         (d)   Exceptions.
            1.   For wind apparatus owned and operated by agencies that are
under public franchise or ownership to provide the general public with
electricity, see “utility, major”.
            2.   For government uses, see “community service”.
(Ord., § 14.1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed - - ; Ord.
19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 22-1356, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 151.271 TERMS DEFINED.
   Words and terms used in this chapter shall be given the meanings set forth
in this section. All words not defined in this section shall be given their
common, ordinary meanings, as the context may reasonably suggest. The use-
related terms are mutually exclusive, meaning that uses given a specific
definition shall not also be considered to be a part of a more general
definition of that use type. A “bookstore”, for example, shall not be
considered a general “retail sales and service” use, since “bookstore” is a
more specific definition of that use.
   ABUTTING.  Having a common border with or being separated from the common
border by an alley, easement, or right-of-way.
   ACCESS. A means of vehicular entry to or exit from property.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING. An accessory structure, separate or attached, located on
the same lot as a principal dwelling and occupied, for residential purposes
only, by a person or persons either employed on the premises or related by
blood, marriage, or adoption to the occupants of the principal dwelling.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that customarily:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and services a principal building or a principal
use legally existing on the same zoning lot;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal
building or principal use;
      (3)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the
occupants, business, or industry of the principal structure or principal use
served; and
      (4)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or
principal use served.
   ACCESSORY USE. See USE, ACCESSORY.
   ADEQUATE DOWNSTREAM STORMWATER CAPACITY. A stormwater management system
shall be considered to have ADEQUATE DOWNSTREAM STORMWATER CAPACITY if the
system can be shown to store or convey up to and including the 100-year
stormwater runoff without increasing damage to adjoining properties or to a
point downstream known to the Planning, Building and Development Director to be
a restriction causing significant backwater.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (410 ILCS
705).
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act, (410 ILCS 705). Licensees may share premises with a processing
organization or dispensing organization, or both. May contain up to 5,000
square feet on its premises for plants in the flowering stage (increases
available by Department of Agriculture in increments of 3,000–-max 14,000
square feet.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to directly
incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to
produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act, (410 ILCS 705). Licensees may share premises with a craft grower, or
dispensing organization or both.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSOR. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to either
extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or
incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to
produce a cannabis product, per the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(410 ILCS 705).
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business
establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-
infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to
purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers,
per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (410 ILCS 705).
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTER. An organization or business that is licensed
by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a
cannabis business establishment or a community college licensed under the
Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (410 ILCS 705).
   ADULT BOOTH. Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off from
the remainder of the establishment by one or more walls or other dividers or
partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials
or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. Any commercial establishment that regularly features any of
the following as a substantial or significant portion of its business:
      (1)   Persons who appear semi-nude; or
      (2)   Live performances distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the
conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult cabaret, adult store, or adult
theater.
   ADULT MATERIAL. Any of the following, whether new or used:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
digitally-stored materials that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities;
      (2)   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer
displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or
description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of
specified sexual activities;
      (3)   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities; or
      (4)   Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or
describe specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT STORE. Any commercial establishment that contains one or more adult
booths; offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials as a
substantial or significant portion of its business; or has a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of adult materials.
   ADULT THEATER. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or
significant portion of its business regularly features for presentation films,
motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays or other
visual representations or recordings that are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING.  Decent, safe, and sanitary housing that can be secured
at a cost not exceeding 30% of the owner’s or renter’s household income. For
renters, the 30% is comprised of rent and utilities. For owners, the 30% is
comprised of mortgage principal, interest, real estate taxes, and insurance
(PITI).
   AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION. Any assemblage of structures and uses intended to
educate the general public about the history, science, business, and technology
of agriculture, as defined in this section, when operated in conjunction with a
principal agricultural use on sites of 200,000 square feet or greater. These
structures may include but are not limited to classrooms, displays of
equipment, and working models of agricultural implements, devices, or
machinery.
   AGRICULTURAL EXEMPTION. An exemption contained in state law which prohibits
fee bearing building permits with respect to land used or to be used for
agricultural purposes and further defines the powers of this chapter as to
restrict its application.
   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil; the growing of crops; the operation of
non-retail greenhouses and nurseries; the raising and/or keeping of livestock,
equine, fur-bearing animals, gamebirds, poultry, and farm animals; and
incidental structures for carrying out the above.
   AIRCRAFT. Any machine or device, including but not limited to airplanes,
helicopters, gliders, hang gliders, ultralights, autogiros, dirigibles, and hot
air balloons, capable of atmospheric flight.
   AIRPORT. Any area of land, water, or both which is used or designed for the
landing or taking off of aircraft of any type, or for the location of runways,
landing areas, airdomes, hangars, structures, airport runways, grass runways,
and other facilities constituting an advantage or convenience to the safe
landing, takeoff, and navigation of aircraft, or the safe and efficient
maintenance thereof, whether or not facilities are provided for the shelter,
servicing, or repair of aircraft or for receiving or discharging passengers or
cargo, and whether or not those areas and facilities are public or are
restricted to private use.
   ALLEY. A thoroughfare that is not more than 30 feet wide and that affords
only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
   AMBIENT SOUND. The all-encompassing sound at a given location, usually a
composite of sounds from many sources near and far. For the purpose of this
chapter, the AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL shall mean the quietest of ten ten-second
average sound levels measured when there are no nearby or distinctly audible
sound sources (e.g., dogs, or jets). Daytime ambient measurements should be
made during mid-morning weekday hours, while nighttime measurements should be
made after midnight.
   AMPHITHEATER. An open air commercial structure, with tiers of seats or a
seating area rising above a stage, that is intended to be used for the viewing
of musical, theatrical, or other entertainment performances. Non-commercial
bandshells and other outdoor stages established as accessory structures in
public or community parks shall not be considered AMPHITHEATERS.
   AMUSEMENT PARK. An area of land, including the structures thereon, which is
devoted to a commercial enterprise open to the public, which provides to
patrons multiple amusement attractions and/or amusement rides.
   APPROPRIATE USE. Those uses of the regulatory floodway that are expressly
permitted by §
151.150.
   ARBORIST, CERTIFIED. A person certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture.
   ARCHITECT. A person licensed as an architect and licensed to practice in the
State of Illinois.
   ARTERIAL STREET. See STREET, ARTERIAL.
   ASSEMBLY SPACE. Space intended to accommodate a group of people gathered
together, for a particular purpose, whether religious, political, educational,
or social. ASSEMBLY SPACE may include but shall not be limited to meeting
rooms/halls, classrooms, worship halls, and social halls.
   ASSURANCE, SUBDIVISION (PERFORMANCE, RESTORATION OR MAINTENANCE). A
financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work
required by this chapter will be restored, completed, or maintained in
compliance with this chapter.
   ATRIUM HOUSE. A one-story dwelling unit with private individual access that
is attached to another dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit has a private yard or
atrium that is enclosed by the house or a wall. (See also atrium house
standards of §
151.130.)
   ATTACHED DWELLING. A dwelling unit that is attached to one or more dwelling
units or to nonresidential uses.
   AVERAGE GROUND ELEVATION. The average level of the finished surface of the
ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure.
   BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more
edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any
institution shall not be considered a BANNER.
   BAR. An establishment in which the principal business is the sale of
alcoholic beverages to patrons for consumption on the premises. Same as TAVERN
or NIGHTCLUB.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD also is known as the 100-YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD
EVENT.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation delineating the level of flooding
resulting from the 100-year flood frequency. Application of the BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION at any location shall conform to all applicable standards of §
151.147.
   BASE SITE AREA. The portion of a parcel as calculated pursuant to §
151.070(D)(1).
   BASEMENT. Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below grade
level) on all sides.
   BASIN. A facility which provides temporary or permanent impoundment of water
for flood control and other water resource purposes. BASINS include stormwater
infiltration, retention, and detention facilities. Sub-watershed areas within
the county that include the Fox River mainstream (including the Chain O’Lakes),
Flint Creek, Tower Lake Drain, Slocum Drain, Mutton Creek, Manitou Creek, Fish
Lake Drain, Sequoit Creek, the Des Plaines River mainstream, South Mill Creek,
North Mill Creek, Newport Drainage Ditch, Bull Creek, Indian Creek, Aptakisic
Creek, Buffalo Creek, Skokie River, Middle Fork-North Branch Chicago River,
West Fork-North Branch Chicago River, Kellogg Creek, Dead River, Waukegan
River, Pettibone Creek, and Lake Michigan Bluff/Ravines.
   BASIN PLAN. A study and evaluation of an individual drainage basin’s
stormwater management and flood control needs.
   BEACON. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or
directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also,
any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
   BERM. A man-made landscape feature generally consisting of a linear mound of
fill. Temporary soil stockpiles and retaining walls are not BERMS.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). Structural or vegetative control measure
designed to mitigate changes to both quantity and quality of storm water runoff
from land development. BMPs are intended to reduce storm water volume, peak
flows, and/or nonpoint source pollution through evapotranspiration,
infiltration, detention, and filtration.
   BOATHOUSE. A structure erected for the purpose of storing boats on an
earthen floor or over a water slip.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   BRIDGE ENGINEER. The Bridge Engineer of the Illinois Department of
Transportation.
   BUFFER. An area of predominantly vegetated land to be left open, adjacent to
linear water bodies, wetland, lakes, ponds, or other surface waters for the
purpose of eliminating or minimizing adverse impacts to the areas.
   BUILDING. A structure built, maintained, or intended for use for the shelter
or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. The term includes a
gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home, or a
prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and
travel trailers that exist on a site for more than 180 days.
   BUILDING, FRONT OF. The exterior wall of a building which faces the street
lot line of the lot.
   BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. An active solar energy system that
is an integral part of a principal or accessory structure, rather than a
separate mechanical device, replacing of substituting for an architectural or
structural component of the building. BUILDING- INTEGRATED SYSTEMS include, but
are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are
contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, or awnings.
   BUILDING MARKER. Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and
incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry
surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the county for the construction,
erection, or alteration of a structure or building.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted, or in which is
intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
   BYPASS. To route tributary drainage area runoff around and not through a
stormwater control structure.
   CABIN or COTTAGE. A recreational (nonresidential) use consisting of detached
dwelling units used for temporary or seasonal occupancy.
   CALIPER. A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its
trunk measured six inches above natural grade for trees having calipers less
than or equal to 12 inches diameter; and measured four and one-half feet above
grade for tree calipers greater than 12 inches diameter.
   CAMP. Any land, including structures, used for assembly or temporary
occupancy by individuals and providing outdoor recreational facilities.
   CARDHOLDER. A qualifying patient or a designated caregiver who has been
issued and possesses a valid registry identification card by the Illinois
Department of Public Health pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
   CARETAKER’S DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit located on the same parcel as a
nonresidential principal use and occupied exclusively by either the owner,
manager, caretaker, or operator, and his or her family, of a permitted
principal use.
   CASINO/COMMERCIAL WATERCRAFT.
      (1)   A retail sales and service (entertainment-oriented) use consisting
of:
         (a)   A boat, barge, or vessel or other watercraft operated on any
body of water in the county, excluding Lake Michigan, for the purpose of
providing on-board food, beverage, entertainment, and/or gaming services to
patrons of the watercraft;
         (b)   All onshore facilities established adjacent to the body of water
upon which the watercraft is operated, including but not limited to all
docking, maintenance and service, operation, restaurant, tavern, ticketing,
retail sales and service, parking, loading and other buildings, structures, and
facilities that provide for the comfort, convenience, entertainment, or
enjoyment of the patrons of the watercraft;
         (c)   All piers, docks, breakwaters, moorings, and other waterside
structures and facilities required in connection with the safe and convenient
operation of the watercraft; and
         (d)   All on-site construction and development activities associated
with the establishment of these uses.
      (2)   Boats, barges, vessels, or other watercraft operated principally
for the transportation of people and materials shall not be considered
COMMERCIAL WATERCRAFT.
   CEMETERY. Any land, and the structures thereon, designed, used, or intended
to be used for the interment of human or animals remains. A CEMETERY may
include a crematorium.
   CERTIFIED COMMUNITY. A community which has petitioned the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission and has been found by the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission to be capable of enforcing an ordinance (or
ordinances) which contain stormwater and regulatory floodplain management rules
and regulations which are consistent with, or at least as stringent, as these
of this chapter.
   CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL SOIL CLASSIFIER. A person who is certified by
Illinois Soil Classifiers’ Association or the American Registry of Certified
Professionals in Agronomy, Crops, and Soils.
   CERTIFIED WETLAND SPECIALIST. Persons meeting the minimum requirements of
subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4) as follows:
      (1)   Provide a one-page statement of qualifications in the areas noted
below. The signed statement will be considered as evidence of qualifications;
      (2)   Pass the CERTIFIED WETLAND SPECIALIST exam;
      (3)   Completion of a Lake County Stormwater Management Commission-
approved wetland delineation course and meet the requirements of one of the
following:
         (a)   Licensed professional wetland scientist (PWS) from the Society
of Wetland Scientists;
         (b)   Minimum of a bachelor’s degree in an earth science or biologic
science and at least one of the following: three years (cumulative) full-time
experience in the Upper Midwest Region on wetland related projects; or the
completion of 100 wetland delineations in the Upper Midwest; or a minimum of
300 hours spent in field review of wetlands in the Upper Midwest; or
         (c)   Six years (cumulative) full-time experience in the Upper Midwest
Region on wetlands related projects.
      (4)   Recertification as a CERTIFIED WETLAND SPECIALIST shall be required
every three years through the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission. A
minimum of 24 work-related professional development hours including Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission mandatory training for this type of
certification shall be obtained within the three-year period in order to
qualify for recertification. Documentation shall be self-monitoring and shall
be provided to Lake County Stormwater Management Commission upon application of
certification or recertification.
   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. The act or process of attesting that the specific
inspections, calculations, or tests, where required, have been performed and
that they comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   CHANNEL. See LINEAR WATER BODY.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation from
the channel. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of dead or
dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel.
   CLUB, NIGHTCLUB. See NIGHTCLUB.
   CLUB, PRIVATE. A structure, building or property which is primarily used by
an organization serving its members or their guests.
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast, and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
other sources. A COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA is identified on a community’s FIRM
by the designation of Zone VE or a moderate wave action area (MoWA).
   COLLECTOR STREET. See STREET, COLLECTOR.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where admission, services, performances,
or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of consideration.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is used or intended to be used primarily
for commercial purposes.
   COMMUNITY SEWER SYSTEM. A sewage treatment system which serves more than one
dwelling unit.
   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A water system which serves more than one dwelling
unit.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. A volume of storage created to offset the loss or
displacement of flood storage capacity due to a development activity. (See also
§
151.149.)
   COMPOSTING. The biological treatment process by which microorganisms
decompose the organic fraction of waste, producing compost.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. All plans for the orderly development of the county
including all accompanying maps, charts, and explanatory material adopted by
the County Board, and all amendments thereto.
   CONCENTRATED SOLAR THERMAL TECHNOLOGY. A solar energy technology that uses
lenses or mirrors, and often tracking systems, to focus or reflect a large area
of sunlight into a small area.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. Preconstruction
approval by Illinois Department of Transportation, Office of Water Resources
and Federal Emergency Management Agency of a proposed change to the regulatory
floodway map. This preconstruction approval ensures the property owner that
once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the
regulatory floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and
acceptance of as-built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION. A letter which indicates that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations, flood
insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or regulatory floodway as shown on an
effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-
built plans are submitted and approved.
   CONDUIT. A general term for any channel, watercourse, sewer, or culvert used
for the conveyance or movement of water, whether open or closed.
   CONSERVATION DISTRICT. Soil and Water Conservation District of Lake County.
   CONSERVATION RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. The development of land for
residential uses that requires the reservation of open space pursuant to the
requirements of §§
151.125 through
151.132. A CONSERVATION RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT may contain one or more of the
following housing types: detached house (single family), lot-line house,
village house, twinhouse, patio house, atrium house, townhouse, multiplex and/
or multi-dwelling structure, as fully described in §
151.130.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or firm engaged in construction, building services,
or maintenance, on a contract basis.
   CONTRACTOR’S MODEL HOME. A temporary retail sales and/or service use
consisting of a building, or portion thereof, designed as a dwelling unit and
constructed in a residential development for the purpose of temporary marketing
and/or sales of lots or dwelling units within the development in which it is
located.
   CONTROL, HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL GROUND. A system of photo-identifiable
points with established positions or elevations, or both, which are used as
fixed references in positioning and correlating map features.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. The development of land for detached
house (single family) dwelling units that requires no minimum reservation of
open space pursuant to the requirements of §§
151.125 through
151.132.
   CORNER LOT. See LOT, CORNER.
   CORRAL/PADDOCK. An enclosure for confining and/or exercising animals which
is generally located adjacent or in close proximity to a stable or barn.
   CRITICAL DURATION. The design storm duration for a given frequency storm
which produces the greatest peak flow, volume, or stage by analyzing all
durations presented in Appendix K.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street ending in a turnaround, designed and intended as a
permanent or temporary terminus.
   CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS. A business, profession, or trade commonly
practiced within a principal residence.
   CUTOFF. The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source,
or luminaire are completely eliminated (cutoff) at a specific angle above the
ground.
   CUTOFF ANGLE. The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light
rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light
source, above which no light is emitted.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments, or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DAMAGE. For the purpose of interpreting the provisions of §§
151.145 through
151.154 only, DAMAGE shall mean a measurable rise in flood heights on property
currently subject to flooding, flooding of property currently not subject to
flooding unless it is contained within the streambanks or a deed- or plat-
restricted area or increases in velocity to the point where the rate of land
lost to erosion and scour is significantly increased.
   DAY. A work day on which county offices are open for business, exclusive of
weekends and holidays, as established by the County Board.
   DAY, CALENDAR. A calendar day.
   DAY CARE FACILITY.
      (1)   Any facility which is established and maintained for the general
care of children or adults. Whether established for gain or otherwise, a day
care facility receives or arranges for care or placement of more than seven
individuals unrelated to the operator of the facility.
      (2)   The term DAY CARE FACILITY includes facilities commonly called
CHILD CARE CENTERS, DAY NURSERIES, NURSERY SCHOOLS, ADULT DAY CARES and
KINDERGARTENS but does not include any state operated institution for child
care, any juvenile detention housing, any licensed nursing home, or any bona
fide boarding school.
   DECISION-MAKING BODY. The entity that is authorized to finally approve or
deny an application or permit required under this chapter.
   DEDICATION. The transfer of property interests from private to public
ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee simple interest or
of a less than fee interest, including an easement.
   DEED OR PLAT RESTRICTION. Permanent easements, covenants, deed-restricted
open spaces, outlots dedicated to a public entity, reserved plat areas, and
conservation easements dedicated to meet the requirements of this chapter, or
public road rights-of-way that contain any part of the stormwater management
system of a development.
   DENSITY, MAXIMUM. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed per acre of
site area, after subtracting land area in regulatory floodplains, wetlands,
water bodies and public rights-of-way from the base site area. See §
151.131(F).
   DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE AREAS. Non-riverine depressions in the earth where
stormwater collects.
   DESIGN STORM. A selected storm event, described in terms of the probability
of occurring once within a given number of years, for which stormwater or flood
control improvements are designed and built.
   DESIGNATED CAREGIVER. A person who:
      (1)   Is at least 21 years of age;
      (2)   Has agreed to assist with a patient’s medical use of cannabis;
      (3)   Has not been convicted of an excluded offense; and
      (4)   Assists no more than one registered qualifying patient with his or
her medical use of cannabis.
   DESIGNATED EROSION CONTROL INSPECTOR.
      (1)   A person responsible for, at a minimum, verifying compliance and
ongoing maintenance of the approved soil erosion and sediment control plan
measures of a development and who is recommended to meet the minimum
qualification requirements of subsections (1)(a), (1)(b), and (1)(c) as
follows:
         (a)   Provide a one-page statement of qualifications in the areas
noted below and a request to be included on the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission Designated Erosion Control Inspector qualified listing.
The signed statement will be considered as evidence of qualifications.
         (b)   Pass the Designated Erosion Control Inspector Exam that is
administered by the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission.
         (c)   Complete a Lake County Stormwater Management Commission-approved
soil erosion and sediment control course and meet the requirements of one of
the following:
            1.   Have an official designation as a Certified Professional in
Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) or Certified Erosion, Sediment and
Stormwater Inspector (CESSWI);
            2.   Two years cumulative experience in the Upper Midwest Region on
soil erosion and sediment control inspections.
      (2)   The listing of Designated Erosion Control Inspectors shall be
officially updated every three years by the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission. Continuing education requirements shall be as follows:
         (a)   Attendance at each annual DECI training seminars shall be
sufficient for the three-year listing period.
         (b)   Alternatively, DECIs must attend 24 hours of work-related
professional development hours within the three-year period for relisting.
      (3)   Documentation shall be self-monitoring and shall be provided to
Lake County Stormwater Management Commission upon application for listing.
   DESIGNATED EROSION CONTROL INSPECTOR EXAM. An exam that is formally adopted
and administered by the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission to
establish minimum qualifications for an individual to be listed as a Designated
Erosion Control Inspector by the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission.
Formal adoption of this exam by the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission shall include the determination of a starting date for the
Designated Erosion Control Inspector Program requirements in this chapter.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A man-made structure, with either a wet or dry bottom,
for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff with controlled release during
or immediately following a storm.
   DETENTION STORAGE. The temporary detaining or storage of stormwater in
reservoirs, on rooftops or other areas under predetermined and controlled
conditions, with a controlled rate of discharge therefrom.
   DETENTION VOLUME SAFETY FACTOR. A multiplication factor applied to a
development’s detention volume when the detention facility is constructed on-
stream.
   DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner or the representative thereof, of a
lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in a development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase.
   DEVELOPMENT. The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alternation, relocation,
or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or
land; any extension of any use of land or any clearing, grading, excavation or
other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this
chapter. For stormwater management purposes, DEVELOPMENT includes any other
activity that might change the direction, height, volume, or velocity of flood
or surface water, including the drainage of wetlands and removal of vegetation
to the extent such that the wetland would no longer meet the criteria of
supporting hydrophytic vegetation as defined in this chapter except that which
would be considered appropriate for management purposes.
   DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. A physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of a person’s major life activities, impairs his or her
ability to live independently, or a record of having the impairment.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). A measurement of the size of a tree equal
to the diameter of its trunk measured four and one-half feet above natural
grade.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. Discharges of stormwater that have not passed through a
detention or retention facility designed to the specification of this chapter.
   DISCHARGE. The outflow of water, silt, or other mobile substances passing
along a conduit, watercourse, or a channel or released from detention storage.
   DOMINANT. For the purpose of this chapter, a DOMINANT plant species is one
that comprises greater than 50% of the vegetated layer. The VEGETATED LAYER is
defined as a subunit of a plant community in which all component species
exhibit the same growth form (e.g., trees, saplings, shrubs, herbs).
   DRAIN TILE. A conduit, such as corrugated plastic tubing, clay tile, or
pipe, installed beneath the ground surface to collect and/or convey drainage
water.
   DRAINAGE. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading, or other means. DRAINAGE includes the control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during or after development and includes the means
necessary for water supply preservation or for prevention or alleviation of
flooding.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The land area above a given point that contributes stormwater
to that point.
   DRAINAGE BASIN.  Subwatershed as indicated in the Lake County Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Plan.
   DREDGING MATERIAL. Material, including sediments and debris, which are
excavated or dredged from the bottom of lakes, rivers, ponds, channels and
other water bodies.
   DRIP LINE. The perimeter of the circular area surrounding the trunk of a
tree measured as one foot of radius from the centerline of the trunk for each
one inch of DBH.
   DRIVE-IN THEATER. An outdoor movie theater designed to allow patrons to view
motion pictures while seated in their parked automobiles.
   DRY DETENTION FACILITY. A dry detention facility is a detention facility
designed to drain completely after temporary storage of stormwater flows and to
normally be dry over the majority of its bottom area.
   DUPLEX. Two dwelling units within a single structure located on one lot.
(See also TWINHOUSE.)
   DWELLING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY DWELLING.
   DWELLING, ATRIUM HOUSE. See ATRIUM HOUSE.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED. See ATTACHED DWELLING.
   DWELLING, DETACHED. Same as HOUSE, DETACHED.
   DWELLING, DUPLEX. See DUPLEX.
   DWELLING, LOT LINE HOUSE. See LOT LINE HOUSE.
   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. See MANUFACTURED HOME.
   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. See MOBILE HOME.
   DWELLING, MULTI- (STRUCTURE). See MULTI-DWELLING STRUCTURE.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLEX. See MULTIPLEX.
   DWELLING, PATIO HOUSE. See PATIO HOUSE.
   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. See TOWNHOUSE.
   DWELLING, TWINHOUSE. See TWINHOUSE.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion of it designed and used for residential
occupancy by a single household and that includes exclusive sleeping, cooking,
eating, and sanitation facilities. A single DWELLING UNIT shall contain no more
than one set of cooking facilities. Any additional cooking facilities must be
clearly accessory in nature.
   DWELLING UNIT, CARETAKER’S. See CARETAKER’S DWELLING UNIT.
   DWELLING, VILLAGE HOUSE. See VILLAGE HOUSE.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATES. A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been
elevated.
   EMERGENCY OVERFLOW. The structure in a stormwater management system designed
to protect the system in event of a malfunction of the primary flow structure
or a storm event greater than the system design. The EMERGENCY OVERFLOW
capacity initiates at the facility design high water level or base flood
elevations.
   ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY. A room, greenhouse, building, or other enclosed
area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by a
cultivation center’s agents or a dispensing organization’s agent working for
the registered cultivation center or the registered dispensing organization to
cultivate, store, and distribute cannabis for registered qualifying patients.
   ENGINEER. A licensed professional engineer licensed to practice in the State
of Illinois.
   ENGINEER OF RECORD. An engineer that designed and certified the final
engineering plans or the engineer responsible for the design of engineering
improvements in the subdivision and certifies those improvements.
   EQUINE. A horse, pony, mule, or ass.
   EROSION. The process whereby soil is removed by precipitation, flowing
water, wave action, or wind.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   EXCEPTIONAL FUNCTIONAL VALUE WETLAND. See WETLAND, EXCEPTIONAL FUNCTIONAL
VALUE.
   FAMILY. See HOUSEHOLD.
   FARM ANIMALS. Any animal customarily raised on farms, including alpaca,
llama, burros, cattle, bison, mink, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, donkeys,
emus, goats, horses, mules, ostriches, swine, sheep, or lambs.
   FARM HOUSING. Temporary housing that is intended to accommodate individuals
primarily engaged in the occupation of agriculture. The term includes housing
occupied by farm workers, farm employees or farm owners engaged in the full-
time occupation of agriculture, and their families.
   FARMED WETLAND. Wetlands that are farmed currently, or have been farmed
within five years previous to the permit application date, as defined in 7
C.F.R. Part 12 (61 FR 47025).
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY. The Federal Emergency Management Agency
and its regulations codified as 44 C.F.R. 59-79 effective as of October 1,
1986. This incorporation does not include any later editions or amendments.
   FEE-IN-LIEU OF ON-SITE STORMWATER STORAGE. A fee assessed to a permit
applicant used to contribute to the cost of a basin plan or floodplain study
components; or other stormwater system improvements, “in-lieu-of” constructing
on-site detention or for compensatory storage requirements for streambank and
shoreline restoration fills of less than 200 cubic yards.
   FILL. Earth, sand, gravel, rock, concrete without metal reinforcement, or
other material, excluding asphalt, biodegradable material, such as wood,
hazardous waste and special waste (as determined by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency), which is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped,
pulled, transported, or moved by man to a new location.
   FILL/GRADE OPERATION. The acceptance, collection, accumulation, or
aggregation of fill from off-site sources. It includes any property used for
the permanent storage or stockpiling of such material on-site, or temporary
storage or stockpiling of such material for use at any other location.
   FILLING. The act of depositing fill on land, whether submerged or not.
   FILLING, DEEP. Filling of the regulatory floodplain which raises the land
surface elevation above that of the base flood elevation (see also §
151.149).
   FILLING, SHALLOW. Filling of the regulatory floodplain to realign contours,
protect seawalls, or make yards or lands more useful which does not raise the
land surface elevation above the base flood elevation (see also §
151.149).
   FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The specific design of all physical planning and
engineering elements necessary to develop the land in substantial compliance
with the approved preliminary development plan.
   FLAG. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision,
or other entity.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS. A map prepared by Federal Emergency Management
Agency or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that depicts the
Special Flood Hazard Area within a community. This map includes insurance rate
zones and regulatory floodplains and may or may not depict regulatory
floodways.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. An overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for avoiding or reducing future flood damage.
   FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY. May be either riverine or non-riverine depressional
areas. Except for coastal flooding effects of Lake Michigan, floodplain
boundaries shall be delineated by projecting the base flood elevation onto the
best available topography and by superimposing the Special Flood Hazard Area
onto the base map. REGULATORY FLOODPLAINS include:
      (1)   Any riverine area inundated by the base flood where there is at
least 640 acres of tributary drainage area;
      (2)   Any non-riverine area with a surface area of one-fourth acre or
more, or with a storage volume of three-fourths acre-foot or more when
inundated by the base flood; or
      (3)   Any area indicated as a Special Flood Hazard Area on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map or Letter of Map Revision
and located with the best available topographic information to be inundated by
the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN STUDY. A study, formally adopted by the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission, excluding base flood determinations performed for a
specific development site, that examines, analyzes, evaluates, or determines
the hydraulic and hydrologic characteristics of flood hazards for a basin or
partial basin area. To be used as a regulatory instrument, the study shall, at
a minimum, meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency criteria specified in
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners, most current
version.
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any area inundated by the base flood, including such areas
outside of the regulatory floodplain.
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any area inundated by the base flood.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures or property which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and their contents.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The base flood elevation plus two feet of
freeboard.
   FLOOD TABLE LAND. The land area immediately adjacent to flood-prone areas
with greater than 100 acres of tributary drainage area, the elevation of which
is greater than the base flood elevation by two feet or less.
   FLOODWAY, REGULATORY. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the regulatory floodplain adjacent to a channel as designated by
Illinois Department of Transportation, Office of Water Resources, which is
needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future 100-year
frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth foot increase in stage
due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase
in velocities. The location of the regulatory floodway shall be as delineated
on the maps listed in Appendix M, as may be amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact
location of the regulatory floodway boundary, Illinois Department of
Transportation, Office of Water Resources shall be contacted.
   The need to preserve storage when defining the regulatory floodway will be
waived by the SMC if the applicant receives approval from IDNR/OWR 3708.60.d
Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross area for each of a building’s stories under
roof measured from the exterior limits or faces of the structure. Parking
structures providing spaces to meet minimum off-street parking standards of §
151.165 shall not be counted as FLOOR AREA.
   FLOOR AREA FACTOR. An intensity measurement expressed as the total floor
area per net site area.
   FOOTCANDLE. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one foot from a uniform point source of one standard candle.
   FORESTED WETLAND. A wetland area with 30% or greater aerial coverage of
trees. Trees referred to as woody plants that are greater than three inches in
diameter at breast height (DBH) and with a height of greater than 20 feet.
   FORESTRY. The clearing of forested or woodland areas, including mature
woodlands and young woodlands as defined by this chapter.
   FRAMEWORK PLAN. A component of the Comprehensive Plan.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of height added to the base flood or other high
water elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in
calculations, unknown local conditions, wave actions, and unpredictable effects
such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   FREEWAY. A high volume traffic corridor which, together with other freeways,
carries a high proportion of total area travel with a minimum of total mileage,
and to which access is partially or fully controlled, often by public purchase
of access rights or by designation pursuant to state statutes.
   FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT. An assessment of a wetlands flood storage, water
quality, and other beneficial functions.
   GARAGE. A structure or part thereof, designed, used, or intended to be used
for the parking and storage of motor vehicles.
   GARDEN CENTER. A place of business where retail and wholesale products and
produce are sold to the consumer. These centers, which may include a nursery
and/or greenhouses, import most of the items sold, and may include plants,
nursery products and stock, fertilizers, potting soil, hardware, power
equipment and machinery, hoes, rakes, shovels, and other garden and farm
variety tools and utensils.
   GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS.  Non-hazardous, uncontaminated
materials resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair, and the
demolition of utilities, structures, and roads, limited to the following:
bricks, concrete, and other masonry materials; soil; rock; wood, including non-
hazardous, painted, treated, and coated wood and wood products; wall coverings;
plaster; drywall; plumbing fixtures; non-asbestos insulation; roofing shingles
and other roof coverings; reclaimed or other asphalt pavement; glass; plastics
that are not sealed in a manner that conceals waste; electrical wiring and
components containing no hazardous substances; and corrugated cardboard, piping
or metals incidental to any of those materials or as defined in § 3.160(a) of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Act as amended.
   GLARE. The sensation produced by a bright source within the visual field
that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted and
which causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance and
visibility.
   GOLF COURSE. An area of land laid out for the game of golf with a series of
holes and including tees, greens, fairways, and often one or more natural or
artificial hazards.
   GOVERNMENT BUILDING (OR USE). A building or structure owned or leased by a
unit of government and used by the unit of government in exercising its
statutory authority. GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS may include but shall not be limited
to township and forest preserve structures, postal offices, public sewage
treatment plants, public water treatment plants, fire stations, and public
libraries.
   GRADE, EXISTING OR NATURAL. The vertical elevation of the existing ground
surface prior to excavation or filling.
   GRADING. The contouring of land to a specified level or slope.
   GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE. Any stormwater management technique or practice that
reduces runoff volume through preserving, restoring, utilizing, or enhancing
the processes of infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse. Approaches may
include green roofs, naturalized detention facilities, trees and tree boxes,
rain gardens, vegetated swales, wetlands, infiltration planters, porous and
permeable pavements, porous piping systems, dry wells, vegetated median strips,
reforestation/revegetation, rain barrels and cisterns, and protection and
enhancement of riparian buffers and floodplain.
   GREENHOUSE. An enclosed structure, permanent or portable, which is used for
the growth of plants.
   GREENHOUSE AND/OR NURSERY CENTER. The retail or wholesale sale of plants, as
well as accessory items directly related to the maintenance and care of plant
life. The accessory items normally sold are clay pots, potting soil,
fertilizers, insecticides, hanging baskets, rakes, hoes and shovels, and the
like. However, no power equipment, such as gas or electric lawnmowers and farm
implements, may be sold wholesale or retail.
   GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system mounted on a rack
or pole that is attached to or ballasted on the ground. GROUND-MOUNTED SYSTEMS
can be either accessory or principal uses.
   GROUP LIVING. Residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who
do not meet the definition of “household living”. Examples include dormitories,
fraternities, sororities, monasteries, and convents.
   GROUP LIVING STRUCTURE. A structure that is used as a residence for a group
living use and that contains sleeping areas and one or more cooking, eating,
and sanitary facilities.
   GROVE. A stand of five or more individual trees whose total combined canopy
covers an area of less than 20,000 square feet, at least 50% of which is
composed of trees having a diameter breast height of 16 inches or more. An
active commercial nursery or Christmas tree operation shall not be considered a
GROVE.
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance between the mean elevation at finished grade
along the front of a structure to the highest point of the roof.
   HELIPORT. A facility constructed for the taking off and landing of
helicopters.
   HIGH-QUALITY AQUATIC RESOURCES (HQAR). Waters of the United States or
isolated waters of Lake County that are determined to be critical due to their
uniqueness, scarcity, function, and/or value as defined in Appendix N of this
chapter.
   HIGHWAY DESIGN MANUAL. The Design Manual or its successor document or
documents, as published by the Illinois Department of Transportation in effect
at the time a preliminary plat is approved.
   HIGHWAY STANDARD MANUAL. The Standards Manual or its successor document or
documents, as published by the Illinois Department of Transportation in effect
at the time a preliminary plat is approved.
   HOSPITAL. A health-medical use devoted primarily to the maintenance and
operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, and overnight care of
individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other
abnormal physical, mental, or emotional conditions or afflictions.
   HOSPITAL EMERGENCY HELIPORT. A facility constructed for the taking off and
landing of helicopters as a means of providing medical emergency transport.
This heliport shall be considered an accessory use to the hospital, shall be
used exclusively in connection with the hospital, and shall be subordinate to
the hospital in area, extent, and purpose.
   HOTEL. A building designed for transient occupancy containing rooms or
suites accessible from a common hall or entrance, providing living, sleeping
and toilet facilities; individual cooking facilities, a general kitchen or a
common dining room may be provided.
   HOUSE, ATTACHED. Same as DWELLING, ATTACHED.
   HOUSE, DETACHED. A dwelling unit located on its own lot that is not attached
to any other dwelling unit.
   HOUSEHOLD. Any of the following:
      (1)   Two or more persons related to one another by blood, marriage, or
legal adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling
unit;
      (2)   Up to four unrelated persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit; or
      (3)   Up to eight persons with disabilities and attendant support staff
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit.
   HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT COMPENSATORY STORAGE. Compensatory storage placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All storage lost or displaced below the existing ten-year flood
elevation is replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All storage
lost or displaced above the existing ten-year flood elevation is replaced above
the proposed ten-year flood elevation. The additional compensatory storage
required beyond a 1:1 ratio may be placed at any elevation between normal water
level and the base flood elevation.
   HYDRIC SOIL. A soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during
the growing season to develop an anaerobic (without oxygen) conditions in the
upper part.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which determines
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
   HYDROLOGICALLY CONNECTED. A stormwater discharge that is tributary to a
channel, wetland, lake, or pond and that has an overland flow path of less than
200 feet.
   HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED. An area where the land surface has been cleared,
grubbed, compacted, or otherwise modified to increase runoff volumes or rates,
or to change runoff direction.
   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Plant life growing in water, soil, or on a substrate
that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive
water content.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge or dumping of material into the stormwater
management system or a flood-prone area that is not composed entirely of
stormwater, except for discharges allowed under NPDES Permit No. ILR40 Part
I.B.2.
   ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL. The Natural Resources Conservation Service Illinois
Urban Manual. A technical manual designed for urban ecosystem protection and
enhancement. This manual contains design guidance for a development site to
meet the Watershed Development Ordinance performance standards for soil erosion
and sediment control.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign that has characters, letters, figures, designs,
or outlines illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes, or any other
artificial means as part of the sign.
   ILLUMINATION, MAXIMUM PERMITTED.  The maximum illumination measured in
footcandles at the property line.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not readily
absorb or retain water, including but not limited to building roofs, parking
and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks, and paved recreation areas.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (ISR). A measure of the intensity of land use which
is determined by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on a site
by the net site area.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Any man-made changes to any land or structure.
   IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC. Any improvement necessary to provide for public needs.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  A sewage treatment and disposal system
that infiltrates treated wastewater into soil; discharges wastewater to the
surface where the projected daily flow is less than 1,500 gallons; or holds
wastewater in a tank for removal or disposal at a remote site.
   IN-KIND REPLACEMENT (CULVERT).  An IN-KIND CULVERT REPLACEMENT has an
equivalent cross-sectional area, shape, roughness coefficient, and inlet and
outlet elevations; or the replacement may be shown to have an equivalent
hydraulic capacity using appropriate engineering calculations.
   INSPECT. To visit, or to review plans, or to oversee a site visit or plan
review per generally accepted engineering practices.
   INTERIOR LOT. See LOT, INTERIOR.
   INTERSECTION VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. An area formed by a point on each street
center line located 100 feet from the intersection of local street center lines
and a third line connecting the two points of 130 feet from the intersection of
collector or higher category street center lines and a third line connecting
the two points.
   ISOLATED WATERS OF LAKE COUNTY. All waters such as wetlands, ponds, streams,
farmed wetlands, and wetlands that are not under U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
jurisdiction. The limits of the ISOLATED WATERS OF LAKE COUNTY extend to the
ordinary high water mark or the delineated wetland boundary.
      (1)   The following are excluded from the ISOLATED WATERS OF LAKE COUNTY,
as determined by the Enforcement Officer:
         (a)   Excavations and impoundments that have received a permit from
the appropriate jurisdictional authority;
         (b)   Excavations and impoundments permitted by right, prior to being
a regulated activity, within 40% or more non-hydric soils. Areas designated as
“water” as depicted on the Soil Survey of Lake County, SCS, 1970 are determined
as either hydric or non-hydric soils by connecting adjoining soil boundaries to
create complete polygons of the depicted soil types;
         (c)   Wetlands created incidental construction grading on development
sites; and
         (d)   Road-side ditches.
      (2)   The following shall not be considered as meeting the exclusion
criteria in subsection (1) above:
         (a)   All areas meeting the definition of high-quality aquatic
resources, other than areas meeting exclusions (1)(a) or (1)(d);
         (b)   Wetland mitigation areas created to meet the requirements of
this chapter or § 404 of the Clean Water Act; and
         (c)   Wetland areas created or restored using public funds.
   JUNK YARD. Any land or structure, exclusive of recycling centers, used for a
salvaging operation, including, among other things, the storage and sale of
waste paper, rags, scrap metal, and discarded materials, or the dismantling,
storage, and salvaging of unlicensed, inoperative vehicles.
   KENNEL. A location where the number of dogs or any other animal, except for
farm animals, exceeds the residential pet limits established by the Lake County
Health Department, or any place in or at which dogs or any other animals,
except farm animals, are kept on a regular basis for the purpose of sale or in
connection with boarding, training, care, or breeding or adoption.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A person with a degree in landscape architecture from
an accredited university or college.
   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. A business principally engaged in the decorative and
functional alteration, planting and maintenance of grounds. The business may
engage in the installation and construction of underground improvements but
only to the extent that the improvements (e.g., irrigation or drainage
facilities) are accessory to the principal business and are necessary to
support or sustain the landscaped surface of the ground.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines, and trees.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY. An establishment for the composting of
waste materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines, and trees. However property on which the principal use is residential
and on which composting of these materials, accumulated exclusively on-site, is
conducted, shall not be considered a LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT. Official determination by Federal Emergency
Management Agency that a specific structure is not in a Special Flood Hazard
Area, amends the effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate
Map.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION. A letter issued by Federal Emergency Management
Agency or Illinois Department of Transportation, Office of Water Resources that
revises base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries, or
regulatory floodways as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Maps or
Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
   LETTER OF NO IMPACT (LONI). Written confirmation from Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission or isolated wetland certified community that no wetland
impacts will occur from a proposed development, based on a review of plans or
other applicable information provided by the applicant as specified in this
chapter.
   LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA). A line shown on a Flood Insurance
Rate Map to indicate the inland limit of the 1.5-ft breaking wave height during
the base flood.
   LINEAR WATER BODY. A natural or artificial watercourse that periodically or
continuously contains moving water, or that forms a connecting link between two
or more bodies of water. LINEAR WATER BODIES have a definite bed and banks that
serve to confine the water and include any river, stream, creek, brook, branch,
flowage, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, swale, wash, or natural or
man-made drainageway, in or into which surface water or groundwater flows,
either perennially or intermittently. Roadside drainage ditches, conveyance
systems between on-site detention facilities and excavated detention facilities
are not LINEAR WATER BODIES. LINEAR WATER BODIES are also known as CHANNELS.
For the purposes of §§
151.145 through
151.154 only, the terms LINEAR WATER BODY and NONLINEAR WATER BODY are
interchangeable.
   LIQUID EQUIVALENT PRECIPITATION. The amount of precipitation, including any
frozen precipitation in its melted state (e.g., snow, sleet, freezing rain).
With varying densities of frozen precipitation, the liquid equivalent
precipitation indicates the actual amount of water that falls in a storm event,
regardless of the type of precipitation.
   LIVESTOCK. Animals that are customarily kept for producing food or fiber.
   LOCAL FOOD GARDEN. A parcel or any portion thereof, managed and maintained
by a person or group of persons, for the growing and harvesting of food
products and/or ornamental plants, exclusive of those agricultural uses that
require large-scale mechanized equipment not customarily used for residential
gardening.
   LOCAL FOOD PRODUCTION. The practice of producing food for the purposes of
consumption or sale at a local market, such as growing vegetables and fruits
and raising livestock. LOCAL FOOD PRODUCTION also includes the growing of
vegetables and fruits and the keeping of chickens or bees, as a residential
accessory use.
   LOCAL STREET. See STREET, LOCAL.
   LOT. A single legally divided parcel of land.
   LOT AREA. The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot, excluding
any street, easement for street purposes, or street right-of-way.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two streets at their juncture.
   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE. A lot abutting on two parallel streets, or abutting on
two intersecting streets at points removed from their juncture.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. A line bounding a lot which divides one lot from another or from a
street or any other public or private space.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The part of the entire interior lot abutting the street or
that part of a corner lot extending across the narrowest part of the lot
abutting the street. Double frontage lots have two FRONT LOT LINES.
   LOT LINE HOUSE. A dwelling unit that is located on its own lot, not attached
to any other dwelling unit and set on or within five feet of the interior side
lot line.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the
front lot line; in the case of a triangular or an irregular lot, a line 20 feet
in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible
distance from the front lot line shall be considered to be the REAR LOT LINE.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a street or rear lot line.
   LOT LINE, STREET. In the case of a lot abutting only one street, the lot
line separating a lot from the street; in the case of a corner lot, each lot
line separating the lot from a street; in the case of a double frontage lot,
each lot line separating the lot from a street shall be considered to be the
STREET LOT LINE.
   LOT, PANHANDLE. A lot resulting from the division of a tract of land that,
before its division, did not have sufficient width on a street to create more
than one lot abutting the street but had sufficient area and depth to be
divided into more than one buildable lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines. LOT WIDTH shall
be measured between side lot lines at the required front setback line. (See
also §
151.131(B).)
   LOT, ZONING. A parcel of land comprised of one or more recorded lots that
are contiguous and under the same ownership and in the same zoning district;
occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or buildings, or
principal use or uses, along with permitted accessory buildings or uses; and
meeting all of the requirements for area, buildable area, frontage, width,
setbacks, and any other requirements set forth in this chapter. Lots separated
by streets or alleys shall not be considered contiguous for the purposes of
this definition.
   LOW-FREQUENCY SOUND. Sound with frequencies below 100 Hz, including audible
sound and infrasound, as opposed to broadband which has sound frequencies above
100 Hz. Infrasound has frequencies below 20 Hz, which if sufficiently intense,
can be perceived by many individuals, and must be measured by a sound level
meter using the C-weighted scale.
   LOW OPENING ELEVATION. The elevation at which water could enter a structure
through any non-watertight opening such as a doorway threshold, a window sill,
or a basement window well.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest finished grade adjacent to a structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement.
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, or building access in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that the requirements of §
151.149(H) are met.
   LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all
necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.
   LUMINAIRE, CUTOFF-TYPE. A luminaire with elements such as shields,
reflectors, or refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff
angle that is less than 90 degrees.
   MAINTAINABLE OUTLET. A stormwater conveyance system (such as a storm sewer
or overland flow path) that provides positive drainage to a natural watercourse
or stormwater management system. The natural watercourse or stormwater
management system shall have adequate downstream capacity. Stormwater
management systems shall be within a recorded drainage easement or right-of-
way.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling manufactured off-site which complies with the
provisions of the 2018 International Residential Code (see
Chapter 150).
   MARINA. A boat basin and recreational facility, located on waterfront
property or having direct water access, providing moorings for boats, and one
or more of the following facilities: boat launching ramps, boat livery, boat
sales, maintenance shops, marine supply store, and fuel dock.
   MATURE WOODLAND. See WOODLAND, MATURE.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP).
      (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, the maximum extent practicable
(MEP) is defined as the highest level of Runoff Volume Reduction (RVR) that is
achievable for the development as determined by the applicant and approved by
the Planning, Building and Development Director (see Appendix R for runoff
volume reduction quantities). The MEP RVR quantitative standard for the
development shall not be required to exceed the minimum performance standards
identified in §
151.146(D). For public road developments, the MEP shall not necessitate the
need to acquire right-of-wav or deed and plat restricted areas outside of the
right-of-way.
      (2)   In making the determination that the RVR quantitative standard for
the development is the MEP, the following objectives should be considered, when
applicable, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Prevention or reduction of existing, adjacent flood-related
problems;
         (b)   Examination of adequate downstream capacity from the
development;
         (c)   Preservation of existing wetland hydrology;
         (d)   Protection of adjacent streams from degradation due to increased
volumes and prolonged bankfull flows;
         (e)   Minimization of off-site water quality impacts;
         (f)   Enhancements of aquifer recharge on-site;
         (g)   Evaluate geographic features of the site (e.g., topography, soil
structure, natural resources);
         (h)   Utilize best available and feasible technology;
         (i)   Maximize performance of the design; and
         (j)   Provide for sustainability through maintenance and management of
the installed practices.
   MEDIAN FAMILY INCOME. As defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS INFUSED PRODUCT. Food, oils, ointments, or other products
containing usable cannabis that are not smoked.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CONTAINER. A sealed, traceable, food compliant, tamper
resistant, tamper evident container or package used for the purpose of
containment of medical cannabis from a cultivation center to a dispensing
organization.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER (CULTIVATION CENTER). A facility
operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide only
registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical
cannabis.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION (DISPENSING ORGANIZATION,
DISPENSARY ORGANIZATION, DISPENSARY). A facility operated by an organization or
business that is registered by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
   MINIMUM FLOOR ELEVATION. The lowest elevation permissible for the
construction, erection, or other placement of any floor, including a basement
floor.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE. See WAREHOUSE, MINI.
   MITIGATION. Measures taken to eliminate or minimize damage from development
activities, such as construction in wetlands or regulatory floodplain filling,
by replacement of the resource or other means of compensation.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable, factory-built structure that was manufactured
prior to enactment of the federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. § 5401) or a manufactured home build
subsequent to and in compliance with the federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. § 5401) and that is
designed to be used as a single dwelling unit.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A contiguous parcel of land which has been developed for
the placement of mobile homes and is owned in its entirety by an individual, a
firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation.
   MODERATE WAVE ACTION AREA (MoWA). A special flood hazard area subject to the
potential for breaking wave heights of greater than or equal to one and one-
half feet, but less than three feet, where the primary source of flooding is
astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches, and/or tsunamis. A MoWA is an area
within zone AE on a FIRM that is between the inland limit of zone VE and a
Limit of Moderate Wave Action, where identified. (Also known as “Coastal A
zone.”)
   MOTEL. A building designed for transient occupancy containing rooms or
suites with separate entrances, providing living, sleeping, and toilet
facilities. Individual cooking facilities may be provided.
   MULTI-DWELLING (STRUCTURE). A structure that contains more than eight
dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceilings with one or more
units. The land underneath the structure is not divided into separate lots.
MULTI-DWELLING includes structures commonly called apartments and condominiums.
(See also MULTI-DWELLING STRUCTURE standards of §
151.130.)
   MULTIPLEX. An attached dwelling or a stacked dwelling containing no fewer
than three and no more than eight dwelling units within a single building, each
(building) of which is located on its own individual lot. (See also MULTIPLEX
standards of §
151.130.)
   NATIVE VEGETATION OR PLANT SPECIES. Tree, shrub, and other plant species
living in the Chicago region and Northeastern Illinois, specifically this
county, prior to European settlement of the region. (See Plants of the Chicago
Region, Floyd Swink and Gerald Wilhelm, Indiana Academy of Sciences.)
   NATURAL. When used in reference to streams, channels, and linear water
bodies, means those streams, channels, and linear water bodies formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
modified stream, channel, or linear water body that has regained NATURAL
characteristics over time as it meanders and reestablishes vegetation may be
considered NATURAL.
   NATURAL RESOURCES. All areas of wetlands, floodplains, linear and nonlinear
water bodies, woodlands, and significant trees, as defined in this chapter.
   NET SITE AREA. The buildable portion of a lot, as calculated in accordance
with §
151.070(D).
   NGVD. National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Superseded by NAVD 88,
effective September 18, 2013.
   NIGHTCLUB. An establishment serving liquor and/or food while providing space
for music, dancing, floor shows, or comedy acts. A NIGHTCLUB shall not include
activities or uses as defined by this chapter as an ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENT.
   NOISE. Sound that adversely affects the psychological or physiological well-
being of people.
   NON-COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign, wording, logo, or other representation
that directly or indirectly expresses, conveys, or calls attention to
political, religious, social, or other non-commercial information, sentiments,
or beliefs, but not including incidental sign messages.
   NON-CUSTOMARY RECREATIONAL STRUCTURE. A recreational structure intended for
the private use of occupants of a principal dwelling and their guests. Examples
of NON-CUSTOMARY RECREATIONAL STRUCTURES include but are not limited to
skateboard/bike ramps, sports courts, and ice rinks.
   NONLINEAR WATER BODY. A natural or artificial body of water that retains
water year-round, other than a linear water body, such as depressional ponded
areas, lakes, and sloughs. For the purposes of §§
151.145 through
151.154 only, the terms LINEAR WATER BODY and NONLINEAR WATER BODY are
interchangeable.
   NON-PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. A different property that is not owned by the
owner of the property on which a development is being proposed or installed.
   NON-PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on non-
participating property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an
application for a conditional use permit application to develop the commercial
solar energy system is filed with the county.
   NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. All zoning districts except those classified
as residential zoning districts. See Residential Zoning District.
   NON-RIVERINE REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN. Regulatory floodplains not associated
with streams, creeks, or rivers, such as isolated depressional storage areas or
lakes.
   NRI. Natural resources information report, as required by Illinois Statutes,
70 ILCS 405/22.02a.
   NURSERY. A place where the primary activity is the growing of plants,
flowers, trees, and shrubs for sale.
   OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING. Any one or more of the following buildings that
is existing and occupied on the date that the application for a conditional use
permit to develop the commercial solar energy system is filed with the county:
a school, place of worship, day care facility, public library, or community
center.
   ON-STREAM DETENTION. Any detention facility that has off-site tributary
drainage area.
   OPEN SPACE RATIO. A ratio derived by dividing open space by the net site
area.
   OPEN WATERS. Permanently inundated isolated waters of Lake County that are
greater than three feet in depth below the normal water level or normal pool
elevation.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The point on the bank or shore at which the
presence and movement of surface waters are continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction, or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other recognized
characteristics.
   OVERLAND FLOW PATH. An area of land which conveys stormwater for all events
up to and including the base flood event. The OVERLAND FLOW PATH can be
estimated using readily available topographic information and shall take into
account all on-site and off-site tributary areas in accordance with §
151.146(H).
   OWNER. The person having the right of legal title or beneficial interest in
or a contractual right to purchase a parcel of land. For the purpose of
providing notices required by this chapter, the OWNER is the person who last
paid taxes on any parcel as identified by county property tax records.
   OWNERSHIP PARCEL. Any legally described parcel of land. This includes
contiguous lots or parcels of land, owned in whole, or in part, by the same
property owner.
   PARCEL. Any legally described piece of land.
   PARCEL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER. Permanent index number used to identify
properties for tax assessment.
   PARK, COMMERCIAL. Any park or recreation area for which an admission fee is
charged.
   PARK, COMMUNITY. Any non-commercial recreation area or park created as part
of, or within the area covered by, a county approved subdivision plat.
   PARK, NON-COMMERCIAL. A park or recreation area that is open to public and
for which no fee is charged.
   PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on participating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that a conditional use
permit for a building permit to develop the commercial solar energy system is
filed with the county.
   PASTURE. An area of grass or other vegetative cover grown for the purpose of
grazing animals.
   PATIO HOUSE. A dwelling unit located on its own lot that may be attached to
or detached from other dwelling units. A PATIO HOUSE lot is enclosed by a solid
wall located at the lot line, broken only by driveways and pedestrian access
points, thus creating a private yard area between the house and the wall. (See
also the PATIO HOUSE standards of §
151.130.)
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel,
watercourse, or conduit resulting from a specified storm or flood.
   PEDESTRIANWAY. A right-of-way designated for use by pedestrian traffic.
   PENNANT. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit is issued.
   PERSON. Any individual, public or private firm or corporation, the State of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer,
or employee of any of the foregoing.
   PLAT. Plat of subdivision, whether preliminary or final.
   POND. A natural or artificial body of water of less than two acres that
retains water year-round.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. See BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.
   PRINCIPAL USE. See USE, PRINCIPAL.
   PRIVATE CLUB. See CLUB, PRIVATE.
   PRIVATE STABLE. See STABLE, PRIVATE.
   PROTECTED USE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship;
      (2)   A public or private nursery, elementary, or secondary school;
      (3)   A child care facility, licensed by the Illinois Department of
Children and Family Services;
      (4)   A public park, playground, playing field, forest preserve, or other
recreational area;
      (5)   A public or private cemetery; or
      (6)   A public housing facility.
   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER.  All open public rivers, streams, and lakes
specifically designated by Illinois Department of Transportation, Office of
Water Resources, that are capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or
in part, for commercial uses and purposes, or which in their natural condition
were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with
or discharged their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon, the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, lakes that are open to the main channel or body of water and
directly accessible thereto.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project within a deed- or
plat-restricted area, which will be operated and maintained by a public agency
to reduce flood damages to existing buildings or structures. A land stewardship
not-for-profit corporation or other similar entity may also own, operate or
maintain a PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. In this circumstance, there shall also
be an executed agreement with a public agency to take over ownership, operation
or maintenance if the corporation dissolves or fails to meet the operation, and
maintenance requirements for the project area. The project shall include a
hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the
watershed area affected by the project. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction, or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
   PUBLIC PARK. Park, noncommercial.
   PUBLIC ROAD DEVELOPMENT. Any development activity which takes place in a
public right-of-way, or part thereof, that is administered and funded in whole
or in part, by a public agency under its respective roadway jurisdiction.
Rehabilitative maintenance and in-kind replacement are considered to be a
PUBLIC ROAD DEVELOPMENT if located in a regulatory floodplain. A PUBLIC ROAD
DEVELOPMENT located within a regulatory floodway and which has been approved by
the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Highways (IDOT/DOH),
Bureau of Local Roads and Streets is exempt from the hydraulic analysis
requirements of this chapter. Individual recreational trail systems being
constructed that are not part of another development project and linear
railroad development projects shall be considered PUBLIC ROAD DEVELOPMENTS with
respect to the requirements of this chapter.
   PUBLICLY DEDICATED ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street which is dedicated for
public road purposes.
   RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY. The maximum rated output of electric power
production of the photovoltaic system in watts of direct current (DC).
   REAR LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, REAR.
   REAR SETBACK. See SETBACK, REAR.
   REASONABLY FEASIBLE ALTERNATIVE. An option that does not involve physical or
economic hardships that would render a development project infeasible and that
is not unreasonable in the determination of the Planning, Building and
Development Director.
   RECONSTRUCTION. The act of rebuilding a structure.
   RECORD DRAWINGS. Construction drawings revised to show significant changes
made during the construction process, usually based on marked-up prints,
drawings and other data furnished by the contractor to the Enforcement Officer.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis and that
has a total area of 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection. The vehicle must be designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light-duty truck. Furthermore, the vehicle must be
designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use rather than as
a permanent dwelling. TRAVEL TRAILER, MOTOR-HOME, CAMPING TRAILER, and PICKUP
COACH are deemed synonymous with RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
must be road-ready at all times when located within the floodplain.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A parcel on which campsites are established for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living
quarters for purposes of recreation or vacation.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, ROAD-READY.  A recreational vehicle that is on its
wheels or a jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
type utilities and security devices. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at
all times, and the vehicle’s wheels must remain on its axles, with tires
inflated.
   RECYCLING CENTER. A land use devoted to the receipt, separation, storage,
baling, conversion, and/or processing of recyclable materials.
   REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN. See FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. See FLOODWAY, REGULATORY.
   REHABILITATIVE MAINTENANCE (ROADWAY). Repair or maintenance that does not
increase the traffic lanes and does not involve changes to the roadway
elevation.
   REPAIR, REMODELING, OR MAINTENANCE. Activities which do not result in any
increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any lot or other tract of land zoned in any of the
following zoning districts: RE, E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, and RR.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. Any RE, E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, and RR
Zoning District.
   RESTAURANT, CLASS “A” (i.e., “FAST FOOD”). A restaurant which exhibits any
three or more of the following characteristics:
      (1)   Provides drive-through service,
      (2)   Sells prepared food ready to carryout,
      (3)   Holds no county liquor license,
      (4)   Does not accept dining reservations, or
      (5)   Little or no advertising on an individual establishment basis.
   RESTAURANT, CLASS “B” (i.e., “FAST CASUAL”). A restaurant which exhibits any
three or more of the following characteristics:
      (1)   Limited service or self-service format,
      (2)   Significant portion of sales are carryout orders,
      (3)   Holds a county-issued Class E county liquor license,
      (4)   Does not accept dining reservations, or
      (5)   Does little or no advertising on an individual establishment basis.
   RESTAURANT, CLASS “C” (i.e., “FULL SERVICE”). A restaurant which exhibits
any three or more of the following characteristics:
      (1)   Full table service is available,
      (2)   Holds a county-issued Class A, B, or E liquor license,
      (3)   Meeting and/or banquet facilities incidental to the principal use
are available,
      (4)   Provides carryout in addition to full table service, or
      (5)   Advertising primarily on an individual establishment basis.
   RETAINING WALL. A structure used to accommodate a vertical grade change over
a short horizontal distance.
   RETENTION FACILITY. A facility designed to completely retain a specified
amount of stormwater runoff without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration, or pumping.
   REVIEW BODY. The entity that is authorized to recommend approval or denial
of an application or permit required under this chapter.
   REVIEWING AGENCY. Any of the following agencies or individuals:
      (1)   Cable television company;
      (2)   County Board district member;
      (3)   Electric company;
      (4)   Fire Department/protection district;
      (5)   Gas company;
      (6)   Illinois Department of Natural Resources;
      (7)   Illinois Department of Transportation;
      (8)   J.U.L.I.E.;
      (9)   Lake County Forest Preserve District;
      (10)   Lake County Map Services;
      (11)   Local postmaster;
      (12)   Mayor/president of all municipalities within a one and one-half-
mile radius of the subject property;
      (13)   METRA and PACE;
      (14)   Planning Building and Zoning Committee members;
      (15)   Regional Superintendent of Schools;
      (16)   Soil and Water Conservation District;
      (17)   Sanitary District;
      (18)   Lake County Stormwater Management Commission;
      (19)   Superintendent, grade school district;
      (20)   Superintendent, high school district;
      (21)   Telephone company;
      (22)   Township Assessor;
      (23)   Township Highway Commissioner;
      (24)   Township Supervisor; and
      (25)   Water District.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, sanitary or storm sewer, electric transmission
line, oil or gas pipeline, or for any other similar use as may be designated.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE.  The full width of right-of-way, as identified in
Appendix B or as shown on transportation plans that have been adopted by the
County Board, whichever width is greater.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a stream (including creeks
and rivers).
   ROAD. An approved place or way, however designated, for vehicular travel
which affords principal means of access to abutting property, or other street.
   ROADSIDE DITCHES. Drainage ditches within 25 feet from the edge of the
outside travel lane.
   RODEO. A public exhibition of cowboy skills, such as but not limited to
bronco- and bull-riding, steer-wrestling, calf-roping and barrel racing.
   ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that is fastened to
or ballasted on a building roof. ROOF-MOUNTED SYSTEMS are accessory to the
principal use.
   SCHOOL. A place or institution that is recognized by the State Board of
Education and provides basic education at the primary, elementary, middle,
junior high, or high school level.
   SCHOOL, PRIVATE. Any school that is not recognized by the State Board of
Education. PRIVATE SCHOOLS may include but shall not be limited to business
schools, trade schools, art schools, dance schools, or schools in other similar
fields.
   SEASONAL SALE OF FARM PRODUCE. A temporary use of land involving the retail
sale of agricultural produce primarily grown on-site.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor
accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks.
   SERVICE STATION. An establishment providing retail sales of vehicle fuels
which may also provide such services as lubrication, oil and tire changes, and
minor repairs. This use does not include paint spraying or body repair.
   SETBACK, REAR. A setback extending the full width of the lot in the area
between the rear lot line and the rear building line.
   SETBACK, SIDE. A setback extending the full length of the lot in the area
between a side lot line and a side building line.
   SETBACK, STREET. A setback extending the full width of a lot between the
street lot line and a building line.
   SEWER. Unless otherwise expressly stated, SEWER means a closed conduit for
conducting sanitary sewage.
   SHADOW FLICKER. The on-and-off strobe light effect caused by the shadow of
moving blades cast by the sun passing above or behind the turbine.
   SHADOW FLICKER INTENSITY. The difference or variation in brightness at a
given location in the presence and absence of a shadow.
   SHOOTING RANGE, OUTDOOR. An area of land reserved or designed for the aiming
and discharge of firearms at inanimate targets.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of commercial establishments planned, developed,
and managed as a unit and having in excess of 100,000 square feet of floor
area.
   SHOPPING CENTER, REGIONAL. A shopping center having in excess of 500,000
square feet of floor area.
   SHORELINE. The area of land adjacent to a wetland, lake, pond, or channel.
   SIDE LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, SIDE.
   SIDE SETBACK. See SETBACK, SIDE.
   SIGN. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announces the purpose
of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict
action or create a special effect or scene.
   SIGN, BENCH. Any sign that is part of, or affixed to, a bench, including but
not limited to a sidewalk bench, park bench, or a bench at a bus stop or
railroad station.
   SIGN, BUILDING. Any sign attached to any section of a building, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign. BUILDING SIGNS include but are not
necessarily limited to the following: banners, building markers, canopy signs,
identification signs, incidental signs, projecting signs, residential signs
(some), roof signs, temporary signs, wall signs, and window signs.
   SIGN, CANOPY. Any sign that is a section of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door,
entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a CANOPY.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters,
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or
the surface of the sign. The term CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN expressly excludes
animated signs, time/temperature signs, and electronic message boards.
   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary sign indicating that construction is
occurring on that zoning lot.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign indicating only the name of a business or activity
and the distance or directions to the business or activity.
   SIGN, ELECTION. A sign concerning a concurrent election.
   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD. A sign or component of a sign that uses
changing lights to form a message or series of messages that are electronically
programmed or modified by electronic processes.
   SIGN, ENTRANCE. A freestanding or wall sign located at the entrance of a
subdivision, office park, park or forest preserve, providing only the name and/
or location of that activity.
   SIGN, FLASHING. A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in
intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes
in lighting effects. Electronic message boards and time/temperature signs that
are operated in accordance with all applicable regulations shall not be
considered FLASHING SIGNS.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign not attached to a building or structure other
than its own support, supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in
or upon the ground. Includes ground-mounted monument signs, pylon signs, and
pole signs.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign bearing the address of the premises and/or the
name of its occupant but containing no logo and no commercial message.
   SIGN, INCIDENTAL. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as “no parking”,
“entrance”, “loading only”, “telephone”, and similar information and
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the
lot on which the sign is located shall be considered INCIDENTAL.
   SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL. A sign identifying or advertising an institutional or
business use permitted in a residential district, where the sign is located on
the same premises as the use.
   SIGN, INTEGRAL ROOF. Any sign erected and constructed as an integral or
essential integral section of a normal roof structure of any design, so that no
section of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof
and so that no section of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a
space of more than six inches.
   SIGN, MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. A sign that is an integral part of a product
display rack (also known as POINT-OF-PURCHASE SIGN).
   SIGN, NON-COMMERCIAL, NOT OTHERWISE CLASSIFIED. A sign containing a non-
commercial message, either political or personal; provided that a sign
concerning a concurrent election shall be considered a temporary election sign.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including but not
limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs made as
A-frames or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs;
umbrellas used for commercial messages; and signs attached to or painted on
vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is
used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign attached to a building wall and extending
laterally more than 18 inches from the face of the wall.
   SIGN, RESIDENTIAL. Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses
that contains no commercial message.
   SIGN, ROOF. A sign that is placed above or supported on the top of a
building.
   SIGN, SUSPENDED. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal
plane surface and is supported by that surface.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted.
   SIGN, TIME/TEMPERATURE. Any sign indicating the time and/or temperature.
   SIGN, VEHICLE. A sign attached to an operable vehicle licensed to operate on
the public streets. Any sign attached to an inoperable or unlicensed vehicle or
any sign attached to a vehicle that is regularly parked for more than 72 hours
in a location conspicuously visible from a public street shall be deemed a
portable sign.
   SIGN, WALL. Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of a wall,
painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an
outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by the wall or
building, and which displays only one sign surface.
   SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window
panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
   SIGNIFICANT TREES. Trees (other than those listed as prohibited or noxious
species) with a diameter at breast height of 24 inches or greater that are not
included in any young woodland or mature woodland area.
   SITE. A parcel of land for which a permit is issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the Lake County Planning,
Building and Development Department for the alteration or construction of
ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff, and
grading.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan prepared by an engineer that shows the method,
control, and implementation of erosion control measures, stormwater runoff,
and/or grading of lands for the construction of buildings and other necessary
improvements.
   SMC WETLAND RESTORATION FUND. A fund that is administered and implemented
for wetland impact mitigation that is approved and adopted by the Lake County
Stormwater Management Commission.
   SOIL SURVEY. The latest issue and amendments thereto of a publication
entitled Soil Survey of Lake County, Illinois prepared by the U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with Illinois
Agriculture Experiment Station.
   SOLAR ARRAY. A group of solar panels wired together. An ARRAY consists of
multiple solar modules (solar panels).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A device or structural design feature to provide for
the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating or
cooling, electricity generation, or water heating.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACCESSORY LARGE-SCALE. A ground-mounted solar energy
system that occupies at least 40,000 square feet of surface area and whose
power generation is primarily for consumption on the property. An accessory
large-scale solar energy system is considered accessory regardless of its size
in relation to the principal use and/or buildings on the property.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACCESSORY MEDIUM-SCALE. A ground-mounted solar energy
system that occupies more than 1,750 square feet but less than 40,000 square
feet of surface area and whose power generation is primarily for consumption on
the property. An accessory medium-scale solar energy system is considered
accessory regardless of its size in relation to the principal use and/or
buildings on the property.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACCESSORY SMALL-SCALE. A ground-mounted solar energy
system that occupies 1,750 square feet of surface area or less and whose power
generation is primarily for consumption on the property. An accessory small-
scale solar energy system is considered accessory regardless of its size in
relation to the principal use and/or buildings on the property.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, COMMERCIAL. A ground-mounted solar energy system for
the primary purpose of wholesale or retail sale and not primarily for
consumption on the property.
   SOLAR PANEL. A device that is used to convert radiant solar energy into
electrical current.
   SOUND FREQUENCY. The number of oscillations per second in hertz (Hz). How we
perceive sound is partly dependent on what the frequency is. High frequency
sound has more oscillations per second, whereas low frequency sound has fewer.
   SOUND LEVEL. The A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels (dB) (or the C-
weighted level if specified) as measured using a sound level meter that meets
the requirements of a Type 2 or better precision instrument according to ANSI
S1.4. The average SOUND LEVEL is time-averaged over a one to two minute period,
using an integrating sound level meter that meets the requirements of ANSI
S12.43.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any area subject to inundation by the base flood
as shown on the regulatory floodplain maps and profiles listed in Appendix M,
as may be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female
breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn,
simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   Actual touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or
female breasts;
      (2)   Actual physical sexual acts, normal or perverted, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Actual masturbation;
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence; or
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections (1), (2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   SPORTS ARENA. A commercial structure with tiers of seats rising around a
field or court, that is intended to be used primarily for the viewing of
athletic events. SPORTS ARENA may also be used for entertainment and other
public gathering purposes, such as conventions, circuses, or concerts.
   STABLE, PRIVATE. An accessory structure and/or land use which is designed,
arranged, used or intended to be used for the keeping of equines for the
private use of the occupants of a principal dwelling and their guests, but in
no event for hire.
   STAFF DOCTOR. A doctor employed by a hospital, clinic, or other institution,
or a doctor who is “on call” to that institution during certain specified
periods of time for emergencies or other need.
   STANDARD RESTAURANT. See RESTAURANT, STANDARD.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions or
its successor document or documents, as adopted by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, in effect at the time a preliminary plat is approved. The
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois or
its successor document or documents, as adopted by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency in effect at the time a preliminary plat is approved.
   STOCKPILE, TEMPORARY SOIL. A mass or mound of soil, typically topsoil, that
has been stripped or removed from an area or areas of a site and reserved for
future use.
   STORAGE, OUTDOOR. Outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials, products, and
equipment.
   STORM, ONE HUNDRED-YEAR. Rainstorms of varying durations and intensities
expected to recur on the average of once every 100 years or statistically
having a 1% chance of occurring in any single year. A duration of 24 hours is
assumed unless otherwise noted.
   STORM RUNOFF, ONE HUNDRED-YEAR. The stormwater runoff from the 100-year
storm.
   STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conducting stormwater.
   STORMWATER DRAINAGE FACILITY. Any element in a stormwater drainage system
which is made or improved by humans.
   STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All facilities used for conducting stormwater
to, through, or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. A set of actions taken to control stormwater runoff
with the objectives of providing controlled surface drainage, flood control,
and pollutant reduction in runoff.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT COMMISSION APPROVED WETLAND BANK. A wetland mitigation
bank approved by the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission that conforms
with Appendix O of the Watershed Development Ordinance.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. The collection of natural features and man-
made facilities which define the stormwater management for a development.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The waters derived from rains falling within a tributary
drainage basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in
channels, watercourses, or conduits.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF, EXCESS. The volume and rate of flow of stormwater
discharged from a developed drainage area which is or will be in excess of that
volume and rate which existed before development.
   STORY. The portion of a building or structure included between the surface
of any floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a STORY
if the floor next above it is more than five feet above the average ground
elevation.
   STREAM. A course of running water flowing in a channel.
   STREET. An approved place or way, however designated, for vehicular travel
which affords principal means of access to abutting property, or other street.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street which serves or connects major urban activity
centers, is a high volume travel corridor, provides for long trip desires and/
or is part of an integrated network providing intercounty and interstate
service. (See § 151.169(A).)
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street serving as an intracounty travel corridor
channelizing and distributing traffic to and from arterial and local streets.
(See §
151.169(A).)
   STREET, LOCAL. A street providing access to adjacent land, service to travel
short distances, the lowest level of mobility, and access service to other
streets. (See §
151.169(A).)
   STREET LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, STREET.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A local street that is adjacent to, or is included
in, the right-of-way of an expressway, major arterial, collector street,
railroad or utility right-of-way and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
   STREET, NONRESIDENTIAL. A street internal to a non-residential subdivision.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A street which is not dedicated for public use and for
which no highway authority has any jurisdiction or maintenance
responsibilities.
   STREET SETBACK. See SETBACK, STREET.
   STRUCTURE. Anything man-made, constructed, erected, or placed, which has
location in or on the ground or is attached to something having a location on
the ground.
   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
   STRUCTURE, HEIGHT OF. See HEIGHT.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division or redivision of a parcel of land into two or more
parts by means of mapping, platting, conveyance, change or rearrangement of
boundaries, except those divisions of land provided for under 765 ILCS 205/1.
   SUBDIVISION MARKETING SIGN. A temporary sign used for marketing lots within
a subdivision which has been approved pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   SUBDIVISION, NONRESIDENTIAL. A division of land which is in compliance with
the Lake County Subdivision Ordinance (§§
151.185 through
151.204) and which results in lots all of which are intended for nonresidential
uses.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or improvement of a structure, which increases the floor area by more
than 75% of the structure’s first floor area or the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the current structure before the start of
construction. This term includes structures which have incurred a repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For
the purposes of this definition, “start of construction” is considered to occur
when the first qualifying improvement, as described in FEMA Publication 480
National Flood Insurance Program Flood Management Requirements, commences or
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. This term includes all cumulative improvements
within the last ten years. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF ITS BUSINESS. For purposes of the
definitions of “adult cabaret”, “adult store”, or “adult theater” herein, the
phrase SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF ITS BUSINESS shall be deemed to
apply to any commercial establishment that satisfies one or more of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Gross sales: 30% or more of the retail dollar value of the
commercial establishment’s annual gross sales derives from the sale, rental, or
viewing of adult materials;
      (2)   Floor area: 30% or more of the floor area of the commercial
establishment is devoted to the display, viewing, or presentation of adult
materials, not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any
other portion of the commercial establishment not open to the public;
      (3)   Merchandise displayed: 30% or more of the retail dollar value of
all merchandise displayed at any one time is attributable to adult materials;
      (4)   Inventory: 30% or more of all inventory of the commercial
establishment (whether measured by retail dollar value or number of items)
consists at any one time of adult materials;
      (5)   Stock-in-trade: 30% or more of the stock-in-trade at the commercial
establishment consists at any one time of adult materials; and/or
      (6)   Live performances: live performances by persons appearing semi-
nude, or live performances that are otherwise distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities, and that are
taking place 30% or more of the time during which the commercial establishment
is open for business.
   SUN GLINT. The reflection of sunlight off of a surface, as in the case of
the blades, tower, or other component of a wind energy facility.
   SUPPORTING FACILITIES. The transmission lines, substations, access roads,
meteorological towers, storage containers, and equipment associated with the
generation and storage of electricity by the WECS.
   SURVEYOR. A licensed professional land surveyor licensed to practice in the
State of Illinois.
   SWALE. A linear depression in the ground surface which conveys drainage
water with side slopes at or less steep than a 3H to 1V slope.
   TECHNICAL REFERENCE MANUAL (TRM).  The Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission Technical Reference Manual. This manual contains design guidance for
a development site to meet the Watershed Development Ordinance performance
standards.
   TEMPORARY USE. See USE, TEMPORARY.
   TERMINAL, TRUCK. A structure or land primarily used for the temporary
storage of goods awaiting transfer or wholesale distribution by means of motor
carrier transportation.
   TOPDRESSING. The placement of not more than four inches of topsoil within
the regulatory floodplain for the purposes of preventing soil erosion and
establishing vegetative cover. (See also §
151.149.)
   TOWER.  A tall structure, mounted in the ground, on which a wind turbine,
nacelle and blades are mounted. Also referred to as "wind tower" or "WECS
tower".
   TOWNHOUSE. A dwelling unit, located on its own lot, that shares one or more
common or abutting walls with one or more dwelling units. A TOWNHOUSE does not
share common floors/ceilings with other dwelling units. (See also the TOWNHOUSE
standards of §
151.130.)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL MANUAL. The Illinois Manual for Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD), as published by the Illinois
Department of Transportation.
   Traffic engineer. A State of Illinois registered professional engineer whose
primary work experience has been in traffic engineering.
   TRAFFIC FACILITY. Any public or private right-or-way used for or intended to
be used for travel including but not limited to an expressway, highway,
arterial, street, road, thoroughfare, avenue, lane, place, or alley.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or regulatory floodway where water
flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice-versa.
   TRAUMA CENTER. A facility devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment
of individuals suffering from injury or medical emergency.
   TRIBUTARY AREA. See DRAINAGE AREA.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. See TERMINAL, TRUCK.
   TURBINE. The parts of a wind energy facility including the blades, nacelle
and tail, or any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the
kinetic energy of moving wind into electrical energy through the use of
airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
   TWINHOUSE. A structure that contains two primary dwelling units, each
located on its own lot. The two dwelling units share a common wall along the
common lot line. (See also the TWINHOUSE standards of §
151.130.)
   USE. The purpose or activity for which land, or any structure thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use that customarily:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and services a principal building or a principal
use legally existing on the same zoning lot;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal
building or principal use;
      (3)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the
occupants, business, or industry of the principal structure or principal use
served; and
      (4)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or
principal use served.
   USE, NONRESIDENTIAL. Any use not classified as a residential use.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
   USE, RESIDENTIAL. A use of land which provides space for the permanent
occupancy of either individuals or households within dwellings.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent
to discontinue the use upon the expiration of that time.
   VALUE ADDED AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING. The small-scale processing and/or
packaging of raw agricultural products resulting in an increase in the value of
the agricultural product.
   VALUE ADDED AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT. An agricultural product that has been
modified from its raw physical state or form in order to enhance the value for
sale to the consumer.
   VILLAGE HOUSE. A dwelling unit that is located on its own lot, not attached
to any other dwelling units, surrounded by very shallow front and side yards
and located in a conservation residential development that complies with the
VILLAGE HOUSE standards of §
151.130.
   WAREHOUSE, MINI. A building or group of buildings that contains varying
sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls or lockers
for the dead storage of a customer’s goods or wares. No service or repair
activities other than the rental of dead storage units are permitted on the
premises.
   WATER DEPENDENT. Structures of facilities relating to the use of, or
requiring access to, the water or shoreline. Examples of WATER DEPENDENT uses
include but are not limited to pumping facilities, wastewater treatment
facilities, facilities and improvements related to recreation boating or
commercial shipping.
   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or man-made depression into which water flows
either regularly or intermittently.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. For the purpose of this chapter, the term
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES refers to those areas that are under the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers jurisdiction.
   WATERSHED. The land area above a given point on a channel that contributes
stormwater to that point. In this county the four major WATERSHEDS are
officially defined as: the Lake Michigan Watershed, the North Branch of the
Chicago River Watershed, the Des Plaines River Watershed, and the Fox River
Watershed.
   WATERSHED BENEFIT. A decrease in flood damages to structures upstream or
downstream of the development site created by installation of the stormwater
management system. The benefit must be beyond the benefit provided by meeting
the minimum Watershed Development Ordinance standards and TRM guidance.
   WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit established by the Watershed
Development Ordinance and issued, through the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission or certified communities, prior to the approval of a building permit
signifying conformance with provisions of the Watershed Development Ordinance.
   WEEKEND. Saturday and Sunday. National holidays observed on a Friday or
Monday may be included.
   WET DETENTION FACILITY. A WET DETENTION FACILITY designed to maintain a
permanent pool of water after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
   WETLAND. A specific type of natural or man-made drainageway as follows: land
that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, under normal conditions, a prevalence of
vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (known as hydrophytic
vegetation). A WETLAND is identified based upon the three attributes:
hydrology, soils, and vegetation as mandated by the current federal wetland
determination methodology.
   WETLAND, EXCEPTIONAL FUNCTIONAL VALUE (ADID). Any wetland identified as such
in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Advanced Identification Study of
the county (ADID) or any wetland that through a functional assessment meets the
criteria defined in that study for determining exceptional functional value.
   WETLAND IMPACT. Isolated waters of Lake County or Waters of the United
States that are hydrologically disturbed or otherwise adversely affected by
flooding, filling, excavation, or drainage which results from implementation of
a development activity.
   WETLAND, MAPPED. Any area suspected of being a wetland because it is mapped
as such on the Lake County Wetland Inventory or Advanced Identification (ADID)
maps.
   WHOLESALE. The sale of goods to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
   WILDLIFE. Any animal that is normally born in the wild and able to live on
its own without human assistance, excluding livestock or animals considered to
be domesticated.
   WILDLIFE EDUCATION. The process of influencing people's attitudes, emotions,
knowledge, and behaviors about wildlife and wild places with the purpose of
introducing people to wildlife, promoting awareness of biodiversity, and
developing conservation-minded and sustainable behavior. This is done through
the efforts of trained/skilled educators and interpreters, who use a variety of
techniques, methods and assessments to impart information. WILDLIFE EDUCATION
is distinct from entertainment-oriented exhibitions in that its primary purpose
is not to entertain but rather to provide a deeper understanding of and
connection to wildlife. WILDLIFE EDUCATION does not include the use of wildlife
in performances that: (a) are foreign to their natural behavior (or otherwise
not designed to simulate their natural interactions within their environment);
(b) introduce painful physical restraint or deprivation inconsistent with
practices employed by wildlife biologists, veterinarians or other licensed or
trained wildlife caretakers; (c) force interactions with other wildlife
contrary to normal conditions in the wild; or (d) otherwise unnecessarily
induce significant stress, injury or illness to wildlife as a reasonably
foreseeable consequence of the performance. WILDLIFE EDUCATION includes, but is
not limited to, events to provide the public with opportunities to experience
wildlife directly and vicariously through outreach programs, on-site tours,
demonstrations, and community events. Wildlife educational programming is
typically, but not exclusively, provided by local government agencies, non-
profit organizations that provide rehabilitation and release or sanctuary of
animals, or trained professionals who are actively engaged in conservation and
educational programs and possess the proper permits from the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or the U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
   WIND ENERGY FACILITY, ACCESSORY. A wind energy conversion facility less than
500 kilowatts in total nameplate generating capacity. Can be either building
mounted or tower mounted.
   WIND ENERGY FACILITY, COMMERCIAL. A wind energy conversion facility of equal
or greater than 500 kilowatts in total nameplate generating capacity. Also
referred to as "wind energy conversion system" or "WECS" or "WECS project".
   WOODLAND, MATURE. An area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy
covers an area of 20,000 square feet or more, at least 50% of which is composed
of trees having a diameter breast height of 16 inches or more. An active
commercial nursery or Christmas tree operation shall not be considered a MATURE
WOODLAND. In addition, no woodlands dominated (more than 50% of the canopy
cover) by non-native tree species such as Acer negundo (box elder), Robinia
pseudoacacia (black locust), Rhamnus cathartica (common buckthorn), Eleagnus
angustifolia (Russian olive), Eleagnus umbellata (autumn olive), Populus alba
(white poplar) and Ulmus pumila (siberian elm) shall be considered a MATURE
WOODLAND.
   WOODLANDS, YOUNG. An area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy
covers an area of 20,000 square feet or more, at least 50% of which is composed
of trees having a diameter breast height of at least three inches and less than
16 inches. An active commercial nursery or Christmas tree operation shall not
be considered a YOUNG WOODLAND. In addition, no woodlands dominated (more than
50% of the canopy cover) by non-native tree species such as Acer negundo (box
elder), Robinia pseudoacacia (black locust), Rhamnus cathartica (common
buckthorn), Eleagnus angustifolia (Russian olive), Eleagnus umbellata (autumn
olive), Populus alba (white poplar) and Ulmus pumila (siberian elm) shall be
considered a YOUNG WOODLAND.
   YARD. The space between a lot line and building line.
   YOUNG WOODLAND. See WOODLANDS, YOUNG.
   ZONING LOT. See LOT, ZONING.
(Ord., § 14.2, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 8-14-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2012;
Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed - -; Ord. 15-0701, passed 7-14-2015; Ord. 15-1028,
passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 21-0744, passed 5-11-
2021; Ord. 22-1060, passed 8-9-2022: Ord. 22-1356, passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 23-
0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 23-1056, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-
12-2024; Ord. 24-0924, passed 8-13-2024)
SPECIAL AREA REGULATIONS
§ 151.285 GENERAL.
   (A)   General. The GW, Gateway Zoning District regulations implement Chapter
12 of the County Regional Framework Plan, entitled “Gateway Economic
Development Plan”. The GW, Gateway Zoning District regulations provide a
development option which landowners within the Route 173/I-94 interchange area
may pursue as an alternative to the regulations provided elsewhere in this
chapter. Property owners seeking to zone property to the GW, Gateway Zoning
District and to develop properties within the GW, Gateway Zoning District shall
be required to:
      (1)   Generally maintain consistency with the Conceptual Land Use Map;
      (2)   Utilize public sanitary sewer disposal and appropriate water supply
as approved by the Lake County Public Works Department to service the
development; and
      (3)   Use the planned unit development method as provided in §
151.051 for developing properties.
   (B)   Uses and development standards. The following uses and development
standards shall be applicable within the GW, Gateway Zoning District.
      (1)   Office/research uses and development standards.
         (a)   Principal uses.  Offices, as defined in §
151.270(E)(2) and research uses (referring to the conduct of research in
various fields of science, such as but not limited to chemistry,
pharmaceuticals, medicine, electricity, computer sciences, transportation, and
engineering);
         (b)   Accessory uses. Those uses listed in §
151.270(E)(2)(b), those retail, sales and service uses that serve only the
principal use, and pilot plants or test production facilities that serve only
the principal use.
         (c)   Prohibited uses. Heavy manufacturing (referring to basic
processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from raw
material with the potential for significant external effects to the community
and environment), light assembly (referring to processing, compounding,
assembling, and packaging finished or semi-finished products in a manner which
produces little or no external effects), and warehouse uses.
         (d)   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.40.
         (e)   Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR): 0.60.
         (f)   Maximum building height: 50 feet.
         (g)   Minimum lot size: 80,000 square feet.
         (h)   Minimum lot width: 190 feet.
         (i)   Building setbacks:
            1.   Street - 50 feet;
            2.   Interior side - 30 feet; and
            3.   Rear - 30 feet.
      (2)   Office/light assembly uses and development standards.
         (a)   Principal uses. Offices as defined in §
151.270(E)(2), research uses (referring to the conduct of research, development
and testing in various fields of science, such as but not limited to chemistry,
pharmaceuticals, medicine, electricity, computer sciences, transportation, and
engineering, and including pilot plants or limited test production facilities)
and light assembly uses (referring to processing, compounding, assembling, and
packaging finished or semi-finished products in a manner that produces little
external effects to the community or to the environment).
         (b)   Accessory uses. Warehouse, wholesale, distribution, and retail
sales and service uses that serve only the principal use; accessory uses shall
occupy no more than 50% of the gross building area.
         (c)   Prohibited uses. Heavy manufacturing (referring to basic
processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from raw
material with the potential for significant external effects to the community
and environment) and motor freight terminals.
         (d)   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.40.
         (e)   Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR): 0.60.
         (f)   Maximum building height: 50 feet.
         (g)   Minimum lot size: 80,000 square feet.
         (h)   Minimum lot width: 190 feet.
         (i)   Building setbacks:
            1.   Street - 35 feet;
            2.   Interior side - 20 feet; and
            3.   Rear - 25 feet.
      (3)   Retail/service uses and development standards.
         (a)   Principal uses.
            1.   All types of retail sales and service uses allowed (by right
or by conditional use permit) under §§
151.110 through
151.114 of this chapter.
            2.   Non-retail uses (specifically office, financial, clinic, or
government) are limited to 25% of the ground floor area; these uses may occupy
100% of the upper floors.
         (b)   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.40.
         (c)   Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR): 0.70.
         (d)   Maximum building height: 35 feet.
         (e)   Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
         (f)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
         (g)   Building setbacks:
            1.   Street - 50 feet;
            2.   Interior side - 12 feet; and
            3.   Rear - 12 feet.
      (4)   Residential use and development standards.
         (a)   Principal uses. Single family detached dwellings.
         (b)   Accessory uses. Those uses accessory to single family detached
dwellings allowed under §§
151.110 through
151.114 of this chapter.
         (c)   Density: Maximum one-half dwelling unit per acre.
         (d)   Minimum lot size: 80,000 square feet.
         (e)   Minimum lot width: 190 feet.
         (f)   Building setbacks:
            1.   Street - 50 feet;
            2.   Interior side - 30 feet;
            3.   Rear - 50 feet; and
            4.   Accessory uses/structures - ten feet from all property lines.
         (g)   Maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR): 0.25.
         (h)   Maximum building height: 35 feet.
   (C)   Building and site design standards.
      (1)   Natural resources and open space.
      (2)   Protection. Natural resources shall be protected in accordance with
the provisions of §§
151.070 through
151.072 of this chapter. The resource protection areas shall remain as
permanent open space.
 
COMMENTARY:
Each development should enhance existing natural resource areas and provide
open space areas. In addition to natural open space areas, it may also be
appropriate to provide formal open space, such as a village square or building
courtyards, as a focal point of the development. All open space areas should
feature amenities such as benches and walkways. Buildings should be oriented to
take advantage of open space views and access.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3078.jpg]
 
      (3)   Stormwater management. Stormwater detention shall be provided to
comply with the provisions of §§
151.145 through
151.154 of this chapter.
 
COMMENTARY:
A unified stormwater management system should be designed for the entire
development site. To the greatest extent possible, stormwater conveyance and
storage should utilize the naturally occurring drainage patterns and wetlands.
Detention basins with native wetland vegetation are encouraged; basins with
hard, man-made edges are discouraged. Stormwater management facilities should
comply with best management practices as provided in the Lake County Stormwater
Management Commission’s Technical Reference Manual.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3080.jpg]
 
COMMENTARY:
The stormwater management system should be integrated into the open space and
pedestrian circulation plan. Incorporation of fountains to create water
features is encouraged. Buildings should be oriented to take advantage of views
of attractive water features and wetlands.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3082.jpg]
 
   (4)   Access and circulation.
         (a)   Automobile access and circulation. Automobile access and
circulation shall be designed to meet the requirements of the highway authority
having jurisdiction.
            1.   The primary access roads shall be designed as boulevards for a
distance of at least 200 yards from the intersections with Route 173. The
central median shall be planted with a variety of deciduous and evergreen
plantings to ensure year-round foliage. Annuals shall be used to ensure maximum
color during spring, summer, and fall.
            2.   Internal roadways shall be designed to allow circulation
between various buildings and uses within the entire development without
exiting onto Route 173. Roadways shall be designed to minimize conflicts
between automobile and truck traffic.
            3.   An entrance monument shall be provided for both the north and
south primary access roads. The entrance monuments shall be designed to
complement the building architecture and shall be consistent with the signage
and landscaping.
 
COMMENTARY:
Following are guidelines to be considered in designing automobile access:
   a.   The northeast quadrant as defined in Chapter 12 of the Lake County
Regional Framework Plan may have a new access point to Route 173, approximately
centered between the existing Mill Creek Road and I-94. The northeast quadrant
may have one primary access point onto Mill Creek Road and a secondary access
point primarily intended to serve truck traffic to the area designated on the
Conceptual Land Use Map for office/light assembly/warehouse uses.

   b.   The southeast quadrant as defined in Chapter 12 of the Lake County
Regional Framework Plan may have a new access point onto Route 173 directly
parallel to the northeast quadrant access point. The southeast quadrant may also
have one primary access point onto Mill Creek Road. A secondary access point for
truck traffic may also be permitted.
 
         (b)   Pedestrian circulation. Walking paths shall be provided within
and between various uses contained within the overall development through the
provision of sidewalks along internal roadways and/or footpaths through the
open space areas. The sidewalk and footpath network shall be designed to
provide for future possible connections to adjacent developments.
      (5)   Building design. Building design standards, including building
massing, shall be consistent with the architectural standards provided in §
151.171. The following architectural guidelines for buildings are intended to
require development that is compatible in scale and appearance with the
character of the Route 173 Interchange area.
 
COMMENTARY:
A uniform design pallet of building materials, colors, and architectural design should be
applied throughout the entire subject area. Building elements and other uses, such as
vehicle parking, that are incompatible with the surrounding character, should be strictly
screened from view from adjacent properties and roadways, including I-94. Architectural
plans should also incorporate green building design. These guidelines are not all-
inclusive; it may be necessary to address additional design elements during the review of
individual project proposals.

         1.   Building Facades
            All building facades that are visible from adjacent major roadways should be
designed to be aesthetically pleasing. This includes the side and rear facades of
buildings that are visible from Route 173, I-94, and US 41. Aesthetically pleasing design
can be accomplished by employing the same design elements to the side and rear facades
that are often only given to front facades.

         2.   Building Massing
            Big box architecture is discouraged. Large wall expanses (whether long or
tall) should be eliminated through vertical and horizontal articulation (changes so the
wall is not a straight horizontal or vertical line) and the use of architectural
projections, such as porticos, and recesses. Large wall expanses can also be broken
through the use of pilasters, columns, canopies, and windows. Changes in building heights
and rooflines can also be utilized to often the visual impacts of long building walls.
Changes in facade materials and colors can improve the appearance of large buildings, but,
alone these changes are not sufficient to eliminate the visual impacts of large wall
expanses.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3084.jpg]
 
         3.   Building Height
            Building heights should gradually transition from low buildings to tall
buildings. Where necessary, this transition can occur within a single building by
designing the building with a larger, single-story base and a taller (multi-story or high-
ceilinged warehouse) center.

         4.   Building Entrances and Windows
            Building entrances should allow for easy access from parking areas and public
open space. Primary building entrances should be easily identifiable through the use of
design elements such as canopies, porticos, recesses, or archways. Buildings doors and
windows should be pedestrian scaled.

            In addition to providing natural lighting for occupants, windows should be
utilized to soften building appearances, displaying merchandise, and inviting customers
into buildings. Windows should be appropriately sized, arranged, and designed to enhance
the overall appearance of the building. Multi-paned windows, windows with a vertical
orientation, and windows with a well defined frame or sill are preferred.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3086.jpg]

         5.   Facade Materials and Colors
            In order to complement the character of the Route 173 interchange area, the
use of natural building materials and colors is encouraged. Desirable building materials
include brick, terra cotta, and natural stone, such as limestone and river stone. The
exclusive use of synthetic materials, such as EIFS/Drivit, and pre-cast concrete is
discouraged.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3088.jpg]

            Building colors should be natural, earth tones. Dark tones should be utilized
at building base and lighter tones for upper levels. The color selection for
architectural elements such as roofs, awnings, cornices, eaves, and sills should
complement the main building color.

         6.   Roof Styles and Materials
            Roof styles can add visual interest to all buildings, but should remain
consistent with the overall building design. Buildings should be designed with a fascia
and cornices that provide a transition between the wall and roof. Arched and pitched
roofs and roof features such as dormers and cupolas are encouraged. Flat rooflines are
discouraged unless part of a green roof design.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3090.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3092.jpg]


         7.   Mechanical and service area screening
            All rooftop mechanical equipment should be visually screened from sight from
all public access areas and adjacent properties and roadways. Ground level mechanical
equipment, trash collection, and loading areas should be appropriately screened from view
from all public access areas and adjacent properties and roadways.
 
      (6)   Lighting standards. Lighting shall comply with the provisions of §§
151.165 through
151.173 of this chapter. Lighting shall ensure the safety and security of
building occupants and customers. A uniform lighting plan shall be designed for
the entire area. Lighting shall be designed and scaled to create an attractive,
friendly pedestrian environment. Pathways shall be lit with low bollard lights.
All light fixtures shall be shielded. All lighting shall be designed to
minimize glare on adjacent properties.
      (7)   Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided for each building in
accordance with the off-street parking standards contained in §§
151.165 through
151.173 of this chapter. Parking shall not be allowed in the required street
setbacks unless otherwise approved as part of the conditional use permit.
Parking areas shall comply with the parking lot landscaping requirements of §§
151.165 through
151.173.
 
COMMENTARY:
Parking lots should be located to the side and rear of buildings, when
possible. Shared parking is encouraged. Parking lots should provide well-
defined walkways that minimize pedestrian-vehicle conflicts. Consideration
should be given to using semi-pervious paving and bio-swales to reduce
stormwater runoff and improve water quality.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3094.jpg]
 
      (8)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of materials and equipment shall
be prohibited. This storage shall occur within structures unless otherwise
approved as part of the conditional use permit.
      (9)   Sign standards. Signs shall meet the standards provided in §§
151.165 through
151.173 of this chapter, except freestanding signs shall be of a monument type
not exceeding 12 feet in height. Pole signs shall be prohibited.
 
COMMENTARY:
      1.   Sign Massing and Landscaping
         Freestanding signs shall emphasize horizontal rather than vertical massing.
The base of the freestanding sign should be landscaped.

      2.   Sign Composition
         Softer, subtler alternatives to prominent corporate logos should be used.
For multi-tenant buildings and developments, consistent lettering, colors, and sign
designs should be used on all wall signs and monument signs.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3096.jpg]

      The sign text should consist of no more than two fonts or sizes.
Italicized, bold, and plain text should not be mixed. The use of images,
pictures, and logos should be minimized but, if used, should be simplified in
appearance and integrated into the site’s overall architectural and color
schemes. Solid lettering is preferred over highlighted or accented lettering.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3098.jpg]
 
      3.   Sign Colors
         The sign and any background should together consist of no more than two colors
or shades of the same color. The sign color scheme should match or complement the color
scheme of the building. Primary, white and “day-glo” colors should be avoided.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3100.jpg]

      4.   Sign Materials
         Plastic or glass surfaces that result in polished, glossy, shiny, or reflective
sign surfaces should not be used. Wood stone, brick, masonry, or metal materials which
produce matte, natural brushed, patina-like, or burnished surfaces should be used.

      5.   Sign Lighting
         Natural (soft halogen or incandescent) lighting should be used. Over-bright or
fluorescent lighting should be avoided. Internal illumination and protruding overhead
lights or lamps should be avoided. Lighting devices should be hidden or integrated into
architectural features or landscaping. Lighting should be focused and only so bright as
to effectively illuminate the sign surface. For mounted letters, back-lighting should be
used.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3102.jpg]

         For freestanding signs, ground-based external lighting should be used. Ground-
based light sources should be concealed within landscaping.
 
      (10)   Landscaping and screening.
         (a)   Landscaping and screening shall meet the standards provided in §
151.167 of this chapter.
         (b)   All development shall contain adequate exterior transition areas
that are bermed and landscaped so as to preclude views of buildings, loading
areas, truck parking lots, and other undesirable views from adjacent uses,
properties, and roadways. For screening purposes, fences may be used in
conjunction with berms and landscaping.
         (c)   Loading docks and truck parking areas shall be screened from
view from all public (customer) access areas, including public access areas on
the same property or development. In order to minimize undesirable views,
loading docks and truck parking areas shall be located back-to-back between
adjacent office, light assembly, and warehouse buildings.
 
COMMENTARY:
The following guidelines should be used to design landscaping. The guidelines are
not all-inclusive; additional landscaping may be required based on new concerns or
changing conditions.

      Desirable views of office and retail buildings should be preserved from
adjacent roadways and properties with compatible uses. Partial views of well-
designed office, light assembly, and warehouse building front facades as well as
side and rear facades that achieve aesthetically pleasing 360-degree design, may be
permissible from adjacent roadways and properties with compatible uses.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/
0-0-0-3104.jpg]
 
      The view of parking lots should be partially obscured or softened through
landscaping, staggered landscaped berms, or preserved natural vegetation. Extensive
area of mowed or manicured turf grass should be avoided.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-
0-0-3106.jpg]

      Existing woodlands should be preserved and enhanced. Trees should be planted in
random clusters, rather than straight rows. Like species should be grouped only to
maintain continuity. Formal landscaping should be limited to small areas. Landscape
areas should incorporate a complementary mix of deciduous and evergreen species,
while emphasizing deciduous species.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/IMAGES/0-
0-0-3108.jpg]
 
      Landscaping should cluster varieties of species sizes (canopies
interspersed with understories, bushes, and groundcover), emphasize hardy native
species (limit predominance of non-native or ornamental species), minimize the
use of formal hedges and incorporate groundcover and/or bushes into landscaping,
while limiting the predominance of groundcover and/or bushes.

[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3110.jpg]

      Landscaping should maximize seasonal colors by including perennial flowers
and opportunities for planning annual flowers that bloom in spring, summer, and
fall.

      Earthen berms should undulate naturally and have varying heights and
setbacks. Berms should be landscaped with a variety of plant species, as
otherwise required in these landscaping guidelines. Extensive areas of turf
grass on berms should be avoided.

      At intersections, provide soft massings of landscaping to complement
signage and to provide a focal point, while not impairing visibility of
buildings nor impairing traffic safety. Bike and pedestrian pathways should be
integrated into landscaping to soften visibility, separate from vehicle traffic,
and promote safety.
 
      (11)   Noise. All equipment shall operate in accordance with the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency’s nighttime noise regulations (Ill. Adm. Code,
Title 35, Subtitle H, Chapter I). Compliance with the noise standards shall be
measured at the boundary of the subject property.
      (12)   Development calculations. It is the purpose of this provision to
promote the improvement and expansion of I-94 in the county, increase the
accessibility of I-94 to all residents of the county, reduce the public costs
associated with the improvements, and reduce the congestion of the existing I-
94 interchanges and associated roadways by allowing for increased building
intensities at selected suitable locations in exchange for private assistance
in providing the improvements. The projects may not be achievable in a timely
fashion without the private sector participation.
         (a)   Eligibility. Any land lying within GW, Gateway Zoning District
containing area that is required for I-94 purposes by the Tollway Authority may
use these provisions.
         (b)   Standards. For properties abutting I-94 or its ramps, or
containing area required by the Tollway Authority for the installation of new
ramps to I-94 or approaches thereto or for widening of I-94, these provisions
permit the floor area ratio, impervious surface ratio, and density to be
increased in accordance with the following:
            1.   The maximum floor area ratio, impervious surface ratio, and
density specified in this section may be calculated on the entire site prior to
the contribution of land to the Tollway Authority.
            2.   The yard setbacks required by this section shall be measured
from the original property lines as they existed prior to the contribution,
provided no yard shall be reduced to less than 30 feet.
      (13)   Conceptual Land Use Map. A Conceptual Land Use Map is included for
the Gateway Economic Development Area. The map is intended for illustrative
purposes. The most important feature of the map is the preservation of parcels
immediately adjacent to the Route 173 and I-94 interchange for high-quality
office/research development and the preservation of land along the Route 173
and U.S. 41 frontages for retail/services development. The interior portions of
the planning area are designated for office/light assembly/warehouse uses. The
residential use is restricted to the northwest quadrant, away from the
interchange and major arterial streets. Property owners may submit planned unit
development applications that vary from the Conceptual Land Use Map as long as
they are consistent with the intent of the map and uses and development
standards specified in subsection (B) of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3112.jpg]
      (14)   Procedure for development.
         (a)   Planned unit development. Property owners seeking to zone
property to the GW, Gateway Zoning District or to develop properties within the
GW, Gateway Zoning District shall be required to use the planned unit
development procedure as provided in §
151.051 of this chapter for developing properties. Any modifications to an
approved planned unit development shall be subject to the planned unit
development modification provisions of §
151.051(D). Any change of use to a use of an equal or lesser intensity within
the same use category under the provisions of subsection (B) above shall be
allowed, provided all the use and development standards are met.
         (b)   Nonresidential development. Nonresidential developments shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
151.070 through
151.072, site capacity, site plan review and natural resource protection
standards. Any subdivision of land shall comply with the subdivisions
provisions of §§
151.185 through
151.204.
         (c)   Residential development. Residential developments shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
151.185 through
151.204, subdivisions and §§
151.220 and
151.221, school and park contributions.
         (d)   Application review; approval. All applications for rezoning,
planned unit development, subdivision, building, or other development permits
relating to any parcel within the Route 173/I-94 Interchange area as well as
the review of the applications, shall be in accordance with the applicable
plans, codes, ordinances, and regulations developed in accordance with the
Route 173/I-94 Interchange intergovernmental agreement.
(Ord., § 15.1, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX A: PLANT MATERIALS LIST
Appendix A
Botanical Name Common Name Woodland    Street Tree Parking Lot Transition Area
                           Replacement
Appendix A
Botanical Name   Common Name    Woodland    Street Tree Parking Lot Transition
                                Replacement                         Area
CANOPY TREES
   Canopy Natives
Acer saccharum   Sugar Maple    Y           N           N           Y
Aesculus glabra  Ohio Buckeye   Y           N           N           Y
Carya            Bitternut      Y           Y           N           Y
cordiformis      hickory
Carya glabra     Pignut hickory Y           Y           N           Y
Carya ovata      Shagbark       Y           Y           N           Y
                 hickory
Carya tomentosa  Mockernut      Y           Y           N           Y
                 hickory
Celtis           Hackberry      Y           Y           Y           Y
occidentalis
Fagus            American Beech Y           N           N           Y
grandifolia
Gymocladus       Kentucky       Y           Y           N           Y
dioicus          Coffeetree
Juglans nigra    Black walnut   Y           N           N           Y
Larix laricina   Tamarack       Y           N           N           Y
Nyssa sylvatica  Black Tupelo   Y           Y           N           Y
                 or sour gum
Platanus         American       Y           Y           Y           Y
occidentalis     Sycamore
Populus          Eastern        Y           N           N           Y
deltoides        cottonwood
Quercus alba     White Oak      Y           N           N           N
Quercus bicolor  Swamp White    Y           Y           Y           Y
                 Oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak    Y           N           N           Y
Quercus          Shingle Oak    Y           Y           Y           Y
imbricaria
Quercus          Bur Oak        Y           Y           Y           Y
macrocarpa
Quercus          Chinquapin Oak Y           Y           Y           Y
muehlenbergii
Quercus          Pin Oak        Y           N           N           Y
palustris
Quercus rubra    Northern Red   Y           N           N           Y
                 Oak
Quercus velutina Black Oak      Y           Y           Y           Y
                 American
Tilia americana  Basswood or    Y           Y           Y           Y
                 linden
   Canopy Non-Natives
Acer nigrum      Black Maple    Y           N           Y           Y
Acer             Sycamore Maple Y           N           N           Y
pseudoplatanus
Acer miyabei     Miyabe Maple   Y           Y           N           Y
Acer rubrum      Red Maple      Y           Y           Y           Y
                 Varieties
Aesculus         Horsechestnut  Y           N           N           Y
hippocastanum
Cladrastis lutea Yellowwood     Y           N           N           Y
Fagus sylvatica  European Beech Y           N           N           Y
Ginkgo biloba    Ginkgo         N           Y           N           Y
(male)
Liquidambar      Sweetgum       Y           N           N           Y
styraciflua
Liriodendron     Tuliptree      Y           N           Y           Y
tulipifera
Metasequoia      Dawn Redwood   Y           N           N           Y
glyptostroboides
Platanus         Planetree      Y           Y           Y           Y
acerifolia
Quercus prinus   Chestnut Oak   Y           Y           Y           Y
Quercus robur    English Oak    Y           Y           Y           Y
Taxodium         Bald Cypress   Y           N           N           Y
distichum
Tilia cordata    Little Leaf    Y           Y           Y           Y
                 Linden
SHRUBS
   Shrub Natives
Amorpha          Lead plant     Y                      N           N
canescens
Amorpha          False Indigo   Y                      Y           N
fruticosa        Bush
Aronia           Black          Y                      N           Y
melanocarpa      Chokeberry
Cephalanthus     New Jersey tea Y                      N           Y
americanus
Cephalanthus     Buttonbush     Y                      N           Y
occidentalis
Cornus obliqua   Blue-fruited   Y                      N           Y
                 dogwood
Cornus           Red osier      Y                      N           Y
stolonifera      dogwood
Corylus          American
americana        Filbert or     Y                      N           Y
                 hazelnut
Diervilla        Dwarf          Y                      Y           N
lonicera         honeysuckle
Euonymus         Wahoo          Y                      Y           Y
atropurpureus
Hamamelis        Common         Y                      Y           Y
viginiana        Witchhazel
Hydrangea        Wild Hydrangea Y                      N           Y
arborescens
Hypericum        Kalm's St.     Y                      Y           Y
kalmianum        John's wort
Hypericum        Shrubby St.    Y                      Y           Y
prolificum       John's wort
Ilex             Winterberry    Y                      N           Y
verticillata
Lindera benzoin  Spicebush      Y                      N           Y
Physocarpus      Common         Y                      Y           Y
opulifolius      Ninebark
Potentilla       Bush/shrubby   Y                      Y           Y
fruticosa        Cinquefoil
Prunus americana American plum  Y                      N           Y
Ptelea           Wafer Ash      Y                      N           Y
trifoliata
Rhus aromatica   fragrant sumac Y                      N           Y
Rhus copallina   shining sumac  Y                      N           Y
Rhus glabra      smooth sumac   Y                      N           Y
Ribes americanum wild black     Y                      N           Y
                 currant
Ribes cynosbati  prickly wild   Y                      Y           Y
                 gooseberry
Ribes            wild           Y                      Y           Y
missouriense     gooseberry
Rosa blanda      Early wild     Y                      Y           Y
                 rose
Rosa carolina    Pasture rose   Y                      N           Y
Rosa palustris   Scarlet rose   Y                      N           N
Rosa setigera    Illinois rose  Y                      N           Y
                 Purple
Rubus odoratus   flowering      Y                      N           N
                 raspberry
Salix discolor   Pussy Willow   Y                      N           Y
Salix humilis    Prairie willow Y                      N           Y
Sambucus         Elderberry     Y                      N           Y
canadensis
Spirea alba      Meadowsweet    N                      N           Y
Spirea tomentosa Steeplebush    N                      N           Y
Symphoricarpos   Snowberry      Y                      N           Y
albus
Vaccinium        Early low      Y                      N           Y
angustifolium    blueberry
Viburnum         maple leaf     Y                      N           Y
acerifolium      viburnum
Viburnum lentago nannyberry     Y                      N           Y
Viburnum         downy arrowood Y                      N           Y
rafinesquianum
Viburnum         American       Y                      N           Y
trilobum         cranberry
Zanthoxylum      Prickly ash    Y                      N           N
americanum
   Shrub Non-Natives
Betula pumila    Dwarf Birch    Y                      N           Y
Chaenolmeles     Flowering      N                      N           Y
speciosa         Quince
Clethra          Summersweet    Y                      Y           Y
alnifolia
Corylus cornuta  Beaked         Y                      Y           Y
                 Hazelnut
Cotoneaster      Cotoneaster    Y                      Y           Y
species
Deutzia          Deutzia        Y                      Y           Y
Forsythia        Forsythia      N                      Y           Y
Ilex opaca       American Holly Y                      Y           Y
Itea virginica   Sweetspire     Y                      Y           Y
Juniperus        Juniper        Y                      Y           Y
species
Myrica           Northern       Y                      N           Y
pennsylvanica    Bayberry
Syringa species  Lilac          N                      N           Y
Taxus species    Yew            N                      N           Y
EVERGREEN TREES
   Evergreen Non-Natives
Picea abies      Norway Spruce  Y           N           Y           Y
Picea omorika    Serbian Spruce Y           N           Y           Y
Picea pungens    Colorado       Y           N           Y           Y
                 Spruce
Thuja shandishii Green Giant    Y           N           N           Y
x plicata        Arborvitae
UNDERSTORY TREES
   Understory Natives
Amelanchier      Serviceberry   Y           N           N           Y
arborea
Amelanchier      Inland         Y           N           N           Y
interior         shadblow
Amelanchier      Alleghany      Y           Y           N           Y
laevis           serviceberry
Asimina triloba  Pawpaw         Y           N           N           N
Betula           Yellow Birch   Y           N           N           N
alleghaniensis
Betula nigra     River Birch    Y           N           N           N
Carpinus         Blue beech or  Y           N           N           Y
caroliniana      musclewood
Cercis           Eastern Redbud Y           N           N           Y
canadensis
Cornus           Pagoda dogwood Y           N           N           Y
alternifolia
Crataegus        Scarlet        Y           N           Y           Y
coccinea         hawthorn
Crataegus crus-  Cockspur       Y           N           Y           Y
galli            hawthorn
Crataegus mollis Downy hawthorn Y           N           Y           Y
Euonymus         Wahoo          Y           N           N           Y
atropurpureus
Hamamelis        Common         Y           N           N           Y
virginiana       Witchhazel
Malus ioensis    Prairie Crab   N           N           N           Y
Ostrya           Hophornbeam or Y           Y           Y           Y
virginiana       ironwood
Ptelea           Wafer Ash      Y           N           N           Y
trifoliata
Sassafras        Sassafras      Y           N           N           Y
albidum
   Understory Non-Natives
Larix decidua    Larch          Y           N           N           Y
Magnolia species Magnolia       Y           N           Y           Y
                                                                
 
Landscape Design and Construction Using Best Management Practices
Goal: To build or improve landscaped environments that provide aesthetic and
functional properties and optimal growing conditions while conserving water and
protecting water quality.
   A.   Planning Guidelines:
      In the planning stages of a project is when the designer is most able to
apply Best Management Practices (BMP). These are factors that will either
contribute to or prevent the successful outcome of reaching the goals of BMP.
Consider the following as elements that will affect the success of the
strategy:
      1.   Consider existing and proposed grades to provide optimal drainage
and infiltration opportunities.
      2.   Exposure to wind and sun can affect water needs, plant health, and
conservation.
      3.   Roads and parking areas can be utilized to provide moderate levels
of infiltration.
      4.   Salt, chemical spray, and snow storage in certain locations will
affect plant health, soils, water quality, and runoff.
      5.   Soils should be understood to be used effectively in water
conservation, erosion potential, and plant health.
      6.   Precipitation amounts and intensity at different sites and regions
will affect design choices and maintenance guidelines.
      7.   Maintenance schedules should be well defined and followed throughout
the year.
      Incorporating elements of ‘Xeriscape’ will aid in the conservation and
protection of water resources, these include:
      1.   Use the planning stage to combine design with resource management.
      2.   Amend poor soils for improved erosion control and growing
conditions.
      3.   Choose plants that require minimal water and hardy growing
conditions
      4.   Minimize turf areas to decrease mowing and fertilizing/herbicide
requirements.
      5.   Apply efficient irrigation practices and monitor during the growing
season.
      6.   Apply and maintain proper mulch.
      7.   Use porous paving materials for walkways, roads, and parking areas.
      8.   Follow a site specific maintenance plan.
   B.   Installation:
      The following principles are suggested to improve the sustainability of
plants in the landscape through design, construction, and into the maintenance
cycle:
      Test soils prior to planting to identify appropriate amendments needed to
improve the soil. Soil tests determine costs associated with amendments and
determine pH, phosphorus, and nitrogen level.
      Improve Soil And Drainage. Due to heavy equipment the soil compaction
frequently reaches 80% to 90%. Break compaction by tilling the soil or replace
it around plants. When the soil has been prepared for planting it is important
to keep construction equipment off of the prepared surface. Plants can often
adapt to dry conditions but plantings on poorly drained sites will be difficult
to maintain and have a shortened life span.
      Typical to Lake County, heavy clay soils have poor aeration that, with
compaction, limits root growth. Typical soil preparation consists of
introducing 3 to 5 cubic yards of organic matter into the soil to a depth of 4
to 6 inches for every 1,000 square feet of area to be seeded, sodded, or
planted. If native plants are used, then soil amendment may not be necessary,
provided that native topsoil has been retained at the site and minimal
compaction has occurred.
      Increase Planting Space. To improve the health of plants, increase areas
of open soil. This will reduce extreme moisture conditions that stress plants
under stress and reduce their life span.
      Properly Size Pits and Provide Optimal Plant Depth. Proper planting with
the root collar at least 2 inches above grade helps with establishment and
long-term health. Additionally, planting pits should be at a minimum 2 times
the width of the root ball.
      Select the Proper Plants. Plants are selected for a function or to
visually enhance a site. Local climate, maintenance, availability, soil
properties, available water, all should be considered in plant selection in
addition to the plant characteristics.
      Inspect the Installation. Many contractor mistakes can be covered with
soil and mulch hiding drainage systems, soil amendments, soil compaction, size
of planting pit, and root balls. These all should be inspected while they are
exposed.
      Follow Maintenance Plan.  All landscapes are dependent on a certain
amount of maintenance. Following a maintenance plan over both the short- and
long-term is crucial for plant health. Planting notes and details must be
reviewed and placed on the landscape plan.
   C.   Maintenance: Tree and Plant Care
      1.   New plantings typically require additional watering for one to two
growing seasons to become established.
      2.   Winter watering is necessary for newly planted trees, particularly
evergreens during periods when snow or rainfall has not occurred over an
extended period of time.
      3.   Many plant root systems, trunks or branches, and drought-stressed
plants are harmed by heavy application of lawn-based herbicides.
      4.   Shrubs and trees should be evaluated yearly and fertilized to
promote healthy roots, branching, and leaf growth.
      Perennial Care
      The following procedures should be observed in order to provide optimal
sustainable growing conditions for perennial planting areas:
      1.   Prepare soil before planting by loosening it to 12 inches. If a
heavy clay or sandy soil is present, add 2 to 3 inches of compost on the soil
surface and then till in to a 12-inch depth.
      2.   Apply 1 to 2 inches of organic mulch between plants to reduce
evaporation and control weeds and soil temperature.
      3.   Fertilizing perennials is generally not needed if proper soil
preparation is done prior to planting. Fertilizer increases growth requiring
additional water.
      4.   Choose plants to match the site conditions and consider plants with
lower water needs.
      5.   Irrigation practices affect root depth. By watering less frequently
and more thoroughly, deeper roots are produced, decreasing irrigation
requirements.
      Turf Management
      Properly maintained turf while visually appealing can also reduce
stormwater runoff rates, sediment and pollutant loads, and reduce heat island
effects. The following BMPs can be used for areas that require turfgrass:
      1.   Avoid placing turf in long narrow areas, steep slopes, or in islands
due to maintenance and irrigation challenges. Consider turf alternatives in
these areas such as native or low-water-use plantings.
      2.   Low grow or no mow turf should be considered where feasible to
reduce the maintenance needs during the growing season.
      3.   Mulch-mowing helps turfgrass develop deeper root systems. Mulched
grass clippings can return 30% of the needed nitrogen that turf requires to be
healthy.
      4.   If thatch is present at a depth greater than 1/2 inch, aerate the
lawn with a core-aerator to allow water infiltration.
      5.   Turf grown on properly prepared soil requires only half of the
recommended rate for irrigation.
      6.   Keep leaves, grass clippings and other turf wastes cleared from
sidewalks and streets to avoid washing into storm drains, streams, and lakes.
      7.   Maintain a buffer zone along waterways where chemicals are not
applied to minimize infiltration of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers
into water bodies.
      8.   Follow a maintenance schedule to prevent stress, disease, and turf
injury.
      Mulching
      Mulch trees, shrubs, and planting beds with partially composted organic
material in a layer of 3 to 4 inches depth in order to:
      1.   Reduce water loss through evaporation;
      2.   Reduce soil erosion and sediment transport;
      3.   Suppress weeds; and
      4.   Provide uniform soil temperature.
      In areas prone to significant runoff, inorganic mulch such as stone
should be considered.
(Ord., Appendix A, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 24-
0924, passed 8-13-2024)
APPENDIX B: STREET CLASSIFICATION MAPS
Major Roads: Northeast Quadrant
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4193.jpg]
Major Roads: Northwest Quadrant
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3116.jpg]
Major Roads: Southeast Quadrant
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3118.jpg]
Major Roads: Southwest Quadrant
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3120.jpg]
(Ord., Appendix B, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX C: GENERAL NOTES
N.   The review and approval of these Final Engineering Plans and
specifications by the Lake County Division of Transportation and/or the
                                   Township Highway Commissioner does not
constitute a release from or grant of variation from the standards and
specifications required in the Lake County, Illinois, Subdivision Ordinance,
latest edition. The owner, the owner’s designated representatives, and/or all
successors and assigns shall be solely responsible for all work and
improvements within the limits of the right-of-way. Unless otherwise specified,
approved in writing by the Division of Transportation and the
                             Township Highway Commissioner, all work and
materials necessary to construct roadway and drainage improvements within the
limits of the right-of-way shall be in conformance with the Lake County,
Illinois, Subdivision Ordinance and the latest editions of and revisions to the
following Illinois Department of Transportation specification books and
manuals.
   • Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
   • Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions
   • Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items
   • State of Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways
   • Highway Standards
O.   The construction, including materials use, shall be in accordance with the
above references of the Illinois Department of Transportation specifications.
P.   The Lake County Division of Transportation and/or the
                                   Township Highway Commissioner shall not be
held liable for any errors or omissions in these Final Engineering Plans or for
any additional work which may be needed due to errors or omissions in these
Final Engineering Plans.
Q.   The owner, the owner’s designated representatives, and/or all successors
and assigns shall be solely responsible for any additional work, and all costs
thereof, required because of errors or omissions in these Final Engineering
Plans and for the correction of any construction, maintenance, or safety
problems which become apparent during construction or by inspections made by
the Resident Engineer or the Lake County Division of Transportation.
R.   The Resident Engineer shall be responsible for establishing the proper
lines and grades for all construction work including earthwork, paving,
curbing, and drainage. The Resident Engineer shall also be responsible for all
other engineering work including inspections and any testing required by the
Lake County Division of Transportation. An inspector, as provided or approved
by the Resident Engineer, shall be present during critical phases of the
construction work.
(Ord., Appendix C, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX D: SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE STATEMENT
Note: To view Appendix D forms in PDF, please click FORMS
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               )SS
COUNTY OF LAKE    )
To the best of our knowledge and belief, the drainage of surface waters will
not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof or
that if such surface water drainage will change, reasonable provisions have
been made for collection and discharge or surface waters into public or private
area and/or drains which the developer has a right to use and that such surface
waters will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted engineering
practices so as to reduce the likelihood of substantive damage to the adjoining
property because of the construction of the subdivision.
Dated this                          day of                              ,
20       .
                                                                    
Owner or Attorney
                           (SEAL)
                                                                    
Engineer
(Ord., Appendix D, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX E: CERTIFICATES AND APPROVALS
Note: To view Appendix E forms in PDF, please click FORMS
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
This is to certify that the undersigned is/are the sole owner(s) of the land
described in the annexed plat herein, that no other person has any right,
title, or interest in said land and that he/she/they has/have caused the same
to be surveyed and subdivided as indicated thereon for the uses and purposes
therein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the
title thereon indicated.
Dated at                                   , Illinois, this
                                   day of                                   ,
A.D. 20      .
                                  
Owners
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
I,                                   , a Notary Public in and for said county,
in the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that
                                  , personally known to me to be the same
person(s) whose name(s) is/are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such
owner(s), appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that he/she/
they signed and delivered the annexed plat as his/her/their own free and
voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and notarial seal, this               day of
                                  , A.D., 20     at
                                  , Illinois.
(SEAL)
                                  
Notary Public
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
This is to certify that I,                                   , a Registered
Illinois Land Surveyor, No.                                   , have surveyed
and subdivided the property as described and shown by the annexed plat, which
is a correct representation of said survey and subdivision. All distances are
shown in feet and decimals thereof. All lots meet the requirements of the Lake
County Unified Development Ordinance in regard to lot area, width, and
buildable area.
Further, I certify this subdivision is (is not) situated within five hundred
(500) feet of a surface drain or water course serving a tributary area of 640
acres or more.
The above described tract is/is not located within the area designated as a
flood hazard as shown in the flood insurance rate map Community Panel
No.                                  , dated                                   
as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
This is also to certify that the Village of                                   
is within 1-1/2 miles of the proposed subdivision.
Given under my hand and seal at                                   , Illinois,
this                   day of                  , A.D., 20      .
(SEAL)
                                                                    
Registered Illinois Land Surveyor
OWNER’S SCHOOL DISTRICT CERTIFICATE:
This is to certify that I                                    as owner of the
property described as the
                                                         Subdivision and
legally described on the plat of the same name, have determined to the best of
my knowledge the school district in which each of the following lots lay.
Signature of Owner
      LOT NUMBER(S)               SCHOOL DISTRICTS
                              ELEMENTARY HIGH SCHOOL UNIT DISTRICT
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
I,                                  , a Notary Public in and for said county,
in the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that
                                  , owner of the property commonly known
as                                   Subdivision, appeared before me this day
in person and acknowledged the execution of this statement as his free and
voluntary act.
Given under my hand and notarial seal, this                          day of
                                   A.D., 20      at
                                  , Illinois.
(SEAL)
                                  
LAKE COUNTY CLERK’S CERTIFICATE:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
I,                                  , County Clerk of Lake County, Illinois, do
hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes and no redeemable tax
sales against any of the land included in the annexed plat. I further certify
that I have received all statutory fees in connection with the annexed plat.
Given under my hand and seal of the County Clerk at Waukegan, Illinois this
                day of                  , A.D. 20      .
(SEAL)
                                  
County Clerk
CERTIFICATE OF THE COUNTY ENGINEER:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
I,                                   , County Engineer of said County, do
hereby certify that the annexed plat has been examined by me and found to
comply with the highway requirements as set forth in the regulations governing
plats of subdivided lands adopted by the County Board of Lake County, Illinois.
Dated this                  day of                       , A.D. 20_____
at                                   .
                                  
County Engineer
CERTIFICATE OF HIGHWAY ACCESS AUTHORITY:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
This plat is hereby approved this             day of                        ,
A.D. 20       by the County Engineer of Lake County pursuant to Chapter 765,
Act 205, Section 2 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, as to roadway
access to County Highway                also known as
                              . Direct access either to or from County Highway
             shall be restricted as shown on this plat and shall be subject to
the Lake County Highway Access Regulation Ordinance which requires, in part,
that application be made and an access permit be obtained from the County
Engineer of Lake County prior to any access installation.
                                  
County Engineer
PLANNING BUILDING AND ZONING COMMITTEE CERTIFICATE:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
Approved this            day of                                    A.D.
20       .
                                  
Lake County Plat Committee
Chair
CERTIFICATE OF TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE    )
I,                                   , Highway Commissioner of the Town of
                                  , do hereby certify
that all matters pertaining to the highway requirements, as prescribed in the
regulations governing plats adopted by the County Board of Lake County, have
been complied with.
Dated this             day of                                   , A.D. 20     .
                                  
Highway Commissioner
CERTIFICATE OF THE REGIONAL SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
I,                                   , Regional Superintendent of Schools, Lake
County, Illinois, do hereby certify that all agreements and requirements
required by §
151.220 of the Unified Development Ordinance of Lake County, Illinois have been
reached and met by the developer. I have on file the terms of all such
agreements or conditions by which the requirements of §
151.220 have been met. Agreements to contribute cash are attached and recorded
together with the subject plat as document number
                                  .
Dated this                      day of                                   , A.D.
20    .
                                                         
Regional Superintendent of Schools
CERTIFICATE OF THE HEALTH OFFICER:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
I,                                   , Health Officer of said County, do hereby
certify that the plat has been examined
by me and found to comply with Lake County Board of Health Individual Sewage
Disposal System Ordinance of the County of Lake, as set forth in the
regulations governing plats of subdivided land adopted by the County Board of
Lake County, Illinois.
Dated this                    day of                                   ,
20     .
                                                      
Health Officer of Lake County
CERTIFICATE OF MUNICIPALITY:
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE   )
I,                                    Clerk of the (City) (Village) of
                                  , do hereby certify that the annexed plat was
duly approved by the (City) (Village) of                                    on
the                  day of
                                  , 20    .
Dated this               day of                          , A.D. 20    .
                                  
Clerk
PLAT SUBMITTED BY CERTIFICATE:
The person listed in the following note is hereby granted permission to record
this plat on behalf of
                                  , Professional Land Surveyor.
Signed:                                   
This plat submitted for recording by:
Name:                                        
Business:                                     
Address:                                      
City:                                            
State/Zip:                                     
Date:                                           
(Ord., Appendix E, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX F: ASSIGNMENT OF SPECIFIC USE TYPES TO USE CATEGORIES
The following table assigns specific use types to their respective use
category.
Appendix F
Use Type Use Category
Appendix F
Use Type                                      Use Category
   RESIDENTIAL USES
Accessory Dwelling Unit                       Accessory Use (see §
                                              151.113)
Assisted Living                               Group Living
Atrium House                                  Household Living
Attached Dwelling (attached to nonresidential Household Living
use)
Convent or Monastery                          Group Living
Caretaker’s Dwelling Unit                   Accessory Use (see §
                                              151.113)
Dormitories                                   Group Living
Duplex                                        Household Living
Fraternities and Sororities                   Group Living
Group Homes for the Physically Disabled,      Group Living
Mentally Retarded, or Emotionally Disturbed
House, Detached                               Household Living
Lot Line House                                Household Living
Mobile Home Park                              Household Living
Monasteries and Convents                      Group Living
Multi-Dwelling Structure                      Household Living
Multiplex                                     Household Living
Nursing and Convalescent Homes                Group Living
Patio House                                   Household Living
Residential Programs for Drug and Alcohol     Group Living
Treatment
Townhouse                                     Household Living
Twinhouse                                     Household Living
Village House                                 Household Living
   NONRESIDENTIAL USES
Adult Day Care Programs (For More than 8      Day Care
Individuals)
Adult Use                                     Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Advertising Agency                            Office
Advertising Display Construction/Sign Shop    Manufacturing and Production
Agricultural Implement Sales, Service         Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Agricultural Supplier’s Storage and Service Agriculture
Center
Agriculture Uses                              Agriculture
Airports                                      Aviation and Surface
                                              Transportation
Alignment Shop                                Vehicle Repair
Amphitheater                                  Entertainment Event, Major
Amusement Parks                               Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Animal (farm animal) Breeding or Raising      Agriculture
Animal Grooming                               Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Antique Sales                                 Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Apiary                                        Agriculture
Appliance Repair                              Retail Sales and Service, General
Appliance Sales                               Retail Sales and Service, General
Arcades, Amusement                            Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Archery Range (Indoor)                        Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Archery Range (Outdoor)                       Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Art Gallery, Commercial                       Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Art Supply Stores                             Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Asphalt, Concrete or Redi-Mix Plant           Manufacturing and Production
Auction House                                 Wholesale Sales
Auditoriums                                   Entertainment Event, Major
Auto and Truck Salvage and Wrecking           Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Auto Body Shop                                Vehicle Repair
Auto Detailing and Tire Sales and Mounting    Vehicle Repair
Auto Repair                                   Vehicle Repair
Auto Sales                                    Retail Sales and Service
Auto Upholstery Shop                          Vehicle Repair
Bait Shop                                     Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Bakery                                        Manufacturing and Production
Bank, Branch or Drive-In                      Retail Sale and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Banks (Headquarters)                          Office
Barber Shop                                   Retail Sale and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Bars                                          Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Beauty Shop                                   Retail Sale and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Bicycle Shops                                 Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Billiard Parlor                               Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Blood-collection Facilities                   Office
BMX (Bicycle) tracks                          Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Boarding Schools and Military Academies       Schools
Boat Sales                                    Retail Sales and Service
Boat Construction                             Manufacturing and Production
Book Stores                                   Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Botanical Gardens                             Parks and Open Space
Bowling Alleys                                Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Building, Heating, Plumbing or Electrical     Industrial Service, Commercial
Contractors                                   Service-Oriented
Bulk Materials Storage                        Warehousing and Freight Movement
Bus Barns                                     Warehousing and Freight Movement
Bus Parking                                   Industrial Service
Bus Passenger Terminals                       Aviation and Surface
                                              Transportation
Bus Terminal                                  Aviation and Surface
                                              Transportation
Business Machine Sales, Service               Retail Sales and Service, General
Business, Martial Arts and Other Trade        School, Private
Schools
Cabin or Cottage                              Household Living
Camera Shop                                   Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Camp                                          Parks and Open Space
Car Washes                                    Vehicle Service, Limited
Carpet and Rug Cleaning Plant                 Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Catering Service                              Retail Sales and Service, General
Cemetery, Mausoleum                           Parks and Open Space
Casino/Commercial Watercraft                  Retail Sales and Service
Child Care Center (For More than 7            Day Care
Individuals)
Churches                                      Religious Institutions
Cigar, Cigarette, Tobacco Store               Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Clothes Pressing and Repair Shop/Tailor       Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Clothing Store                                Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Club, Private                                 Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Coin-Operated Arcade                          Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Cold Storage Plants, Including Frozen Food    Warehousing and Freight Movement
Lockers
Coliseums                                     Entertainment Event, Major
Commercial Watercraft/Casino                  Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Entertainment-Oriented
Community Colleges                            Colleges
Concrete Batching and Asphalt Mixing          Manufacturing and Production
Consumer Vehicle Sales                        Retail Sales and Service
Contractor’s Equipment Sales or Storage     Industrial Service
Cottage or Cabin                              Household Living
Crematorium                                   Retail Sales and Service
Currency Exchange                             Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Construction, Boat                            Manufacturing and Production
Dairy Farms                                   Agriculture
Dairy Products Sales                          Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Dance Halls                                   Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Dance or Music Classes                        School, Private
Data Processing                               Office
Day Care Facility (7+ children or adults)     Day Care
Department Store                              Retail Sales and Service, General
Drive-in Theater                              Retail Sales and Service
Drug Store                                    Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Dry Cleaning and Dyeing Plant                 Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Dry Cleaning Pickup (with on-premises         Retail Sales and Service,
cleaning)                                     Neighborhood-Oriented
Electric Motor Repair                         Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Electrical Substations                        Utility, Major
Electrical Switching Facilities and Primary   Utility, Major
Substations
Electronic Equipment Stores                   Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Electronics/Computer Sales, Service           Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Emergency Medical Care                        Hospital
Energy Recovery Plants                        Waste-Related Use
Exhibition Centers                            Entertainment Event, Major
Exterminators                                 Industrial Service
Fabric Stores                                 Retail Sales and Service, Sales-
                                              Oriented
Fairgrounds                                   Entertainment Event, Major
Family Child Care                             Day Care
Farming, Truck Gardening, Forestry, Tree      Agriculture
Farming
Farrier                                       Retail Sales and Service, General
Feed and Grain Sales                          Industrial Service
Financial Services (Brokerage, Mortgage,      Office
Loans)
Firewood Sales                                Retail Sales and Service, General
Fish Market                                   Retail Sales and Service, General
Floor Covering Sales                          Retail Sales and Service, General
Florist Sales                                 Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Food and Related Products Processing          Manufacturing and Production
Food Processing and Packing                   Manufacturing and Production
Forestry                                      Agriculture
Freight Terminal, Motor/Rail                  Warehousing and Freight Movement
Fruit and Vegetable Market, Retail            Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Fuel Oil, Coal Sales                          Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Fuel Oil Distributors                         Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Funeral Home, Mortuary                        Retail Sales and Service, General
Furnace and Water Heater Sales, Display       Retail Sales and Service, General
Furniture Repair, Cleaning or Refinishing     Retail Sales and Service
Furniture Stores                              Retail Sales and Service, General
Garden Center                                 Retail Sales and Service
Garden Supply Stores                          Retail Sales and Service
Gas, Butane and Propane Sales                 Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Generating Plants                             Utility, Major
Gift Shop                                     Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Go-Cart Track                                 Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Golf Course                                   Parks and Open Space
Golf Driving Range                            Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Golf, Miniature                               Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Government Use                                Community Service
Grain Elevators                               Warehousing and Freight Movement
Greenhouse/Nursery, Non-Retail                Agriculture
Greenhouse/Nursery, Retail                    Retail Sales and Service
Grocery Store or Supermarket                  Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Group Child Care (For More than 7             Day Care
Individuals)
Hair, Tanning, and Personal Care Services     Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Hardware Stores                               Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Hazardous-waste Collection Sites              Waste-Related Use
Health Clubs                                  Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Health Food Store                             Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Hearing Aid Sales                             Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Heavy Machinery Sales                         Industrial Service, General
Helicopter Landing Facilities                 Aviation and Surface
                                              Transportation
Hobby Shop                                    Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Home Improvement Stores                       Retail Sales and Service, General
Hospital/Trauma Center                        Hospital
Hotels and Motels                             Retail Sales and Service, General
Household Product Stores                      Retail Sales and Service, General
Ice Cream Shop                                Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Janitorial and Building Maintenance Services  Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Jewelry Stores                                Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Junk Yard                                     Industrial Service
Kennels, Animal Boarding/Obedience School     Retail Sales and Service
Landscape Contractor’s Storage Yard         Industrial Service
Landscape Waste Composting                    Waste-Related Use
Laundromats                                   Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Laundry Drop-off                              Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Dry-cleaning and Carpet Cleaning Plants       Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Leather Goods Sales                           Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Liberal Arts Colleges                         Colleges
Libraries                                     Community Service
Liquor Store                                  Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Locksmith                                     Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Lodges                                        Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Lumber and Building Material Sales            Retail Sales and Service
Lumber Mills                                  Manufacturing and Production
Machine Shops                                 Industrial Service, General
Machinery Storage Yard                        Warehousing and Freight Movement
Magazine and News Stand                       Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Mail Order Houses                             Wholesale Sales
Manufacture or Assembly of Machinery,
Equipment, Instruments, Including Musical     Manufacturing and Production
Instruments, Vehicles, Appliances, Precision
Items and Other Electrical Items
Manufacture or Production of Artwork and Toys Manufacturing and Production
Manufacture or Production of Chemical,
Rubber, Leather, Clay, Bone, Plastic, Stone,  Manufacturing and Production
or Glass Materials or Products
Manufacture, Production or Fabrication of
Metals or Metal Products Including Enameling  Manufacturing and Production
and Galvanizing
Manufactured Housing Unit Production and      Manufacturing and Production
Fabrication
Marina                                        Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Meat Market                                   Retail Sales and Service, General
Medical and Dental Clinics (Including Minor   Office
Emergency Centers)
Medical Centers                               Hospital
Medical Schools Not Accessory to Hospitals    Colleges
Metal and Building Materials Sales            Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Mini-warehouses                               Self-Service Storage
Miniature Golf Course                         Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Mining and Resource Extraction                Mining
Mobile Home Sales                             Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Model Airplane Club                           Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Monument Works                                Manufacturing and Production
Mortuaries                                    Retail Sales and Service, General
Moto-Cross (Motorcycle) tracks                Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Motorcycle Sales                              Retail Sales and Service
Movie Production Facilities                   Manufacturing and Production
Moving Companies and General Freight Storage  Warehousing and Freight Movement
Museum                                        Community Service
Music, Musical Instrument, and Records, Sales Retail Sales and Service,
and Service                                   Neighborhood-Oriented
Nature Preserves                              Parks and Open Space
Neighborhood or Community Centers             Community Service
Nightclubs                                    Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Nursery Schools (For More than 8 Individuals) Day Care
Office Equipment and Supplies                 Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Offices, Business, Professional or Sales      Office
Offices for Non-retail Nurseries              Office
Oil, Gas, or Geothermal Drilling              Mining
Ornamental Iron Work Shop                     Manufacturing and Production
Paint and Wallpaper Sales                     Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Parcel Services                               Warehousing and Freight Movement
Park/Playground, Commercial                   Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Park/Playground, Non-commercial               Parks and Open Space
Park and Ride Facilities                      Parking, Commercial
Parking Facilities and Parking Lots           Parking, Commercial
Parking Garage                                Parking Commercial
Parks                                         Parks and Open Space
Pawn Shop                                     Retail Sales and Service, General
Personnel Training Centers                    Colleges
Pet Cemetery                                  Parks and Open Space
Pet Food Stores                               Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Pet Shop                                      Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Petroleum or Chemical Refining/Production     Industrial Service
Pharmacies                                    Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Photocopy and Blueprint Services              Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Photography Studios                           Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Picture Frame Sales and Service               Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Plant Nurseries (Wholesale)                   Agriculture
Plant Sales (Retail)                          Retail Sales and Service, General
Playgrounds                                   Parks and Open Space
Plazas                                        Parks and Open Space
Plumbing Supplies and Fixture Sales/Service,  Retail Sales and Service, General
Retail
Pool Halls                                    Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Post Office (Main)                            Warehousing and Freight Movement
Post Offices, Main                            Warehousing and Freight Movement
Preschools (For More than 8 Individuals)      Day Care
Printing, Publishing, and Lithography         Manufacturing and Production
Public Facilities of Agencies That Are under
Public Franchise or Ownership to Provide the
General Public with Electricity, Gas, Heat,   Utility, Major
Steam, Water, Sewage Collection, or Other
Similar Service
Public Open Land, Park, or Nature Preserve    Parks and Open Space
Pulp and Paper Mills and Other Wood Products  Manufacturing and Production
Manufacturing
Quarrying or Dredging for Sand, Gravel or     Mining
Other Aggregate Materials
Quick Lubrication Services                    Vehicle Service, Limited
Racetrack, Animal                             Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Racetrack, Motor Vehicle                      Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Radio Station/Studio                          Office
Railroad Passenger Stations                   Aviation and Surface
                                              Transportation
Recreational Trails                           Parks and Open Space
Recreational Uses (Indoor)                    Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Recreational Uses (Outdoor)                   Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Recreational Vehicle Parks (30-day Maximum    Retail Sales and Service
Stay)
Recreational Vehicle Sales                    Retail Sales and Service
Recreational Vehicle Service                  Vehicle Repair
Recreational Vehicle Storage                  Warehousing and Freight Movement
Recycling Center                              Waste-Related Use
Religious Institution                         Religious Institution
Rendering or Tanning Plants                   Industrial Service
Repair of Scientific or Professional          Industrial Service, Commercial
Instruments                                   Service-Oriented
Research Laboratory, including but not
limited to Pure Research, Product             Manufacturing and Production
Development, Pilot Plants, and Research
Manufacturing Facilities
Resort                                        Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Restaurants                                   Retail Sales and Service
Riding Academies                              Agriculture
Sand, Gravel, or Other Aggregate Materials    Warehousing and Freight Movement
Stockpiling
Sanitary Landfills                            Waste-Related Use
School, Business                              Private Schools
School, Industrial                            Private Schools
School, Public                                Schools
Seminaries                                    Colleges
Seminary                                      Colleges
Senior Centers                                Community Service
Service Station (Full-service, Mini-service   Vehicle Service, Limited
and Self-service)
Sewage Disposal (Individual) Systems Sales,   Industrial Service, General
Service
Shoe Repair                                   Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Shooting Range (Indoor)                       Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Shooting Range (Outdoor)                      Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Shopping Centers                              Retail Sales and Service, General
Sign Making                                   Manufacturing and Production
Skating Rinks (Indoor)                        Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Skating Rinks (Outdoor)                       Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Ski or Toboggan Club, Polo Club               Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Slaughterhouse, Meat Packing                  Manufacturing and Production
Sporting Goods Sales                          Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Sports Arena                                  Entertainment Event, Major
Stable, Private                               Accessory Use (see §
                                              151.113)
Stables, Public (Commercial)                  Agriculture
Stadiums                                      Entertainment Event, Major
Stationary and Video Stores                   Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Swimming Pool, Commercial                     Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Synagogues and Mosques                        Religious Institutions
Tailor                                        Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Taverns                                       Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Taxidermists                                  Retail Sales and Service, General
Telecommunications Facilities                 Telecommunications Facilities
Television Repair                             Retail Sales and Service, General
Television Station/Studio                     Office
Temples                                       Religious Institutions
Theater, Indoor                               Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Recreational-Oriented
Theater, Outdoor                              Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Theme Parks                                   Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
Tire Retreading or Recapping                  Industrial Service
Tool Repair                                   Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Towing Service and Vehicle Storage            Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Toy Store                                     Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Transmission or Muffler Shop                  Vehicle Repair
Travel Agency                                 Office
Truck (Heavy) Servicing and Repair            Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Truck (Light and Medium) Sales                Retail Sales and Service
Truck, or Air Freight Terminals               Warehousing and Freight Movement
Truck Stops                                   Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Truck/Trailer Parking                         Industrial Service
Truck/Trailer Sales, Terminal, Repair, Rental Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
TV and Radio Studios                          Office
Union Hall                                    Retail Sales and Service, General
Universities                                  Colleges
Upholsterer                                   Retail Sales and Service, General
Utility Service Yard or Garage                Warehousing and Freight Movement
Veterinary Clinic                             Retail Sales and Service
Warehouse                                     Warehousing and Freight Movement
Warehouses (Separate from Retail Business)
Used by Retail Stores such as Furniture and   Warehousing and Freight Movement
Appliance Stores
Waste Composting                              Waste-Related Use
Watch, Clock, Sales and Repair Shop           Retail Sales and Service,
                                              Neighborhood-Oriented
Water and Wastewater Treatment Plants         Utility, Major
Water Softening Equipment Sales, Service      Retail Sales and Service, General
Water Tanks                                   Utility, Major
Weaving or Production of Textiles or Apparel  Manufacturing and Production
Welding Shops                                 Industrial Service, General
Well Drilling Service                         Industrial Service, Commercial
                                              Service-Oriented
Wholesale Distribution Centers                Warehousing and Freight Movement
Wholesalers of Food, Clothing, Auto Parts,    Wholesale Sales
Building Hardware
Woodworking, Including Cabinet Makers         Manufacturing and Production
Youth Club Facilities                         Community Service
Zoos                                          Recreation and Entertainment,
                                              Outdoor
 
(Ord., Appendix F, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX G: PARTIAL LIST OF AGENCIES FROM WHICH PERMITS MAY BE REQUIRED
   (A)   Municipal/County Building Department;
   (B)   Illinois Department of Natural Resources;
   (C)   Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, District
1;
   (D)   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency;
   (E)   Illinois Department of Conservation;
   (F)   Illinois Historic Preservation Agency;
   (G)   Lake County Soil and Water Conservation Districts;
   (H)   Lake County Health Department;
   (I)   Lake County Division of Transportation;
   (J)   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers;
   (K)   United States Fish and Wildlife Service; and
   (L)   Fox Waterway Agency.
(Ord., Appendix G, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX H: IDOT/DNR DAM SAFETY PERMITTING GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3138.jpg]
(Ord., Appendix H, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX I: PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER IN LAKE COUNTY
The following public bodies of water are navigable in their natural condition
or are improved for navigation and open to public use. The entire length and
surface area in Illinois, including all backwater lakes and sloughs open to the
main channel or body of water at normal flows or stages, are open to the
public:
   1)   Lake Michigan;
   2)   Fox River (Illinois River Basin);
   3)   Fox Chain-O-Lakes (Lake and McHenry Counties): Bluff Lake, Lake
Catherine, Channel Lake, Fox Lake, Grass Lake, Lake Marie, Nippersink Lake,
Dunns Lake, Pistakee Lake, Lake Jerilyn, Lac Louette, and Redhead Lake; and
   4)   The following public bodies of water are navigable waters that are
dedicated to public use. This list is incomplete. It is believed there are
numerous channels and slips in subdivisions on the margins of public bodies of
water that have been dedicated by plat. Additional channels and slips have been
dedicated by common law: Petite Lake and Spring Lake and connecting channels
between Bluff Lake and Fox Lake in Lake County.
(Ord., Appendix I, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX J: DETENTION VOLUMES VS. CURVE NUMBER
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4155.png]
(Ord., Appendix J, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 22-1060, passed 8-9-2022)
APPENDIX K: RAINFALL TABLES
   Rainfall Depth-Duration Frequency Tables for Lake County
   Rainfall is in inches
Storm    2-    3-    4-    6-    9-    1-   2-   5-   10-  25-  50-  100- 500-
Duration month month month month month year year year year year year year year
Storm    2-    3-    4-    6-    9-    1-   2-   5-   10-  25-  50-   100-  500-
Duration month month month month month year year year year year year  year  year
5        0.19  0.22  0.24  0.27  0.31  0.33 0.40 0.52 0.62 0.77 0.90  1.03  1.35
minutes
10       0.33  0.38  0.41  0.47  0.53  0.58 0.70 0.90 1.08 1.35 1.58  1.80  2.36
minutes
15       0.42  0.49  0.53  0.61  0.69  0.75 0.90 1.16 1.39 1.74 2.03  2.32  3.04
minutes
30       0.58  0.66  0.73  0.83  0.94  1.03 1.24 1.59 1.91 2.39 2.78  3.17  4.16
minutes
1 hour   0.74  0.84  0.93  1.05  1.20  1.30 1.57 2.02 2.42 3.03 3.53  4.03  5.28
2 hours  0.91  1.04  1.14  1.30  1.48  1.61 1.94 2.49 2.99 3.74 4.35  4.97  6.52
3 hours  1.00  1.15  1.26  1.44  1.63  1.77 2.14 2.75 3.30 4.13 4.80  5.49  7.20
6 hours  1.18  1.35  1.48  1.68  1.91  2.08 2.51 3.23 3.86 4.84 5.63  6.43  8.43
12 hours 1.37  1.56  1.71  1.95  2.21  2.41 2.91 3.74 4.48 5.61 6.53  7.46  9.78
18 hours 1.48  1.69  1.85  2.11  2.39  2.61 3.14 4.04 4.84 6.06 7.05  8.06  10.57
24 hours 1.57  1.80  1.97  2.24  2.55  2.77 3.34 4.30 5.15 6.45 7.50  8.57  11.24
48 hours 1.72  1.97  2.16  2.46  2.79  3.04 3.66 4.71 5.62 6.99 8.13  9.28  12.10
72 hours 1.87  2.14  2.34  2.67  3.03  3.30 3.97 5.08 6.05 7.49 8.64  9.85  12.81
120      2.08  2.38  2.61  2.97  3.37  3.67 4.42 5.63 6.68 8.16 9.39  10.66 13.81
hours
240      2.63  3.01  3.30  3.76  4.27  4.65 5.60 7.09 8.25 9.90 11.26 12.65 16.00
hours
 
References:      ISWS Bulletin 75 Precipitation Frequency Study for Illinois
         James R. Angel and Momcilo Markus
         Illinois State Water Survey, March 2020
*Multiplication Factor - Average ratios of X-hour/24-hour rainfall for
Illinois, 1989 Bulletin 70
**6 County - A multiplicative factor is not available for these storm events.
Therefore, the 6-county Bulletin 70 data is used for regulatory studies.
HUFF RAINFALL DISTRIBUTIONS
The Huff quartiles represent the typical rainfall distribution for four
different storm duration ranges. The First quartile applies to storms less than
or equal to six hours long. Second is for storms greater than six hours and
less than or equal to 12, while the third Huff quartile is for storms greater
than 12 hours and less than or equal to 24 hours. Fourth quartile storms apply
to storm durations greater than 24 hours.
       Area < 10 SM                         Area > 10 & Area < 50                Area > 50 & Area < 400
Portion First    Second   Third    Fourth     First    Second   Third    Fourth     First    Second   Third    Fourth
of the  Quartile Quartile Quartile Quartile   Quartile Quartile Quartile Quartile   Quartile Quartile Quartile Quartile
Storm
       Area < 10 SM                         Area > 10 & Area < 50                Area > 50 & Area < 400
Portion First    Second   Third    Fourth     First    Second   Third    Fourth     First    Second   Third    Fourth
of the  Quartile Quartile Quartile Quartile   Quartile Quartile Quartile Quartile   Quartile Quartile Quartile Quartile
Storm
0/24    0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00
1/24    8.36     2.29     2.05     2.31      6.41     1.48     1.33     1.48      4.59     0.88     0.72     0.90
2/24    17.73    4.82     4.31     4.79      15.69    3.57     3.02     3.34      13.49    2.38     1.85     2.29
3/24    28.11    7.78     6.67     7.12      27.45    6.39     5.13     5.72      25.94    4.93     3.47     4.36
4/24    38.33    11.33    9.12     9.78      38.91    10.02    7.53     8.56      39.17    8.52     5.57     7.10
5/24    47.45    15.79    11.71    12.53     49.34    14.71    10.01    11.69     51.04    13.19    8.28     9.93
6/24    55.50    21.39    14.36    15.23     58.55    20.89    12.65    14.19     60.79    19.59    10.96    12.84
7/24    62.25    28.41    16.91    17.91     65.88    28.91    15.24    17.19     69.26    27.46    13.79    15.46
8/24    67.22    36.44    19.64    20.33     71.10    37.55    18.17    19.69     74.80    37.17    16.35    17.83
9/24    70.82    45.29    22.78    22.83     74.92    46.86    21.46    22.27     78.74    47.77    19.66    20.12
10/24   74.17    54.35    26.33    25.41     78.30    56.25    25.36    24.81     82.20    58.18    23.46    23.12
11/24   76.97    62.38    30.93    28.35     81.16    64.84    29.90    27.46     85.13    67.64    28.07    25.76
12/24   79.81    69.76    36.35    31.25     83.75    72.90    35.60    30.33     87.38    75.86    34.06    28.26
13/24   82.55    75.48    43.92    33.90     86.20    79.07    43.42    32.42     89.58    82.04    42.30    30.99
14/24   85.18    80.38    52.11    36.33     88.64    83.97    52.18    34.28     91.45    86.92    52.02    33.68
15/24   87.40    84.70    61.02    38.61     90.81    87.58    61.88    36.89     93.35    90.33    62.76    36.12
16/24   89.47    87.81    69.89    41.24     92.58    90.67    71.81    39.73     94.80    93.09    72.80    39.07
17/24   91.17    90.22    78.19    45.08     93.99    92.76    80.43    43.85     95.99    94.82    82.27    42.93
18/24   92.70    92.17    84.92    51.29     95.19    94.59    87.25    49.87     96.94    96.25    89.19    48.98
19/24   94.03    93.81    89.74    59.31     96.35    95.97    92.01    58.93     97.70    97.34    93.60    59.22
20/24   95.36    95.29    93.11    69.19     97.27    97.10    95.04    69.85     98.35    98.21    96.33    71.66
21/24   96.56    96.57    95.34    80.05     98.03    97.99    96.90    82.36     98.86    98.83    97.97    85.18
22/24   97.74    97.74    97.06    89.71     98.74    98.72    98.22    92.59     99.28    99.30    98.98    94.64
23/24   98.85    98.84    98.56    96.04     99.37    99.39    99.21    97.96     99.66    99.67    99.58    98.77
24/24   100.00   100.00   100.00   100.00    100.00   100.00   100.00   100.00    100.00   100.00   100.00   100.00
 
References: Floyd A. Huff and James R. Angel, 1989 ‘Frequency Distributions and
Hydroclimatic Characteristics of Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois’, Illinois State
Water Survey, Bulletin 70.
(Ord., Appendix K, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 22-1060, passed 8-9-2022; Ord. 23-
1056, passed 8-8-2023)
APPENDIX L: WATERSHED-SPECIFIC RELEASE RATES
Appendix L
WATERSHED                                Release Rates (cfc/acre)
 MAJOR TRIBUTARIES  100-Year Storm Event 2-Year Storm Event       Comments
  MINOR TRIBUTARIES
Appendix L
WATERSHED                            Release Rates (cfc/
                                     acre)
 MAJOR TRIBUTARIES    100-Year Storm                     Comments
  MINOR TRIBUTARIES   Event          2-Year Storm Event

FOX RIVER
Fox River Mainstem    0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Flint Creek          0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  Honey Lake Drain    0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Mutton Creek         0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Sequoit Creek        0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Slocum Lake Drain    0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  Bang’s Lake Drain 0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
                                                         Watershed Average
 Manitou Creek                                           Rate Based on 8/1/96
 Mainstem             0.090          0.020               LCSMC adoption of
                                                         the 11/3/82 FIS flow
                                                         rate analysis.
                                                         Watershed Average
                                                         Rate Based on 8/1/96
  Eagle Creek         0.090          0.020               LCSMC adoption of
                                                         the 11/3/82 FIS flow
                                                         rate analysis.
                                                         Watershed Average
                                                         Rate Based on 8/1/96
  Fish Lake Drain     0.090          0.020               LCSMC adoption of
                                                         the 11/3/82 FIS flow
                                                         rate analysis.
                                                         Watershed Average
                                                         Rate Based on 8/1/96
  Round Lake Drain    0.090          0.020               LCSMC adoption of
                                                         the 11/3/82 FIS flow
                                                         rate analysis.
 Tower Lake Drain     0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
DES PLAINES RIVER
Des Plaines River     0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
Mainstem                                                 Allowable
 Aptakisic Creek      0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Buffalo Creek        0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
 Mainstem                                                Allowable
  Tributary B to      0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
  Buffalo Creek                                          Allowable
 Bull Creek Mainstem  0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  Bull Creek          0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
  Tributary                                              Allowable
 Gurnee Tributary     0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Indian Creek         0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
 Mainstem                                                Allowable
  Diamond Lake Drain  0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  Forest Lake Drain   0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  Seavey Creek        0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  South Branch Indian 0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
  Creek                                                  Allowable
  West Branch Indian  0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
  Creek                                                  Allowable
 Mill Creek Mainstem  0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  Hastings Creek      0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  North Mill Creek    0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Newport Drainage     0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
 Ditch                                                   Allowable
 Suburban Country     0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
 Club Tributary                                          Allowable
LAKE MICHIGAN
 Bluff/Ravine         0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Dead River           0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
  Bull Creek          0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Kellogg Creek        0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Pettibone Creek      0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Waukegan River       0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
NORTH BRANCH CHICAGO RIVER
 Middle Fork          0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 Skokie River         0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 West Fork            0.150          0.040               WDO Maximum
                                                         Allowable
 
(Ord., Appendix L, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 22-1060, passed 8-9-2022)
APPENDIX M: FEMA FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY MAPS AND PROFILES
                                DATE OF CURRENT LAKE COUNTY DFIRM EFFECTIVE FIS
COMMUNITY NAME COMMUNITY MEMBER EFFECTIVE MAP   PANEL NUMBERS     STUDY DATE
                                (OR MAP INDEX)
                                  DATE OF CURRENT LAKE COUNTY  EFFECTIVE FIS
COMMUNITY NAME   COMMUNITY MEMBER EFFECTIVE MAP   DFIRM PANEL  STUDY DATE
                                  (OR MAP INDEX)  NUMBERS
ANTIOCH          170358#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0010 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0026 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0027 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0028 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0029 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0032 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0034 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0035 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0055 K OCT 5, 2023
BANNOCKBURN      170359#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0259 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0267 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0278 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0286 K OCT 5, 2023
BARRINGTON HILLS 170058#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0215 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0216 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0217 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0219 K OCT 5, 2023
BARRINGTON       170057#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0216 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0217 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0219 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0236 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0238 K OCT 5, 2023
BEACH PARK       171022#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0059 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0067 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0069 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0078 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0086 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0087 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0088 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0089 L OCT 5, 2023
BUFFALO GROVE    170068#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0253 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0254 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0261 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0262 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0263 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0264 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0266 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0270 K OCT 5, 2023
DEERFIELD        170361#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0267 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0270 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0278 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0286 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0287 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0288 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0289 K OCT 5, 2023
DEER PARK        171028#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0217 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0236 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0237 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0238 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0241 K OCT 5, 2023
FOX LAKE         170362#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0004 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0010 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0012 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0014 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0019 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0020 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0106 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0107 L OCT 5, 2023
FOX RIVER GROVE  170477#          SEP 18, 2013    10797C0205 K OCT 5, 2023
GRAYSLAKE        170363#          OCT 5, 2023     17097C0043 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0044 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0129 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0131 M OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0132 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0133 M OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0134 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0137 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0141 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0142 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0151 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0153 L OCT 5, 2023
GREEN OAKS       170364#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0158 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0159 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0166 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0167 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0168 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0169 K OCT 5, 2023
GURNEE           170365#          OCT 5, 2023     17097C0044 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0063 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0064 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0068 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0069 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0132 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0151 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0152 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0153 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0154 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0156 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0157 K OCT 5, 2023
HAINESVILLE      171005#          FEB 17, 2016    17097C0127 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0129 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0131 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0133 L OCT 5, 2023
HAWTHORN WOODS   170366#          FEB 17, 2016    17097C0139 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0143 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0226 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0227 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0228 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0229 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0231 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0232 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0233 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0234 K OCT 5, 2023
HIGHLAND PARK    170367#          OCT 5, 2023     17097C0277 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0278 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0279 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0281 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0283 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0286 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0287 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0289 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0291 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0292 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0293 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0294 L OCT 5, 2023
HIGHWOOD         171033#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0279 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0283 L OCT 5, 2023
INDIAN CREEK     170369#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0251 K OCT 5, 2023
ISLAND LAKE      170370#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0112 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0114 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0116 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0118 K OCT 5, 2023
KILDEER          170371#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0233 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0234 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0237 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0241 K OCT 5, 2023
LAKE BARRINGTON  170372#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0118 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0205 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0206 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0207 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0208 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0209 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0215 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0216 K OCT 5, 2023
LAKE BLUFF       170373#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0167 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0169 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0186 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0187 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0188 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0189 L OCT 5, 2023
LAKE COUNTY                       DFIRM PANEL NUMBERS LISTED SEPARATELY AT
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          END OF APPENDIX
AREAS
LAKE FOREST      170374#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0169 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0188 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0189 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0257 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0259 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0276 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0277 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0278 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0279 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0281 L OCT 5, 2023
LAKE VILLA       170375#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0028 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0029 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0035 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0036 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0037 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0038 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0039 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0041 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0043 L OCT 5, 2023
LAKE ZURICH      170376#          FEB 17, 2016    17097C0227 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0228 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0229 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0233 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0236 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0237 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0241 K OCT 5, 2023
LAKEMOOR         170915#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0102 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0104 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0106 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0108 K OCT 5, 2023
LIBERTYVILLE     170377#          OCT 5, 2023     17097C0134 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0142 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0161 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0162 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0163 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0164 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0166 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0168 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0252 K OCT 5, 2023
LINCOLNSHIRE     170378#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0254 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0257 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0258 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0259 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0262 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0266 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0267 K OCT 5, 2023
LINDENHURST      170379#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0035 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0041 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0042 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0044 L OCT 5, 2023
LONG GROVE       170380#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0144 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0231 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0232 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0233 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0234 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0241 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0242 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0251 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0253 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0254 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0261 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0263 K OCT 5, 2023
METTAWA          170381#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0164 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0168 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0169 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0252 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0256 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0257 K OCT 5, 2023
MUNDELEIN        170382#          FEB 17, 2016    17097C0139 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0141 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0142 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0143 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0144 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0161 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0163 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0164 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0232 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0251 K OCT 5, 2023
NORTH BARRINGTON 170383#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0207 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0208 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0209 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0217 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0226 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0228 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0236 K OCT 5, 2023
NORTH CHICAGO    170384#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0159 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0167 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0179 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0180 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0186 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0187 L OCT 5, 2023
OLD MILL CREEK   170385#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0034 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0042 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0044 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0055 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0061 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0062 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0063 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0064 K OCT 5, 2023
PARK CITY        170386#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0156 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0157 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0159 K OCT 5, 2023
PORT BARRINGTON  170478#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0114 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0118 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0205 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0206 K OCT 5, 2023
RIVERWOODS       170387#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0259 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0266 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0267 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0270 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0286 K OCT 5, 2023
ROUND LAKE BEACH 170389#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0038 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0039 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0043 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0126 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0127 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0131 M OCT 5, 2023
ROUND LAKE       170390#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0038 K OCT 5, 2023
HEIGHTS
ROUND LAKE PARK  170391#          FEB 17, 2016    17097C0127 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0129 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0133 M OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0137 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0141 L OCT 5, 2023
ROUND LAKE       170388#          FEB 17, 2016    17097C0107 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0109 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0126 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0127 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0128 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0129 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0136 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0137 L OCT 5, 2023
THIRD LAKE       170392#          OCT 5, 2023     17097C0043 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0044 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0132 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0151 L OCT 5, 2023
TOWER LAKES      170393#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0206 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0207 K OCT 5, 2023
VERNON HILLS     170394#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0163 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0164 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0251 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0252 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0253 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0254 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0256 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0258 K OCT 5, 2023
VOLO             171042#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0106 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0107 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0108 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0109 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0116 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0117 L OCT 5, 2023
WADSWORTH        170395#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0055 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0056 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0057 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0058 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0059 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0062 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0064 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0066 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0067 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0068 K OCT 5, 2023
WAUCONDA         170396#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0116 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0117 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0118 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0119 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0136 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0138 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0206 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0207 K OCT 5, 2023
WAUKEGAN         170397#          OCT 5, 2023     17097C0066 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0067 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0068 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0069 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0086 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0087 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0088 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0089 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0093 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     07970C0152 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0154 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0156 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0157 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0158 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0159 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0166 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0177 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0179 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0180 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0181 L OCT 5, 2023
WHEELING         170173#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0264 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0270 K OCT 5, 2023
WINTHROP HARBOR  170398#          OCT 5, 2023     17097C0076 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0077 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0078 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0079 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0081 L OCT 5, 2023
ZION             170399#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0057 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0059 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0076 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0077 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0078 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0079 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0081 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0083 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0086 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0087 L OCT 5, 2023
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0004 K OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0010 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0012 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0014 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0019 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0020 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0026 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0027 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0028 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0029 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0032 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0034 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0035 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0036 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0037 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0038 K OCT 5, 2023
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0039 K OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0041 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0042 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0043 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0044 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0055 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0056 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0057 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0058 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0059 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0061 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0062 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0063 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0064 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0066 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0067 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0068 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0069 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0076 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0077 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0078 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0079 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0081 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0083 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0086 L OCT 5, 2023
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          OCT 5, 2023     17097C0087 L OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0088 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0089 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0091 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0093 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0102 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0104 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0106 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0107 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0108 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0109 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0114 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0116 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0117 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0118 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0119 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0126 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0127 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0128 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0129 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0131 M OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0132 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0133 M OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0134 L OCT 5, 2023
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          FEB 17, 2016    17097C0136 L OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          FEB 17, 2016    17097C0137 L OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0138 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0139 L OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0141 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0142 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0143 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0144 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0151 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0152 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0153 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0154 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0156 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0157 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0158 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0159 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0161 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0162 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0163 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0164 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0166 K OCT 5, 2023
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0167 K OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0168 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0169 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0177 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0179 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0180 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0181 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0186 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0187 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0188 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0189 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0205 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0206 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0207 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0208 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0209 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0215 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0216 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0217 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0226 K OCT 5, 2023
                                FEB 17, 2016    17097C0227 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0228 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0229 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0231 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0232 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0233 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0234 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0236 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0237 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0241 K OCT 5, 2023
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0242 K OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0251 K OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0252 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0253 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0254 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0256 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0257 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0258 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0259 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0261 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0262 K OCT 5, 2023
LAKE COUNTY
UNINCORPORATED   170357#          SEP 18, 2013    17097C0263 K OCT 5, 2023
AREAS
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0266 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0267 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0270 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0277 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0278 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0281 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0283 L OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0286 K OCT 5, 2023
                                SEP 18, 2013    17097C0288 K OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0291 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0292 L OCT 5, 2023
                                OCT 5, 2023     17097C0294 L OCT 5, 2023
 
(Ord., Appendix M, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 15-1028, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 23-
1056, passed 8-8-2023)
APPENDIX N: HIGH-QUALITY AQUATIC RESOURCES
The following are descriptions of high-quality aquatic resources:
   1.   Advanced Identification (ADID) sites: Aquatic sites that have been
determined to provide biological values by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Chicago District and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 1992, Advanced Identification (ADID) Study, Lake County,
Illinois, Chicago, Illinois) or latest ADID study.
   2.   Bog: A low nutrient peatland, usually in a glacial depression, that is
acidic in the surface stratum and often dominated at least in part by the genus
Sphagnum.
   3.   Ephemeral pool: A seasonally inundated depression within a forested
wetland or upland community, usually located on a moraine, glacial outwash
plain, or in an area shallow to bedrock; also known locally as a “vernal pool.”
These areas may not be permanently vegetated.
   4.   Fen: A peatland, herbaceous (including calcareous floating mats) or
wooded, with calcareous groundwater flow.
   5.   High-quality forested wetland: A forested wetland dominated by native
woody vegetation by at least one of the following species or genera: Carya
spp., Cephalanthus occidentalis, Cornus alternifolia, Fraxinus nigra, Juglans
cinerea, and Quercus spp.
   6.   Sedge meadow: A wetland dominated by at least one of the following
genera: Carex (except Carex blanda, Carex grisea, and Carex vulpinodea),
Calamagrostis, Cladium, Deschampsia, Rhynchospora, Scleria, or Eriophorum.
   7.   Seep: A wetland, herbaceous or wooded, with saturated soil or
inundation resulting from the diffuse flow of groundwater to the surface
stratum.
   8.   Streams shown on the most recent USGS quadrangle map as a perennial
(solid blue line) or intermittent (dashed blue line) that are not determined to
be a Waters of the U.S. If a site specific Index of Biological Integrity (IBI)
assessment is lower than 35, this stream reach shall not be considered a HQAR.
   9.   Streamside marsh: An isolated waters of Lake County wetland that is
within a ten-year riverine floodplain and dominated by herbaceous species.
   10.   Wet prairie: A wetland dominated by native graminoid species with a
diverse indigenous forb component that is seasonally saturated and/or
temporarily inundated.
   11.   Wetlands supporting federal or Illinois endangered or threatened
species: For current state-listed species, reference Illinois Endangered
Species Protection Board’s Checklist of Endangered and Threatened Animals and
Plants of Illinois and/or contact the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
For federally listed species, reference the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s
Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants list (latest edition) and/or
contact the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
   12.   Wetlands with a native mean coefficient of conservatism value (native
mean C value) of greater than or equal to 3.5 or a native floristic quality
index value (FQI) of greater than or equal to 20 as determined using the
Chicago Region Floristic Quality Assessment Calculator (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Chicago District, most recent version).
   13.   Wetlands that are within a designated Illinois Natural Areas Inventory
Site (INAI).
(Ord., Appendix N, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 22-1060,
passed 8-9-2022)
APPENDIX O: TYPICAL CROSS-SECTIONS FOR LOCAL STREETS
Figure 1: Typical Section: (60-foot right-of-way)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3142.jpg]
Figure 2: Typical Section: (66-foot right-of-way)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3144.jpg]
Figure 3: Alternate Typical Section: (40-foot right-of-way)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3146.jpg]
(Ord., Appendix O, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX P: SCHOOL CONTRIBUTION DOCUMENTS
• “Estimated Ultimate School Population” Table
• “School Classification” Table
• Agreements Regarding the Receipt of Developer Subdivision Contributions and
Indemnification
• Agreement Between Developer and County to Delay Payment of Cash Contributions
• Agreements Regarding the Receipt of Developer Subdivision Contributions and
Indemnification in the Event of a Private Agreement for School Contributions
• Developer’s County Liability Waiver Agreement
• Legal Description of Property
• “Objection” Form
   ESTIMATED ULTIMATE SCHOOL POPULATION
Appendix P
          Estimated Ultimate School Population per Dwelling Unit
          Pre-      Elem/k- Jr. High Total      High                  Total Per
Unit Type School 4- 5 5-10  Gr. 6-   Gr. k-8 5- School Gr. Adults 18+ Dwelling
          5 Years   Years   8 11-13  13 Yrs     9-12 14-17 Yrs        Unit
                            Yrs                 Yrs
Appendix P
           Estimated Ultimate School Population per Dwelling Unit
           Pre-      Elem/k- Jr. High Total  High                  Total Per
Unit Type  School 4- 5 5-10  Gr. 6-   Gr. k- School Gr. Adults 18+ Dwelling
           5 Years   Years   8 11-13  8 5-13 9-12 14-17 Yrs        Unit
                             Yrs      Yrs    Yrs
   Detached House
2 Bedroom  0.113     0.136   0.048    0.148  0.020      1.700      2.017
3 Bedroom  0.292     0.369   0.173    0.542  0.184      1.881      2.899
4 Bedroom  0.416     0.530   0.298    0.828  0.360      2.158      3.764
5 Bedroom  0.283     0.345   0.248    0.593  0.300      2.594      3.770
   Attached House
1 Bedroom  0.000     0.000   0.000    0.000  0.000      1.193      1.193
2 Bedroom  0.064     0.088   0.048    0.136  0.038      1.752      1.990
3 Bedroom  0.212     0.234   0.058    0.292  0.059      1.829      2.392
4 Bedroom  0.323     0.322   0.154    0.476  0.173      2.173      3.145
   Multi-Dwelling Structure
Efficiency 0.000     0.000   0.000    0.000  0.000      1.294      1.294
1 Bedroom  0.000     0.002   0.001    0.003  0.001      1.754      1.758
2 Bedroom  0.047     0.086   0.042    0.128  0.046      1.693      1.914
3 Bedroom  0.052     0.234   0.123    0.357  0.118      2.526      3.053
 
   SCHOOL CLASSIFICATION
 
School Classification by School Number of Students Site Area (Acres)
Elementary School (grades k-5)  600                11
Junior High (grades 6-8)        900                29
High School (grades 9-12)       1,500              45
 
AGREEMENTS REGARDING THE RECEIPT OF DEVELOPER SUBDIVISION CONTRIBUTIONS AND
INDEMNIFICATION
WHEREAS, Lake County, Illinois, on behalf of itself, its officers, employees
and independent contractors (the “County”), through §
151.220 of its Unified Development Ordinance has required that developers make
contributions to government bodies affected by the subdivision improvements;
and
WHEREAS, such contributions may be in land or in money and, when transferred or
paid over to those government bodies, inure in part to the benefit of those
government bodies and not entirely to the direct benefit of the County; and
WHEREAS, from time to time within the County, and within other municipalities,
disputes have arisen regarding the validity and amount of such contributions;
and
WHEREAS, the County is willing, at its discretion, to continue seeking the
contribution of land or money but wishes to procure a commitment from other
government bodies benefitted by the receipt of such contributions that those
government bodies will: (a) acknowledge that the requirement that such
subdivision contributions be made are totally within the discretion of the
County as to their existence, manner and amount; (b) pay the cost of defending
any lawsuit that is filed challenging the appropriate amount of the
contributions, the time at which they are to be made or any other aspect of the
contributions; and (c) comply with the terms of a final and non-appealable
judicial determination by a court of competent jurisdiction rendered in
connection with the lawsuit; and
WHEREAS, the County is willing, in its discretion, to pay over or require
contributions only to other government bodies that execute this Agreement
annually.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration for the payment of money or the transfer of
land to the                                                (“Benefitting
Government”), which the County, from time to time, may within its discretion
cause to be made by developers that are subdividing property, it is agreed
between the County, on behalf of itself and its officers, employees and
independent contractors, and the Benefitting Government as follows:
   1.   The Benefitting Government acknowledges that, except as otherwise
provided in§
151.220 of the Lake County Unified Development Ordinance, the County is not
obligated to cause the payment of money or the transfer of land to the
Benefitting Government. The Benefitting Government recognizes that the County
may, at its sole discretion, amend its ordinances or its practices to
discontinue the payment of subdivision contributions to the Benefitting
Government.
   2.   Legal Representation and Costs:
      A.   In the event a lawsuit is filed against the County and/or the
Benefitting Government by a developer that is subdividing property or any other
person, corporation or entity that challenges the appropriateness, amount,
timing or any other aspect of a subdivision contribution that, pursuant to the
terms of §
151.220 of the Lake County Unified Development Ordinance has been paid or is
due to the Benefitting Government, then the Benefitting Government does agree
to pay the costs and litigation expenses (including reasonable attorneys’ fees)
incurred by the County in defending such lawsuit. The costs and expenses shall
be paid by the Benefitting Government when and as incurred by the County but in
no event more than once a month. As a condition precedent to the payment of
these costs and expenses, the County shall submit to the Benefitting Government
copies of the original statements reflecting the costs and expenses, together
with the non-privileged supporting documentation that may be reasonably
requested by the Benefitting Government.
The County covenants and agrees that it shall employ competent and skilled
legal counsel to represent the Benefitting Government and the County, and
further covenants and agrees that it shall keep the Benefitting Government
fully advised as to the progress and status of the litigation. In particular,
the County shall provide to the Benefitting Government copies of all pleadings
filed in the litigation and shall consult regularly (and shall cause its
attorneys to consult regularly) with the Benefitting Government or its
attorneys, as applicable, as to the strategy for defending the lawsuit. In no
event may such litigation be compromised or settled by the County without at
least 30 days’ prior written notice to the Benefitting Government.
      B.   In the event the Benefitting Government decides that it would prefer
to be represented in the litigation by legal counsel of its own choosing, then
the Benefitting Government shall be free to retain its own legal counsel for
that purpose, to intervene in the litigation and to ask the County to terminate
its representation of the Benefitting Government under Section 2 of this
Agreement. The Benefitting Government shall notify the County in writing to
that effect. In that event, this Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect regarding all other provisions of this Agreement, and the Benefitting
Government shall remain liable to the County for all sums that have accrued
under this Agreement up until the date that such written notice is received and
for all sums that remain due and owing from the Benefitting Government to the
County relating to the defense of any lawsuit under the terms of this
Agreement. Further, the County shall be permitted to continue to defend itself
in such lawsuit and notwithstanding the Benefitting Government’s withdrawal
from such representation, the Benefitting Government shall still indemnify the
County for the County’s costs incurred in such defense.
   3.   The Benefitting Government shall further indemnify and hold harmless
the County from any and all liability arising from §
151.220 of the Unified Development Ordinance of Lake, including but not limited
to the general administration and handling of funds required by the County and/
or the Benefitting Government.
   4.   In the event a final and non-appealable judicial determination is made
by a court of competent jurisdiction that contributions of land or money
received by the Benefitting Government are, in whole or in part, excessive, the
Benefitting Government shall promptly repay those contributions to the person
who procures such a judgment, together with all other amounts judged by the
court to be owing from the Benefitting Government. In the event a judicial
determination should require the payment of damages or payment of the
attorneys’ fees of the plaintiff’s attorneys, the Benefitting Government shall
pay all additional amounts.
   5.   In further consideration of the continued authorization by the County
enabling the Benefitting Government to collect the subject contributions of
land or money, the Benefitting Government agrees that its obligations under
this Agreement shall extend to both past and future cash and land
contributions.
   6.   On or before June 1 of each year, the Benefitting Government shall
submit a report to the County describing the manner in which the payments have
been used and provide any additional information the County may require. When
that money turned over to the Benefitting Government is to be used for a
specific purpose or within a specific time period, the report shall address
those issues. If the Benefitting Government should fail to file such a report
with the County, the County may require that any further payments made pursuant
to §
151.220 of the Unified Development Ordinance of Lake County shall be made to
the County and shall delay the payment and distribution of any additional funds
due the Benefitting Government until such time as a full report containing
adequate information is transmitted to the County. The Benefitting Government
understands that it will be asked to execute an indemnity agreement similar to
this agreement on an annual basis and that the County shall not pay or cause to
be paid any additional funds due to the Benefitting Government until such time
as the County is in receipt of such annually executed indemnity agreement.
   7.   This Agreement shall be terminable by either party for any reason or no
reason at all upon 30 days’ prior written notice to the other party evidencing
the intention to so terminate this Agreement. But the termination of this
Agreement shall not affect the continuing obligation of the Benefitting
Government or the County with regard to claims or damages allegedly arising out
of the County’s efforts prior to termination to impose, collect or distribute
contributions, or to the actual distribution of subdivision contributions.
DATED this               day of                         , 20    .
Lake County                           The Benefitting Government
                                                                                                                     
Lake County Board Chairman                     Title:
                                           
(SEAL)                                  (SEAL)
ATTEST:                              ATTEST:
                                                                                                                     
Lake County Clerk                              Secretary
AGREEMENT BETWEEN DEVELOPER AND COUNTY TO DELAY PAYMENT OF CASH CONTRIBUTIONS
This agreement (“Agreement”) is entered into between Lake County (the “County”)
and                             , (“Developer”).
WHEREAS, the County has approved a final plat of subdivision or a final plat of
a planned development at the request of Developer for the real estate legally
described in Appendix       .1 attached hereto and made a part hereof (the
“Land”). Accordingly, pursuant to §
151.220 of the Unified Development Ordinance of Lake County (“Ordinance”),
certain cash contributions for school lands are immediately due the County (or
affected school districts )from the Developer; and
WHEREAS, Developer has, however, requested that the payment of the aforesaid
cash contributions be delayed and that the same become due and payable on a per
dwelling unit basis at the time the County issues a building permit for the
particular dwelling unit.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration for the County agreeing to delay the
collection of the cash contributions, Developer hereby agrees as follows:
   1.   The amount of cash contributions owed shall be calculated based upon
the Ordinance, or as provided for in such other future ordinance amending or
replacing the Ordinance, which is in effect at the time of the issuance of a
building permit; and
   2.   Notwithstanding any present or future law, regulation and/or legal
precedent to the contrary, the unit of local government that is the ultimate
recipient of the subject cash contributions may expend such contributions for
any of the following purposes intended to serve immediate or future needs of
the residents and children of the Developer’s subdivision or planned
development: (a) for the acquisition of land; (b) for site improvements such
as, by way of example, streets, curbs, gutters, stormwater control, and utility
extensions; (c) for construction of capital facilities, including, by way of
example, new buildings and structures, and the expansion or enhancement of
existing buildings and structures; and (d) for so-called soft costs directly
related to the foregoing items (b) or (c) such as architectural and engineering
costs.
   3.   Developer has reviewed the Ordinance regarding the dedication of school
sites or cash contributions in lieu thereof, as well as all of the methodology,
formulae, calculations, projections, assumptions, numbers and other factors
used to arrive at the land dedication requirements or cash contributions in
lieu thereof that are the subject of this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as
the “Ordinance and Attendant Calculations”) and hereby acknowledges and agrees
that:
      (a)   Pursuant to the terms of the Ordinance, Developer has been offered
the opportunity to raise in a hearing before the County, any objections
relating to acreage requirements, presumptions as to fair market value, the
Density Formula, or any other application of the Ordinance; Developer has not
raised such objections; Developer has thereby waived the right to assert those
objections;
      (b)   Developer hereby waives any future right to object to or to
institute any legal action regarding the Ordinance and Attendant Calculations;
and
      (c)   Developer hereby acknowledges that the Ordinance and Attendant
Calculations have been properly passed, calculated, and imposed.
   4.   This Agreement constitutes a covenant that is appurtenant to and runs
with the land. Either this Agreement or a memorandum thereof may be recorded
against legal title to the land by either party hereto; provided, however, it
shall be a condition of the County’s issuance of the first building permit for
a dwelling unit on the land that Developer shall provide satisfactory evidence
to the County that this Agreement or a memorandum thereof has been recorded
against legal title to the land.
   5.   Developer represents and warrants to the County that it is the sole
holder of record fee title to the Land.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the County and the Developer have caused this Agreement to
be duly authorized, executed and entered into as of the
                         day of                                 , 20     .
                                                                                                               
Lake County Board Chairman                Developer
                                                   
Lake County Clerk
AGREEMENTS REGARDING THE RECEIPT OF DEVELOPER SUBDIVISION CONTRIBUTIONS AND
INDEMNIFICATION, IN THE EVENT OF A PRIVATE AGREEMENT
   WHEREAS, Lake County, Illinois, on behalf of itself, its officers, employees
and independent contractors (the “County”), through §
151.220 of its Unified Development Ordinance has required that developers make
contributions to government bodies affected by the subdivision improvements;
and
   WHEREAS, those government bodies may instead elect to execute a private
agreement with developers regarding the contribution of land or money; and
   WHEREAS, from time to time within the County, and within other
municipalities, disputes have arisen regarding the validity and amount of such
contributions; and
   WHEREAS, the County is willing to permit private agreements between
government bodies and developers for the contribution of school land or money
but wishes to procure a commitment from such other governmental bodies
benefitted by the receipt of such contributions that those government bodies
will: (a) acknowledge that the requirement by the County of proof of payment
for such contributions to such governmental bodies is totally within the
discretion of the County; (b) acknowledge that the requirement by the County of
proof of payment for such contributions to such governmental bodies does not
render the County a party to such private agreements and does not render the
County responsible or liable for the terms of such private agreements for any
reason, including but not limited to the extent that such private agreements
provide for contributions beyond what is authorized by the contribution
requirements of §
151.220 of the Lake County Unified Development Ordinance; (c) pay the cost of
defending any lawsuit that is filed against the County challenging the
appropriate amount of the contributions, the time at which they are to be made,
the withholding of County building permits in the absence of proof of payment
for such contributions, or any other aspect of the contributions; and (d)
comply with the terms of a final and non-appealable judicial determination by a
court of competent jurisdiction rendered in connection with the lawsuit; and
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration for the payment of money or the transfer of
land to the                                                    (“Benefitting
Government”), which the County has authorized to be effectuated via private
agreement in accordance with the Lake County Unified Development Ordinance, it
is agreed between the County, on behalf of itself and its officers, employees
and independent contractors, and the Benefitting Government as follows:
   1.   Legal Representation and Costs:
      A.   In the event a lawsuit is filed against the County and/or the
Benefitting Government by a developer that is subdividing property or any other
person, corporation, or entity that challenges the appropriateness, amount,
timing, the withholding of County building permits in the absence of proof of
payment of private school contributions by the developer, or any other aspect
of a subdivision contribution that, pursuant to a private agreement between the
Benefitting Government and the developer, has been paid or is due to the
Benefitting Government, then the Benefitting Government does agree to pay the
costs and litigation expenses (including reasonable attorneys’ fees) incurred
by the County in defending such lawsuit. The costs and expenses shall be paid
by the Benefitting Government when and as incurred by the County but in no
event more than once a month. As a condition precedent to the payment of these
costs and expenses, the County shall submit to the Benefitting Government
copies of the original statements reflecting the costs and expenses, together
with the non-privileged supporting documentation that may be reasonably
requested by the Benefitting Government.
      B.   The County covenants and agrees that it shall employ competent and
skilled legal counsel to represent the Benefitting Government and the County,
and further covenants and agrees that it shall keep the Benefitting Government
fully advised as to the progress and status of the litigation. In particular,
the County shall provide to the Benefitting Government copies of all pleadings
filed in the litigation and shall consult regularly (and shall cause its
attorneys to consult regularly) with the Benefitting Government or its
attorneys, as applicable, as to the strategy for defending the lawsuit. In no
event may such litigation be compromised or settled by the County without at
least 30 days’ prior written notice to the Benefitting Government.
      C.   In the event the Benefitting Government decides that it would prefer
to be represented in the litigation by legal counsel of its own choosing, then
the Benefitting Government shall be free to retain its own legal counsel for
that purpose, to intervene in the litigation and to ask the County to terminate
its representation of the Benefitting Government under Section 2 of this
Agreement. The Benefitting Government shall notify the County in writing to
that effect. In that event, this Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect regarding all other provisions of this Agreement, and the Benefitting
Government shall remain liable to the County for all sums that have accrued
under this Agreement up until the date that such written notice is received and
for all sums that remain due and owing from the Benefitting Government to the
County relating to the defense of any lawsuit under the terms of this
Agreement. Further, the County shall be permitted to continue to defend itself
in such lawsuit and notwithstanding the Benefitting Government’s withdrawal
from such representation, the Benefitting Government shall still indemnify the
County for the County’s costs incurred in such defense.
   2.   The Benefitting Government shall indemnify and hold harmless the County
from any and all liability arising from the County’s withholding of building
permits in the absence of proof of payment by the developer of contributions
pursuant to the terms of a private agreement reached between the Benefitting
Government and the developer.
   3.   In the event a judicial determination should require the payment of
damages or payment of the attorneys’ fees of the plaintiff’s attorneys, the
Benefitting Government shall pay all additional amounts.
   4.   In further consideration of the continued authorization by the County
enabling the Benefitting Government to collect the subject contributions of
land or money, the Benefitting Government agrees that its obligations under
this Agreement shall extend to both past and future cash and land
contributions.
   5.   The Benefitting Government understands that it will be asked to execute
an indemnity agreement similar to this agreement on an annual basis, on or
before June 1 of each subsequent year and that the County shall not exercise
any rights it might have to withhold the issuance of building permits in the
absence of proof of payment or to require proof of payment of contributions by
a developer to the Benefitting Government.
   6.    This Agreement shall be terminable by either party for any reason or
no reason at all upon 30 days’ prior written notice to the other party
evidencing the intention to so terminate this Agreement. But the termination of
this Agreement shall not affect the continuing obligation of the Benefitting
Government or the County with regard to claims or damages allegedly arising out
of the County’s efforts prior to termination to impose, collect or distribute
contributions pursuant to private agreement, or to the actual distribution of
subdivision contributions pursuant to private agreement.
   DATED this                   day of                   , 20     .
Lake County                         The Benefitting Government
                                                                                                                  
Lake County Board Chair
                                                                     
                                 Title:
                                          
(SEAL)                               (SEAL)
ATTEST:                            ATTEST:
                                                                                                                  
Lake County Clerk                         Secretary
DEVELOPER’S COUNTY LIABILITY WAIVER AGREEMENT
This agreement (“Agreement”) is entered into between Lake County (the “County”)
and                                                    , (“Developer”).
   WHEREAS, the County has approved a final plat of subdivision or a final plat
of a planned development at the request of Developer for the real estate
legally described in Appendix     .1 attached hereto and made a part hereof
(the “Land”); and
   WHEREAS, Developer, with [school district] on [date], has agreed to execute
a private agreement for school contributions in lieu of an agreement pursuant
to the requirements of the Lake County Unified Development Ordinance; and
   WHEREAS, pursuant to the terms of said private agreement between the
Developer and affected school districts, certain cash contributions for school
lands are due the affected school district from the Developer at either the
time of final plat approval or at the time of building permit issuance.
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration for the County agreeing to permit a
Developer to enter into a private agreement with affected school districts,
Developer hereby agrees as follows:
   1.   Developer hereby acknowledges and agrees that:
      (a)   The County is not a party to said private agreement and is not
responsible or liable for the terms of said private agreement for any reason,
including but not limited to the extent that said private agreement provides
for contributions beyond what is authorized by the contribution requirements of
§
151.220 of the Lake County Unified Development Ordinance.
      (b)   Developer hereby waives any future right to object to or institute
any legal action against the County regarding the County’s requirement, as a
condition to issuance of a building permit or approval of the Final Plat, that
the Developer provide the County with proof of payment of contributions to the
affected school district in accordance with said private agreement.
   2.   This Agreement constitutes a covenant that is appurtenant to and runs
with the land. Either this Agreement or a memorandum thereof may be recorded
against legal title to the land by either party hereto; provided, however, it
shall be a condition of the County’s issuance of the first building permit for
a dwelling unit on the land that Developer shall provide satisfactory evidence
to the County that this Agreement or a memorandum thereof has been recorded
against legal title to the land.
   3.   Developer represents and warrants to the County that it is the sole
holder of record fee title to the land.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the County and the Developer have caused this Agreement
to be duly authorized, executed and entered into as of the                  day
of                                , 20       .
                                                                                                               
Lake County Board Chair                Developer
                                                   
Lake County Clerk
   Legal Description of Property
   OBJECTION FORM:
   OBJECTION TO THE LAKE COUNTY SCHOOL CONTRIBUTION CALCULATION
This form shall be completed by the developer or the affected school district
(s) and submitted to the Lake County Department of Planning, Building and
Development when filing an objection to Lake County’s School Contribution
Calculation. Failure to submit this objection form within the specified time
period shall operate as a concurrence with the School Contribution
Calculations.
Site PIN     -      -      
Development/Subdivision Name:
                                                                                                          
Developer Name:
                                                                                                                                
Name of Primary Contact Person:
                                                    Phone Number:
                              
Email:
                                                                                                                                               
Mailing Address:
                                                                                                                                
Lake County School Contribution Calculations for this development include
(circle one):
Land Contribution Cash Contribution Both Land and Cash Contribution
Detailed Description of Objection (please attach additional pages and/or
documents as necessary)
 
                                                                                                            
Applicant Signature               Date
(Ord., Appendix P, passed 10-13-2009)
APPENDIX Q: WIND ENERGY FACILITIES
§ 1.0 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR WIND ENERGY FACILITIES.
   See §§
151.112(DDD) and
151.113(P) Wind Energy Facilities for information on Height and Setbacks and
Operating Requirements. See §§
151.250 through
151.262 for Violations, Penalties and Enforcement. See below for Additional
Standards for Wind Energy Facilities. Other local and state regulations shall
apply.
   A.   Project proposal.
      1)   Owner name, address and phone number.
      2)   Photos of existing conditions for proposed facility.
      3)   Project summary including the manufacturer information, number of
proposed turbines, and proposed height to the top of the turbine, including
tower height and length of the blades.
   B.   Site plan (drawn to scale).
      For tower-mounted wind energy facilities:
      1)   Existing and proposed contours, at a minimum of two foot intervals.
      2)   Location, setbacks, exterior dimensions and square footage of all
structures on the owner’s property and abutting properties within 100 feet.
      3)   Location and size of existing waterways, wetlands, one hundred-year
floodplains, sanitary sewers, field drain tiles, storm sewer systems, and water
distribution systems.
      For both tower and building-mounted facilities:
      4)   Location of any overhead or underground power lines and utility
easements.
      5)   The locations and the expected duration of shadow flicker caused by
the facility.
   C.   Waivers.
      1)   Any waiver for setbacks, sound level limitations or shadow flicker
signed by nonparticipating property owners shall be recorded against the
impacted property with the Recording Division of the Lake County Clerk's
Office.
      2)   All waivers shall be submitted with the application for the wind
energy facility.
   D.   Engineering plans, drawings, and schematics.
      1)   Manufacturer’s engineering specifications of the tower, turbine and
foundation, detailed drawing of electrical components and installation details,
and expected sound level production (see Sound Level standards below).
      2)   For turbines greater than 20 kW of nameplate capacity, an Illinois
licensed structural engineer’s seal shall be required.
      3)   All facilities shall be designed to withstand a minimum wind
velocity of100 miles per hour.
      4)   Each facility shall conform to applicable industry standards,
including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Applicants
shall submit certificates of design compliance that equipment (inverter)
manufacturers have obtained from Underwriters Laboratories (UL), National
Renewable Energy Laboratories (NREL), Det Norske Veritas (DNV), Germanischer
Lloyd Wind Energie (GL), or an equivalent third party.
      5)   All electrical wires and lines connecting each facility shall be
installed underground.
      6)   To reduce potential bird perching and nesting, towers shall be a
monopole rather than a lattice structure. External platforms/landings and
ladders shall not be permitted on towers, unless mitigation strategies to avoid
bird roosting or nesting are employed.
   E.   Soil studies. Tower-mounted facilities greater than 75 feet total
height OR greater than 5,000 lbs. structural weight shall require a stamped
drawing by an Illinois licensed Structural Engineer and may require, as
determined by relevant building officials, a soil analysis at the base of the
tower, demonstrating that the soils are able to support the structural weight
of the facility. Structural weight shall include the tower, wind turbine
generator, and any other component(s) otherwise supported by the base
foundation. An Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement with the Illinois
Department of Agriculture may be required by the county for a commercial wind
energy facility as a part of the conditional use permit application.
 
COMMENTARY REGARDING WIND AND WILDLIFE IMPACTS:
Lake County will consult with the Illinois Department of Natural Resources and
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service on proposals for tower-mounted wind facilities
over 75 feet in height, in accordance with applicable statutes. Applicants for
wind energy are encouraged to work with the Lake County Soil and Water
Conservation District, the Illinois Department of Natural Resources and U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service to initiate natural resource reviews in order to
identify potential environmental issues before submitting the application. The
Illinois Department of Natural Resources and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service may
request a wildlife study evaluating the potential impact of the proposed
construction and operation of a wind energy facility on any species of concern
or high quality wildlife habitat on or near the subject property. For turbines
proposed with a height of over 75 feet, within 1.5 miles of Lake County Forest
Preserve District, Illinois State Park, Illinois Nature Preserve, or Illinois
Natural Area Inventory lands, Lake County will provide notice to and solicit
comments from those appropriate agency(ies).
 
   F.   Wildlife impacts. Lake County may require the applicant to develop and
implement an environmental plan that adequately mitigates or eliminates any
potentially adverse impacts, identified through consultations, comments from
noticed parties, and environmental studies. The applicant, at its expense,
shall have a third party, qualified professional (after submission of resume
and relevant work experience) conduct an avian and wildlife impact study and
submit said study to the county as part of the conditional use permit
application or building permit application if no conditional use permit is
required. Each WECS or WECS project shall be located, designed, constructed,
and operated so as to avoid and if necessary mitigate the impacts to wildlife.
   G.   Installation. Facilities must be installed according to manufacturer
specifications and permitting requirements. Electrical connections must be made
by a licensed electrician.
   H.   Climb prevention. The base of any facility tower shall not be climbable
for a vertical distance of 15 feet from the base, unless enclosed with an 8-
foot tall locked fence.
   I.   Braking systems. All WECSs shall be equipped with a redundant braking
system. This includes both aerodynamic overspeed controls (including variable
pitch, tip, tilt, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical
brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall not be
considered a sufficient braking system for overspeed protection. The owner
shall immediately cease operations as deemed necessary by Lake County.
   J.   Signage.
      1)   Facilities shall have no advertising material, writing, picture, or
signage other than warning, turbine tower identification, or manufacturer or
ownership information.
      2)   This prohibition shall include the attachment of any flag,
streamers, ribbons, spinners or waving, fluttering or revolving devices, but
not including meteorological/weather devices or bird flight diverters on guy
wires.
      3)   Tower-mounted facilities shall have one warning sign that shall
include a notice of no trespassing, a warning of high voltage, and the phone
number of the owner to call in case of emergency.
   K.   Lighting.
      1)   The facility shall not be artificially lighted, except as required
by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or necessary for workers involved
in maintenance or repairs. Any required lighting shall be shielded so that no
glare extends beyond the property line of the facility.
      2)   Security lighting and any emergency lighting should be kept to the
minimum required.
      3)   To reduce potential wildlife impacts, the facility should employ
only red, or dual red and white strobe, strobe-like, or flashing lights, not
steady burning lights to meet FAA requirements for visibility lighting of wind
turbines, permanent meteorological towers, and communication towers.
   L.   Historic districts and landmarks. Wind facilities within 500 feet of
the local historic district or landmark or a National Historic District or
Landmark must receive a recommendation from the Historical and Architectural
Sites Commission prior to submitting an application to the Plan Commission and
County Board.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-
2024)
APPENDIX R: RUNOFF VOLUME REDUCTION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3148.jpg]
(Ord. passed 10-9-2012)
APPENDIX S: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS
AND GUIDELINES FOR ISOLATED WATERS OF LAKE COUNTY IMPACTS
INTRODUCTION
   This Appendix contains the minimum requirements and guidelines for
preparation of a Project Mitigation Document (PMD) related to the creation or
enhancement of wetlands on a development site, or on an offsite property, to
meet the mitigation provisions in§
151.146(M)(4). These provisions do not apply for Category IV impacts to
Isolated Waters of Lake County. The PMD shall provide at a minimum, information
needed by Lake County Planning Building & Development (PB&D) to evaluate the
appropriateness and enforceability of a proposed mitigation plan. Additional
requirements may apply for impacts to Waters of the United States, as
determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. For the purposes of this
Appendix, the term mitigation site refers to the ownership parcel where the
mitigation is to occur. Mitigation area refers to the location within the
mitigation site where the actual mitigation will occur.
   Each PMD shall include specific information in a standard format as outlined
in Table 1 and described in Sections A-K below.
Table 1 - Standard Format for PMD
Section Topic
A       Mitigation Goals
B       Mitigation Site Information
C       Mitigation Design
D       Deed or Plat Restriction
E       Construction Schedule
F       Financial Assurance
G       As-Built Plans
H       Performance Standards
I       Monitoring and Management
J       Reports
K       Compliance and Completion
 
A.   MITIGATION GOALS
      1.   Discuss how the wetland mitigation shall duplicate or improve the
hydrologic and biologic features of the impacted wetlands. Describe the
specific functions of the wetlands to be created or enhanced versus the
functions of the wetlands to be impacted.
      2.   Describe the acreage and vegetative community type of wetlands and
wetland buffers to be created or enhanced to meet the minimum mitigation ratios
required in §
151.146(M)(4)(b). Mitigation acreage shall be credited on the following basis:
         a.   100% for each acre of wetland created or restored. For the
purposes of this Appendix, wetland creation includes restoration of historic
wetlands which have been filled, drained, or otherwise manipulated to the
extent the areas no longer exhibit wetland characteristics. Open water creation
shall be credited at 100% for in-kind mitigation (e.g., one acre of open water
created for one acre of open water impacted). No mitigation credit shall be
given for open water creation to compensate for non-open water impacts.
         b.   25% for each acre of non-farmed wetland enhanced after a minimum
ratio of 1:1 for wetland creation to wetland impact is achieved.
         c.   Enhancement of farmed wetlands meeting the size criterion in§
151.146(M)(5)(a) may be used for up to 80% of the total mitigation requirement
(e.g., if 2.0 acres of mitigation are required, up to 1.6 acres may be credited
for farmed wetland enhancement, as long as the size criterion above is met).
         d.   Enhanced upland areas or enhanced wetland edges used to meet the
buffer requirements in §
151.146(H)(5) shall be credited at 25% for each acre enhanced. Created or
restored wetland edges used to meet the buffer requirements of this Ordinance
shall be credited at 75% for each acre created or restored. All high-quality
aquatic resources existing on the mitigation site shall, at a minimum, meet the
buffer requirements for high-quality aquatic resources; all other existing
enhanced, created or restored wetland areas shall, at a minimum, meet the non-
high-quality aquatic resource buffer requirements of this Ordinance.
B.   MITIGATION SITE INFORMATION
      1.   Site Location. Identify the mitigation site on a general location
map (USGS quadrangle map preferred), plat of survey, and major watershed map
(e.g., Fox River Watershed).
      2.   Physical Description. Describe the physical characteristics of the
mitigation area. Provide information to support the mitigation site selection,
including, but not limited to: wetland determination report meeting the
requirements in §
151.146(M)(3), NRCS certified wetland determination (for agricultural land),
topographic map with a minimum of 2-foot contour lines, recent and historic
aerial photographs, current site photographs, drain tile information, USGS
hydrologic atlas, FEMA flood insurance rate map and base flood elevations as
required by this Ordinance, and NRCS soil survey map and soil unit
descriptions.
      3.   Land Use. Describe the past and current land use(s) of the
mitigation site parcel. Submit a plan at a minimum scale of 1 in.=100 ft.
showing the existing land use(s) and pertinent features, such as buildings,
roads, utility lines, drain tiles, culverts, landscaping, lot lines, etc.
Include on the plan or provide a narrative of any adjacent land uses that could
conflict with the mitigation proposal and any zoning restrictions. Discuss
potential adverse impacts to the mitigation site, including stormwater runoff
from adjacent properties or nearby development in the watershed. Include a copy
of the current zoning map and comprehensive land plan showing proposed land use
(s), roads and trail systems.
      4.   Ownership. Identify the current owner(s) of the mitigation site
property. If the owner is different from the permittee, provide PB&D with a
copy of an executed agreement between the owner(s) and permittee that grants
permission by the owner(s) for the permittee to use the property for mitigation
and specifies the responsibilities of each party for establishment of the
mitigation site. Once mitigation is in place, the permittee shall notify PB&D
of any change in ownership. The new owner(s) shall provide written assurance to
the issuer of the SDP of the transfer of the permit and intent to comply with
the terms and conditions of the permit, specifically the mitigation plan.
      5.   Significant Biological Resources. The permittee shall consult with
the Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) and the U.S. Fish &
Wildlife Service (USFWS) regarding the possible presence of threatened or
endangered species or critical habitat on the mitigation site. PB&D shall not
approve the mitigation area until documentation is provided confirming the
proposed mitigation area is in compliance with the IDNR’s Endangered Species
Consultation Program and the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act [520 ILCS
10/11 and 525 ILCS 30/17] and the USFWS’ consultation program under the federal
Endangered Species Act.
C.   MITIGATION DESIGN
      1.   Topography. If grading is proposed, submit a grading plan at a
minimum scale of 1 in.=100 ft. showing existing and proposed grades with a
minimum of 1-foot contour lines. Identify elevation and location of reference
benchmarks. Include cross-sections for the mitigation wetlands with normal
water level (NWL) and high water level (HWL) depicted, if applicable.
      2.   Hydrology.
      Identify the source(s) of water for the mitigation wetlands, both surface
and subsurface. Describe any water control structures to be used and identify
these structures on the grading plan, with invert elevations. Control
structures with adjustable inverts are recommended to facilitate management of
desired water levels in the mitigation wetlands. Describe the expected
hydrologic regime of the mitigation wetlands.
      Provide hydrologic modeling results in both summary table and hydrograph
form for the 2-year and 100-year, 24 hour storm events, at a minimum, to
support the expected hydrologic regime of the mitigation wetlands. Verify that
the mitigation design will not adversely impact the hydrology of existing on-
site or nearby wetlands.
      Discuss factors influencing the quality of stormwater runoff from on-site
and off-site sources (e.g., roads, lawns, parking lots, etc.) and incorporate
best management practices (BMPs) into the design to treat runoff before it
discharges into the wetlands. Identify the BMPs on the grading plan.
      Stormwater detention basins shall not be used for creation of wetlands to
meet the wetland mitigation requirements of this Ordinance in§
151.146(M)(4).
      3.   Soils.
      A minimum of twelve (12) inches of suitable rooting medium shall be
provided on the mitigation wetlands and wetland buffer areas. Use low ground
pressure equipment to minimize soil compaction, include information about
whether topsoil will be imported from off-site.
      If the mitigation site contains a drained hydric soil, include the NRCS
soil map unit description and describe the drainage system (e.g., drain tile,
ditches, channels, etc.). The drainage system shall be shown on the grading
plan. Verify the hydric soil map unit by digging a 30-inch deep soil pit in a
representative location of the map unit and write a detailed profile
description of the soil, including horizons, soil colors using Munsell color
charts, and soil texture and structure. Examine the soil profile for the
presence of redoximorphic features such as iron/manganese accumulations,
oxidized rhizospheres, mottles, and depleted zones. Record the type, relative
abundance, location, and color of these features. Record other evidence of soil
wetness such as the accumulation of partially decomposed organic matter at the
soil surface.
      4.   Planting Plan. Submit a plan at a minimum scale of 1 in.=100 ft.
depicting the location and acreage of each wetland and wetland buffer community
type to be established. This plan shall also be used as the base map to show
the locations of the vegetation monitoring transects and hydrology sampling
points discussed in Appendix S, Section I. Provide the list of plants to be
established in community by common and scientific name, along with the seeding
or planting rate for each species. Seed and plant stock source(s) shall
originate from within 150 miles of the mitigation site to maintain local
genotypes.
D.   DEED OR PLAT RESTRICTION
   All mitigation wetlands, as well as other preserved wetlands or waters and
wetland buffers on the mitigation site, shall be protected in perpetuity by a
deed or plat restriction. The permittee shall provide PB&D with a draft copy of
the proposed deed or plat restriction document and associated exhibit(s)
showing the restricted areas for approval. Contact PB&D for example wetland and
wetland buffer restrictive language.
E.   CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE
   Provide a schedule with anticipated start date and duration for each phase
of the mitigation site construction, including installation of soil erosion and
sediment control measures, earthwork, and planting.
F.   FINANCIAL ASSURANCE
   The permittee shall provide PB&D with a financial surety for 110% of the
total estimated cost for construction, monitoring, and management of the
mitigation wetlands and wetland buffers. The amount of the financial surety
shall be based upon the wetland consultant’s detailed cost estimate for
completing the approved mitigation plan, including earthwork, planting, and
monitoring and management for a minimum of five (5) full growing seasons after
planting is completed. The cost estimate shall be provided to PB&D for approval
prior to obtaining the financial surety. The financial surety may be in the
form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, irrevocable trust,
escrow account, casualty insurance, or other approved surety.
   The financial surety shall be held by PB&D until the mitigation site meets
the performance standards in Section H. Such surety may be phased out or
reduced by PB&D once it has been demonstrated that the mitigation site is
functionally mature and/or self-sustaining in accordance with the performance
standards in Section H.
G.   AS-BUILT PLANS
      1.   Upon the completion of earthwork, but prior to planting, the
permittee shall provide an as-built topographic map to PB&D for approval. The
as-built map shall depict the constructed grades at a minimum of 2-ft contour
intervals, along with spot elevations, and the invert elevations of all water
control structures. The bench mark(s) used to establish the grades shall also
be indicated on the plan. If the constructed grades and invert elevations are
not in conformance with the approved grading and utility plan, the permittee
shall be responsible for regrading or reinstalling the water control structures
at the designed elevations to comply with the approved plan. If the as-built
plan and site inspection are determined to be in conformance with the approved
design, PB&D shall issue a written approval of the as-built plan and planting
activities may commence.
      2.   Upon the completion of planting activities, the permittee shall
provide PB&D with lists of the species actually planted in the mitigation
wetlands and wetland buffers, including the common and scientific name of each
species, the quantity of each species planted (e.g., weight of seeds/acre,
number of plugged plants/acre), the source of the seeds/plants, the planting
method(s) used, and the date(s) seeding or planting occurred.
H.   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
   Performance standards are predetermined goals for guiding and measuring
mitigation success.
      1.   Performance Period. The performance period shall consist of a
minimum five (5) years at which time the vegetation performance standards are
met, unless the vegetation performance standards can be met earlier for two (2)
consecutive growing seasons, at which time the performance period shall be
considered complete. Conversely, the performance period may be required to be
longer than five (5) years in order to meet the vegetation performance
standards if they haven’t been met after the standard five-year time frame.
      2.   Wetland Vegetation Performance Standards. The performance standards
below apply to emergent, wet prairie and sedge meadow communities. If other
community types are proposed (e.g., aquatic, forest, etc.), the permittee shall
submit proposed performance standards for each community to PB&D for approval.
         a.   Floristic Quality. By the end of the performance period, a native
mean coefficient of conservatism value (native mean C value) of greater than or
equal to 3.5 and a native floristic quality index value (FQI) of greater than
or equal to 20 shall be achieved for each wetland community as determined using
the Chicago Region Floristic Quality Assessment Calculator (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Chicago District, most recent version).
         b.   Mean Wetness Coefficient. By the end of the performance period,
the mean wetness coefficient (mean W) shall be less than or equal to 0 in each
wetland community. Wetness coefficients are listed below, based on the category
of each plant species designated in the National Wetland Plant List—Midwest
Regional Plant List (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, most recent version. The
mean W for each wetland community is calculated by the following equation: Sum
of wetness coefficients for all species/number of species.
 
Wetness Coefficients
National Wetland Category  Wetness Coefficient
Obligate (OBL)             -2
Facultative Wetland (FACW) -1
Facultative (FAC)          0
Facultative Upland (FACU)  1
Upland (UPL)               2
 
         c.   Vegetative Cover. By the end of the performance period, no area
greater than ten (10) square feet within the created or enhanced wetlands shall
be devoid of vegetation, as measured by percent areal coverage. Areas not
meeting this standard shall be re-planted.
         d.   Invasive Species Dominance. By the end of the performance period,
none of the three dominant plant species in the emergent, wet prairie, or sedge
meadow communities shall be non-native or weedy species, including, but not
limited to, the following species: Typha spp., Phragmites australis, Poa
compressa, Poa pratensis, Lythrum salicaria, Salix interior, Echinochloa
crusgalli, or Phalaris arundinacea. Dominance shall be based on the relative
importance value (RIV) of each species, which is calculated by the following
equation: Invasive Species Dominance:
         RIVs = [RFs + RCs] / 2 x 100, where:
         RIVs is the relative importance value of the individual species in the
community,
         RFs is the frequency of the individual species occurring in all
quadrats/the total frequency of all species (adventive and native) occurring in
all quadrats, and
         RCs is the coverage of the individual species occurring in all
quadrats/the total coverage of all species (adventive and native) occurring in
all quadrats.
      3.   Wetland Buffer Vegetation Performance Standards. The performance
standards below apply to the prairie community to achieve mitigation credit. If
other community types are proposed for the wetland buffers (e.g., forest,
savanna, etc.), the permittee shall submit proposed performance standards for
each community to PB&D for approval.
         a.   Floristic Quality. By the end of the performance period, a native
mean coefficient of conservatism value (native mean C value) of greater than or
equal to 2.5 and a native floristic quality index value (FQI) of greater than
or equal to 15 shall be achieved for the buffer as determined using the Chicago
Region Floristic Quality Assessment Calculator (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Chicago District, most recent version).
         b.   Vegetative Cover. By the end of the performance period, no area
greater than ten (10) square feet within the created or enhanced mesic prairie
buffers shall be devoid of vegetation, as measured by percent areal coverage.
Areas not meeting this standard shall be re-planted.
         c.   Invasive Species Dominance. By the end of the performance period,
none of the three dominant plant species in the mesic prairie buffer community
shall be non-native or weedy species, including, but not limited to, the
following species: Cirsium arvense, Melilotus spp., Aliiaria petiolata, Poa
compressa, Poa pratensis, Ambrosia artemisiifolia, or Rhamnus cathartica and R.
franguia. Dominance shall be based on the relative importance value (RIV) of
each species, which is calculated using the equation in Section H.2.d.
I.   MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT
      1.   Monitoring.
         a.   Monitoring Plan. The PMD shall contain a proposed five-year
monitoring plan. Such plan shall include, at a minimum, a description of the
sampling methodologies to be followed for evaluating hydrology in the
mitigation wetlands and assessing vegetation in the mitigation wetlands and
buffers, the frequency of sampling, and the report(s) to be generated.
         b.   Vegetation Monitoring. A sufficient number of straight-line
sampling transects shall be established in the mitigation wetlands and wetland
buffers to achieve a representative amount of plant frequency and coverage
data. The beginning and end points of each transect shall be monumented in the
field with a metal stake. The location of each transect and the number of
proposed quadrats per transect shall be accurately identified on the Planting
Plan (Section C.4.), which shall be included in the annual monitoring reports.
Each transect shall consist of a series of sample quadrats either 0.25 or 1.0
square meter in size. Vegetation sampling shall be conducted by, or under the
supervision of, a Certified Wetland Specialist twice during the growing season
with at least one month between sampling dates (e.g., May/June and August/
September). Vegetation sampling shall include the following, at a minimum:
            (1)   Record the number and estimated percent areal coverage of
each vascular plant species in each quadrant, including all non-native
(adventive) taxa and native taxa. Use this data to perform the calculations in
(2)-(4) below, Photograph each end of the transect at the time of sampling,
            (2)   Calculate the native mean C value, FQI, and mean wetness
coefficient for each quadrat,
            (3)   Calculate native mean C value, and native FQI and mean
wetness coefficient for each transect,
            (4)   Calculate the RIVn of total native species by the following
equation:
            RIVn = [RFn + RCn] / 2 x 100, where:
            RIVn is the relative importance value of the total native species
in the community,
            RFn is the total frequency of the native species occurring in all
quadrats/the total frequency of all species (adventive and native) occurring in
all quadrats, and
            RCn is the total coverage of the native species occurring in all
quadrats/the total coverage of all species (adventive and native) occurring in
all quadrats.
         c.   Hydrology Monitoring. A sufficient number of representative
sample points shall be established in each mitigation wetland to assess the
hydrologic conditions. The sample points shall be monumented in the field with
a metal stake. The location of each sample point shall be accurately identified
on the Planting Plan (Section C.4.), which shall be included in the annual
monitoring reports. At a minimum, hydrology monitoring shall be conducted on a
bi-weekly basis during the first growing season and on a monthly basis during
each succeeding growing season of the monitoring period. Hydrology sampling
shall include the following, at a minimum:
            (1)   Depth of inundation (in. or cm.) based on NAVD 88 datum,
which superseded the NGVD 29 datum used prior to September 18, 2013, and
            (2)   Soil moisture condition to a minimum depth of 12 in. (e.g.,
saturated, moist, dry).
      2.   Management.
         a.   Management Plan. The PMD shall contain a proposed five-year
management plan. Such plan shall include a description of the anticipated
management practices to be employed each year to meet the performance standards
in Section H., and a schedule of all proposed management practices (i.e., a
calendar indicating month and year of activity). In addition, the plan shall
identify the entity to assume responsibility for long-term management of the
mitigation wetlands and wetland buffers after the performance period and the
dedicated source of funding for long-term management. At completion of the
performance period, PB&D shall require a written agreement between the
permittee and the entity identified for long-term management.
         b.   Management Practices. Describe the methods and equipment to be
used for each proposed management practice (e.g., prescribed burning, control
of invasive plant species by herbicide application or hand removal, mow
management, etc.). List all permits or certifications/licenses required for the
proposed management practices (e.g., IEPA open burn permit, local fire
department permits, IDOA herbicide applicators license, etc.). Personnel who
perform the management activities shall have appropriate licenses and
qualifications.
J.   REPORTS
   At a minimum, an annual report prepared by, or under the supervision of, a
Certified Wetland Specialist summarizing the results of the previous year’s
monitoring data shall be submitted to the PB&D by January 31st of the following
year. The annual reports shall contain, at a minimum:
      1.   A narrative summary of the vegetation and hydrology monitoring data;
      2.   A discussion of the progress of native vegetation establishment
relative to the performance standards in Section H.;
      3.   An appendix containing the monitoring data;
      4.   Photographs of the sample transects and panoramic views of the
mitigation wetlands and buffers;
      5.   A narrative summary of the management practices employed during the
previous year and photographs documenting these activities;
      6.   Recommendations for proposed management practices to be employed
during the following year(s), based on the monitoring results to date; and
      7.   The proposed schedule for management practices in the following year
(s).
K.   COMPLIANCE AND COMPLETION
      1.   Responsible Parties.
      The permittee shall be responsible for establishment of the mitigation
wetlands and wetland buffers and all associated monitoring and management
activities for the performance period. The permittee shall take corrective
measures as necessary to meet the performance standards in Section H., within
the performance period.
      After the performance period, the entity identified for long term
management shall assume long-term management for the mitigation wetlands and
wetland buffers. The permittee’s responsibility for the mitigation wetlands and
wetland buffers shall be released in writing by PB&D.
      2.   Notification.
      After the performance period, the permittee shall provide written
notification to PB&D, along with following information: 1) A scaled plan (min.
1 in. = 100 ft.) showing the delineated boundaries and actual acreages of the
mitigation wetlands and wetland buffers; and 2) A summary of how the
performance standards have been met for each wetland and buffer. Upon
notification, PB&D shall review the submitted information and perform a site
inspection to evaluate the success of the mitigation site. If the mitigation
goals and performance standards have been met, PB&D shall notify the permittee
in writing that the permittee’s responsibility for the mitigation site is
released. A copy of the written release shall be provided to the entity
designated for long-term management of the mitigation site.
      If PB&D determines that the mitigation goals or performance standards
have not been met based on the information submitted and site inspection, PB&D
shall notify the permittee in writing of the specific shortfalls. The permittee
shall be granted a specified time limit to respond to the identified
shortfalls. Failure to fully respond to the identified shortfalls within the
specified time limit may result in PB&D’s use of the mitigation surety to
correct the shortfalls.
(Ord. passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 22-1060, passed 8-9-2022; Ord. 23-1056, passed 8-
8-2023)
APPENDIX T: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 1.0 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
See §
151.112(XX) Solar Energy Systems and §
151.113(U) Accessory Solar Energy Systems for information on height, setbacks
and lot coverage requirements. See §§
151.250 through
151.262 for violations, penalties and enforcement. Other local and state
regulations shall apply.
   A.   Project proposal.
      1)   Owner name, address, and phone number.
      2)   Photos of existing site conditions for proposed facility
      3)   Project summary including the manufacturer information, number of
proposed solar modules, and proposed height of the solar arrays.
   B.   Site plan (drawn to scale).
      1)   Existing and proposed contours, at a minimum of two-foot intervals.
      2)   Location, setbacks, exterior dimensions, and square footage of all
structures on the owner’s property and abutting properties within 100 feet.
      3)   Location and size of existing waterways, wetlands, 100-year
floodplain, sanitary sewers, field drain tiles, storm sewer systems, and water
distribution systems.
      4)    Location of any overhead or underground power lines and utility
easements. All power lines used to collect power and all communication lines
shall be buried underground at a depth in accordance with the Agricultural
Impact Mitigation Agreement and the current adoption of the NFPA 70 National
Electrical Code, whichever is more restrictive, until same reach the property
line or a substation adjacent to the property line.
   C.   Waivers.
      1)   All setback or landscape transition yard waiver agreements shall be
submitted with the application for the solar energy system.
      2)   Any setback or landscape transition waiver agreement between the
property owner and adjacent property owner shall be recorded against the
impacted properties with the Recording Division of the Lake County Clerk's
Office.
   D.   Engineering plans, drawings, and schematics.
      1)   Manufacturer’s specifications of the solar modules, foundation, and
detailed drawing of electrical components and installation details.
      2)   All electrical wire and lines connecting modules and any related
structures.
   E.   Utility connection.
       1)   Developers of commercial and accessory medium and large-scale solar
energy systems connected to the utility grid must provide written authorization
from the local utility company acknowledging and approving such connection
prior to building permit issuance.
   F.   Native plantings.
       1)   In order to prevent erosion, manage run-off, and provide ecological
benefit, commercial and accessory medium and large-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems shall be planted with “low-profile” native prairie species, and
use a mix appropriate for this region and site-specific soil conditions.
 
COMMENTARY: Pollinator Friendly Solar Site Act, 525 ILCS 55/1, establishes a
scorecard for solar site vegetation that provides foraging habitat for game
birds, songbirds, and pollinators, and prevents weeds, reduces storm water
runoff, and erosion.
 
   G.   Signage.
      1)   Signs on ground-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the
signage requirements of the underlying zoning district. A sign consistent with
the standards of §
151.173 shall be required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency
contact phone number.
   H.   Lighting.
      1)   Lighting of ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be consistent
with §
151.168. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant
structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational
purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where
feasible, lighting of the solar energy system shall be directed downward and
shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
   I.   Agriculture Impact Mitigation Agreement.
      1)   For commercial solar energy system projects, applicants shall
provide an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) executed between the
applicant and the Illinois Department of Agriculture.
   J.   Natural resource protection.
      1)   For commercial and large-scale solar energy system projects,
applicants shall provide a copy of the consultation application to the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Illinois Endangered Species
Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/11) and the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act
(525 ILCS 30/17).
(Ord. 19-1378, passed 9-10-2019; Ord. 23-0675, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-0207,
passed 3-12-2024)
APPENDIX U: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FILL/GRADE OPERATIONS
§ 1.0 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FILL/GRADE OPERATIONS
   A.   See §
151.112(JJ) Major Fill/Grade Operations and §
151.113(W) Minor Fill/Grade Operations for information on height, setbacks, and
lot coverage requirements. See §§
151.250 through
151.262 for violations, penalties, and enforcement. Other local and state
regulations shall apply.
   B.   Roads and Access.
      1)   A transportation plan shall be submitted which:
         (a)   Identifies proposed haul route(s) with a map and clearly
specifies type of signage, signposts, and locations along roadway identifying
the haul route to the satisfaction of the county;
         (b)   Ensures that the temporary access drive within the site shall be
paved with a surface of asphalt or concrete for a distance of at least 50 feet
from the right-of-way of the public road from which access is taken. Beyond the
50-foot entrance, temporary access drives within the site shall be comprised of
a stone base and crushed asphalt top layer.
         (c)   Includes provisions to maintain this haul road and replace the
stone base and asphalt as needed.
         (d)   Includes provisions to remove dust, dirt, mud, and other debris
from vehicles exiting the site and to keep the main road from which access is
taken free of dust, dirt, mud, and other debris at all times.
         (e)   Includes provisions to clean and repair the main road from which
access is taken as needed.
         (f)   Includes measures to ensure minimal disruption of normal traffic
due to the fill/grade operation.
      2)   Operation will not be allowed to begin until all required
improvements have been constructed, in accordance with the approved
transportation plan.
      3)   The operator and contractors shall abide by all posted weight limits
unless a permit is obtained, or permission is granted to do otherwise.
      4)   The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of roads,
including asphalt patching and shoulder maintenance during operation. The
operator shall work in conjunction with the highway authorities and obtain any
necessary permits.
      5)   Access Routes.
         (a)   For properties without an approved access location, evidence
that an access permit can be obtained for the proposed use from the highway
authority having jurisdiction is required. For properties with a previously
approved access location, evidence from the highway authority having
jurisdiction that the existing access point is sufficient to serve the proposed
use is required. If the existing access is insufficient to manage weight or
traffic volumes generated by the proposed use, evidence that a new access
permit can be obtained, for the proposed use, from the highway authority having
jurisdiction is required.
         (b)   For properties with an access location onto a private road,
evidence that permission can be obtained, for the proposed use from: 1)
homeowners’ association having responsibility for maintenance of the private
road, or 2) a majority of the property owners fronting the access road in the
absence of an active association is required. Operators must also show that
they have or can obtain access permits from the highway authority which has
jurisdiction over the road onto which the private road terminates, as outlined
in the preceding paragraph.
         (c)   If the operator does not repair hauler damage to the designated
access route in a reasonable period of time (based on the degree to which it
poses a hazard to the motoring public) the appropriate highway authority may
make the necessary repairs and the operator is expected to reimburse a highway
authority for any costs it incurs for repairing damage to any road in its
jurisdiction arising from the construction, operation, or maintenance of the
project. Should the operator not make such reimbursement upon request of the
highway authority, a stop work order may be issued by Lake County until such
reimbursement is received by the highway authority.
 
COMMENTARY: General Transportation Guidelines: For the purpose of transporting
fill, the operator shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
appropriate highway authority(ies), be it the Illinois Department of
Transportation, Lake County Division of Transportation, township, or
municipality. The operator must improve the designated access route to satisfy
the design requirements of the appropriate highway authority(ies) Local highway
authorities may require a performance assurance to ensure the required
improvements or interim repairs to the damaged portions of the roads will be
completed and to ensure that post-project road improvements are made to the
satisfaction of the appropriate highway authority. The amount and form of the
performance assurance for this project shall be determined by the appropriate
highway authorities.
 
(Ord. 24-0207, passed 3-12-2024)
CHAPTER 152: LAND DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
152.01   Fees established and amended
§ 152.01 FEES ESTABLISHED AND AMENDED.
   All land development fees and charges required under Title XV, Land Usage, (
Chapters 150 and
151) shall be established and amended from time to time by a separate
resolution of the County Board.
TITLE XVII: HEALTH
   Chapter
      
170.   WELL AND WATER REGULATIONS
      
171.   ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
      
172.   ANIMALS
      
173.   FOOD SERVICE REGULATIONS
      
174.   SWIMMING FACILITY REGULATIONS
      
175.   SEWAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL FROM BOATS
      
176.   HEARINGS; BOARD OF HEALTH
      
177.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS
      
178.   HEALTH DEPARTMENT FEE SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 170: WELL AND WATER REGULATIONS
Section
Regulation of Private, Semi-Private and Non-Community Wells and Water Systems
   
170.01   General provisions
   
170.02   Health Officer, duties and powers
   
170.03   Existing wells
   
170.04   Definitions
   
170.05   General requirements
   
170.06   Permits for construction, modification, or sealing and non-community
water system operation; supplemental irrigation well registrations;
restrictions; fees
   
170.07   Inspections
   
170.08   Variances; hearings
   
170.09   Enforcement
   
170.10   Hearings and appeals
   
170.11   Application after revocation
   
170.12   Serious or repeated violations
   
170.13   Liability
   
170.14   Interpretation and conflicts
   
170.15   State and local requirements
   
170.16   Effective date
   
170.17   Adopted materials
 
   
170.99   Penalty
   
170.100   Other remedies
REGULATION OF PRIVATE, SEMI- PRIVATE AND NON-COMMUNITY WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS
§ 170.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Title. This subchapter shall be known as the “Well Ordinance of the
County of Lake”, hereinafter referred to as “this subchapter.”
      (2)   Intent. This subchapter is enacted in order to ensure minimum
standards for the location, construction, modification and use of water wells
and closed loop wells and closed loop well systems; the installation of water
well pumps or equipment used in withdrawing water from a water well; the proper
sealing of wells; the monitoring of private, semi-private, and non-community
water systems to protect the groundwater of the county from contamination, and
to protect the citizens of the county from the transmission of disease.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   General. The provisions of these regulations shall cover all
matters relating to wells, and private, semi-private, and non-community water
systems as set forth by this subchapter.
      (2)   Continued use. The continued use of a private, semi-private, or
non-community water system, or other water well, closed loop well or closed
loop well system, or part thereof, contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed a violation, and subject to the penalties prescribed
in §§
170.09 through
170.12.
      (3)   Matters not provided for. Any well or private, semi-private, or
non-community water system requirement essential for the sanitary safety of an
existing or proposed property, building, or structure, or essential for the
health or safety of the occupants thereof, and which is not specifically
covered by this subchapter, shall be determined by the Health Officer.
      (4)   Referenced materials. This subchapter adopts by reference the Water
Well Construction Code, the Illinois Water Well Pump Installation Code, the
Illinois Drinking Water Systems Code, and the Illinois Public Area Sanitary
Practice Code, three copies of which are on file with the Clerk of the county
(details, see §
170.17).
      (5)   Selected terms. The terms "well" and "water well," while defined in
materials adopted by reference in this subchapter, shall be applied and used
for the purposes of enforcement of this subchapter as follows:
         (a)   The term "water well" shall include, but not be limited to the
following types or categories of water wells: private, semi-private, non-
community, irrigation, supplemental irrigation, extraction, dewatering (20 feet
or greater in depth), test and geothermal heat exchange water wells.
         (b)   The term "well" shall include, but not be limited to the
following types or categories of wells: all types or categories of water wells
(including community water wells), monitoring wells, closed loop wells and
injection wells (where the depth is greater than the largest surface
dimension).
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.02 HEALTH OFFICER, DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   General. The Health Officer shall enforce the provisions of this
subchapter and shall act on any question relative to the mode or manner of the
design or construction and the materials to be used in the installation or
modification of water wells and closed loop wells and closed loop well systems,
the sealing of wells, and the operation of water systems and closed loop well
systems except as otherwise specifically provided for by statutory
requirements.
   (B)   Applications and permits.  The Health Officer shall receive
applications and issue permits for the installation and modification of water
wells, closed loop wells and closed loop well systems, the sealing of wells,
the operation of non-community water systems, and shall inspect the premises
for which the permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Supplemental irrigation well registrations. The Health Officer shall
receive and issue registrations of supplemental irrigation wells, and shall
enforce compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (D)   Notices and orders. The Health Officer shall issue all necessary
notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the
necessary safeguards during construction, sealing of wells, and the operation
of water wells and water well systems, and to ensure compliance with all
ordinance requirements. Any written order posted on premises involved shall not
be removed except by order of the Health Officer. Removal without an order
shall constitute a violation of this subchapter. The Health Officer may revoke
in writing, any permit or approval issued contrary to this subchapter or based
upon a false statement or misrepresentation in the application or registration.
   (E)   Authority to enter premises. The Health Officer, after identification,
shall have the authority to enter any property at any reasonable time to
inspect for health and sanitation purposes, and for compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter. The Health Officer may also make any necessary
test, including water samples for laboratory analysis, on any property to
determine compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. The Health Officer
is authorized to engage any expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon
unusual technical issues that arise.
   (F)   Credentials. The Health Officer shall carry proper credentials of his
or her respective office for the purpose of inspecting any and all wells in the
performance of duties under this subchapter.
   (G)   Official records. The Health Officer shall keep official records of
applications received, permits issued, fees collected, reports of inspections,
and notices and orders issued. The records shall be retained in the official
records so long as the building or structure to which they relate remains in
existence unless otherwise provided for.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.03 EXISTING WELLS.
   (A)   Continued system use. The legal use and occupancy of any structure
served by a water well or closed loop well(s), which had been heretofore
approved, shall be permitted to be continued without change, except as
specifically addressed in this subchapter.
   (B)   System maintenance.  
      (1)   Maintenance standard. All wells, both existing and new, shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition such that no public nuisance,
threat of transmission of disease, or threat of contamination of the
groundwater exists. All service equipment, devices and safeguards that are
required by this subchapter, or that were required by previous statute, shall
be maintained in working order as when installed or repaired.
      (2)   Maintenance responsibility. The owner or the owner’s designated
agent shall be responsible for the safe and sanitary maintenance of a well,
water system or closed loop well system at all times.
   (C)   Alterations of properties with existing wells.  No dwelling or
establishment served by a private, semi-private, or non-community water well,
supplemental irrigation well, or closed loop well(s) may be altered, expanded,
remodeled, or added to where the change may affect the water well or closed
loop well(s) without prior approval of the Health Officer. Applications for
alterations or additions shall be reviewed as follows:
      (1)   Required lateral distances to sources of contamination. No
alteration to a property (with the exception of approved onsite wastewater
treatment system site plans) on which a water well exists may be made that
violates the required minimum lateral distances from sources of contamination
to the water well; and
      (2)   Shared water wells. No new or existing dwelling, or dwelling that
is being demolished and rebuilt, shall be allowed to connect to an existing
water well that already serves an existing dwelling to unless the requirements
of § 170.06(C)(3) are met.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.04 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated or defined in materials adopted by
reference in this subchapter, the following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this subchapter, have the meanings indicated. Where words or terms
are defined in both materials adopted by reference in this subchapter as well
as in this section, the definition in this section shall apply in the
enforcement of this subchapter. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
   AVAILABLE COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. An Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency approved and regulated public water system that is located no further
than 250 feet from the closest property boundary of a single family dwelling
property, or no further than 1,000 feet from the closest property boundary of a
commercial building or multifamily dwelling, or from a proposed subdivision
property boundary, and to which permission is granted by the controlling
authority to connect. If annexation is required by the controlling authority
for permission as a precondition to connect to the public water system, the
system shall be deemed unavailable.
   CESSPOOL. A non-water-tight, below- ground receptacle that directly receives
wastewater containing solids and liquids, is designed to disperse domestic
sewage into the surrounding soil, and that may or may not have an outlet.
   CLOSED LOOP WELL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Health Officer
to a property owner, or to an appropriately certified closed loop well
contractor on behalf of a property owner, to construct a closed loop well or
wells to the specifications of the approved site plan and the requirements of
this subchapter.
   CLOSED LOOP WELL MODIFICATION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Health Officer
to a property owner, or to an appropriately certified closed loop well
contractor on behalf of a property owner, to modify a closed loop well or
closed loop well system as defined and specified in the Water Well Construction
Code and to the specifications of the approved site plan and the requirements
of this subchapter.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Wastewater derived principally from dwellings, businesses,
office buildings, institutions, food establishments, or similar facilities.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department
or an appropriate designated agent.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. A hazard to public health when the evidence is
sufficient to show that a condition or practice, posing or contributing to a
significant threat of danger to health or safety, creates or may create a
public health situation that should be corrected immediately to prevent injury
or illness, and that should not be permitted to continue.
   LEACHING PIT. A non-water-tight, below-ground receptacle that receives only
liquid domestic sewage, or wastewater that has been pretreated by a septic tank
or cesspool, is designed to disperse wastewater into the surrounding soil, and
that may or may not have an outlet.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential building that contains more than one
dwelling unit.
   NON-COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM PERMIT. An annual permit issued by the Health
Officer to the owner or operator of a non-community water system. The permit
may be transferred to a new owner within the permitting year, which shall run
from January 1 to December 31.
   PERMANENT FIXTURE. A permanently installed plumbing fixture located inside a
dwelling or building from which a water sample may be collected, including a
non-threaded spigot located adjacent to the pressure tank, at least 18 inches
above the floor.
   SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING. A freestanding residential building that contains
one dwelling unit.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that is used for conveying rainwater, surface water,
groundwater, subsurface water, site drainage, condensate, cooling water or
other similar liquid waste (excluding domestic sewage) to an approved point of
discharge.
   SUPPLEMENTAL IRRIGATION WELL. A non-potable water well that is used at a
dwelling for residential watering and/or other outdoor purposes, where a
separate water supply exists for drinking, culinary and sanitation purposes.
   SUPPLEMENTAL IRRIGATION WELL REGISTRATION. A registration issued by the
Health Officer to the owner or operator of a supplemental irrigation well to
operate the supplemental irrigation well. The registration shall be recorded
with the property on which the supplemental irrigation well is located with the
Lake County Recorder of Deeds and shall run with the land.
   WATER WELL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Health Officer to a
property owner, or to a licensed water well contractor on behalf of a property
owner, to construct a water well to the specifications of the approved plan and
the requirements of this subchapter.
   WATER WELL MODIFICATION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Health Officer to a
property owner, or to a licensed water well contractor on behalf of a property
owner, to modify a water well, or to a property owner, to modify a water well
as defined and specified in the Water Well Construction Code and to the
specifications of the approved site plan and the requirements of this
subchapter.
   WELL SEALING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Health Officer to a property
owner, or to an appropriately licensed, credentialed, or registered contractor
on behalf of a property owner, to seal a well to the specifications of the
approved site plan when required, and to the requirements of this subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.05 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Scope.
      (1)   Water well and closed loop well construction, water well pump
installation, sealing wells, and the operation of water systems shall be
regulated in accordance with the Water Well Construction Code, the Illinois
Water Well Pump Installation Code, the Illinois Drinking Water Systems Code,
the Illinois Public Area Sanitary Practice Code, copies of which are on file
with the Secretary of State.
      (2)   Three copies of the Water Well Construction Code, the Illinois
Water Well Pump Installation Code, the Illinois Drinking Water Systems Code,
and the Illinois Public Area Sanitary Practice Code shall be on file at the
office of the Lake County Clerk.
   (B)   Authority. The Health Officer, in order to protect and promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of Lake County, and other
affected communities, is authorized and directed to develop procedures,
practices, and policies; to interpret and enforce these rules and regulations
establishing minimum standards for water well and closed loop well location,
installation, modification, sealing, operation, maintenance, the sealing of
wells and for monitoring of all private, semi-private, and non-community water
systems so as to protect groundwater and other natural resources within the
county from impairment, pollution, or destruction; to minimize the risk of
spreading communicable diseases, and to prevent and avoid other health and
ecologic hazards attributable to bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and helminths, as
well as chemical contamination of groundwater.
   (C)   Minimum standards. This subchapter establishes minimum standards to
ensure that wells:
      (1)   Will not contaminate the groundwater supply;
      (2)   Will not violate any other laws or regulations governing control of
groundwater pollution; and
      (3)   Will not create a public nuisance.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.06 PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION, MODIFICATION, OR SEALING AND NON- COMMUNITY
WATER SYSTEM OPERATION; SUPPLEMENTAL IRRIGATION WELL REGISTRATIONS;
RESTRICTIONS; FEES.
   (A)   Construction, modification, or sealing.
      (1)   General. No person shall construct or modify a water well or a
closed loop well, or seal a well without the prior approval of the Health
Officer. The approval shall include the approval of a site plan, as specified
in this section, for the proposed construction, modification, or sealing, and
the issuance of a permit to conduct the permitted work.
      (2)   Construction, modification, or sealing without a valid permit. A
person who constructs or modifies a water well or closed loop well(s), or seals
a well without a valid permit or prior verbal approval to begin work from the
Health Officer shall be subject to enforcement actions as described in §§
170.09 through
170.12. Additionally, a penalty fee may be assessed as set by the current fee
schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
      (3)   Permit expiration. A permit approved for the construction or
modification of a water well or a closed loop well(s), or the sealing of a well
shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of approval. If
construction or modification of the water well or closed loop well(s) or
sealing of the well has not started at that time, the permit is void.
      (4)   Application form. An application for a permit to construct or
modify a water well or a closed loop well(s), or seal a well shall be made in
writing on forms provided by the Illinois Department of Public Health or the
Health Officer.
      (5)   Site plans. A plan shall be submitted with an application for a
permit as specified in this section. The site plan shall meet the following
minimum standards:
         (a)   Applications to construct or modify a water well submitted with
onsite wastewater treatment system site plans. When the construction or the
modification of a water well is proposed in conjunction with a site plan to
install an onsite wastewater treatment system or system component, the location
of the water well shall be indicated on that site plan. The onsite wastewater
treatment system site plan shall indicate the location of any available
community water system, as defined in §
170.04, or shall contain a statement clearly indicating that no community water
system is available.
         (b)   Applications to construct a water well submitted without onsite
wastewater treatment system site plans. When the construction of a water well
is proposed, but is not in conjunction with a site plan to install an onsite
wastewater treatment system or system component, a valid plat of survey or a
site plan to a scale of 1"=10', 1"=20', 1"=30' or 1"=40' shall accompany the
application, drawn legibly on a minimum size sheet of eight and one-half inches
by 11 inches, clearly indicating:
            1.   The location of all closed loop wells and sources of
contamination on the subject property or on neighboring properties that are
located, from the proposed water well, a distance equal to, or less than that
specified in the "Minimal Lateral Distances in Feet Between Water Wells, Closed
Loop Wells and Sources of Contamination" Table in the Water Well Construction
Code or as specified in this subchapter;
               A.    Where the closed loop well or source of contamination is
located, from the proposed water well, a distance greater than that specified
in the "Minimal Lateral Distances in Feet Between Water Wells, Closed Loop
Wells and Sources of Contamination" Table in the Water Well Construction Code
or as specified in this subchapter, the site plan shall contain a statement
that clearly indicates that information.
            2.   The location of the proposed or existing water line that will
convey water from the proposed water well;
            3.   The location of all existing water wells, if any, on the
property on which the water well is proposed; and
            4.   The location of an available community water system, if any,
as defined in §
170.04, or a statement clearly indicating that no community water system is
available.
         (c)   Applications to modify a water well submitted without onsite
wastewater treatment system site plans. When the modification of a water well
is proposed, but is not in conjunction with a site plan to install an onsite
wastewater treatment system or system component, a valid plat of survey or a
site plan to a scale of 1"=10', 1"=20', 1"=30' or 1"=40' shall accompany the
application, drawn on a minimum size sheet of eight and one-half inches by 11
inches, which shall be legible, clearly indicating:
            1.   The location of all closed loop wells and sources of
contamination on the subject property or on neighboring properties that are
located, from the proposed water well, a distance equal to, or less than that
specified in the "Minimal Lateral Distances in Feet Between Water Wells, Closed
Loop Wells and Sources of Contamination" Table in the Water Well Construction
Code or as specified in this subchapter;
            2.   The location of the proposed or existing water line that will
convey water from the proposed water well; and
            3.   The location of all existing water wells, if any, on the
property on which the water well is proposed.
         (d)   Applications to seal a well. When a well is to be sealed on a
property where the building it served is to be demolished, a valid plat of
survey or a site plan to a scale of 1"=10', 1"=20', 1"=30' or 1"=40' shall
accompany the application, drawn legibly on a minimum size sheet of eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches, clearly indicating the location of the well to be
sealed.
         (e)   Applications to construct or modify a closed loop well. When the
construction or modification of a closed loop well(s) is proposed, a valid plat
of survey or a site plan to a scale of 1"=10', 1"=20', 1"=30' or 1"=40' shall
accompany the application, drawn legibly on a minimum size sheet of eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches, clearly indicating:
            1.   The location of all water wells and sources of contamination
on the subject property or on neighboring properties that are located, from the
proposed closed loop well(s), a distance equal to, or less than that specified
in the "Minimal Lateral Distances in Feet Between Water Wells, Closed Loop
Wells and Sources of Contamination" Table in the Water Well Construction Code
or as specified in this subchapter;
               A.    Where the water well or source of contamination is
located, from the proposed closed loop well(s), a distance greater than that
specified in the "Minimal Lateral Distances in Feet Between Water Wells, Closed
Loop Wells and Sources of Contamination" Table in the Water Well Construction
Code or as specified in this subchapter, the site plan shall contain a
statement that clearly indicates that information.
            2.   A description of the heat exchange fluid to be used in the
closed loop well system.
      (6)   Plan review. Upon receipt of an application, site plans as
specified in this section, and receipt of the appropriate fee, the Health
Officer shall review the application and site plan for compliance with this
subchapter, and shall approve, approve with comments, or deny approval of the
application and site plan.
      (7)   Notification of non-approval. The Health Officer shall notify an
applicant whose application is not approved of the reason(s) preventing the
approval and of any technical or administrative solution remaining.
   (B)   Non-community water systems.
      (1)   General. No person shall operate a non-community water system
without a valid permit issued by the Health Officer. The permit shall be
renewed annually. The permit shall be posted in public view.
      (2)   Approval to operate. Before approving a permit to operate a non-
community water system, the Health Officer shall inspect the water system to
determine compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Supplemental irrigation wells.
      (1)   General. No person shall operate a supplemental irrigation well
without registering the supplemental irrigation well with the Health Officer.
The Health Officer shall deem the registration issued when the following
requirements are met:
         (a)   Conditions for approval/issuance or registrations. Before
issuing a registration to operate a supplemental irrigation well, the Health
Officer shall:
            1.   Inspect the water well in accordance with §
170.07(D)(1)(a) through (c) to assure that the condition of the water well
complies with the requirements of §
170.07(D)(2);
            2.   If the property is located within a municipality, receive
assurance that approval to maintain and operate the supplemental irrigation
well is granted by the municipality;
            3.   Receive assurance that the registration certificate has been
recorded with the property with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds and shall run
with the land.
      (2)   Owner's responsibilities. If the Health Officer refuses to issue a
supplemental irrigation well registration because it does not meet the
requirements of §
170.07 (D)(2), the owner must correct the deficiency or deficiencies in the
construction of the water well, or must seal the well in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
   (D)   Restrictions.
      (1)   Community water system availability. The Health Officer shall
refuse to grant a permit to construct a water well where a community water
system is available, unless the water well will be used for non-potable
purposes. If a non-potable water well is proposed where a community water
system is available, the Health Officer shall refuse to grant a permit without
written approval from the controlling authority of the community water system.
Additionally, if the property is located within a municipality, written
approval to allow the water well must also be granted by the municipality.
      (2)   Property boundaries. Water wells and closed loop wells shall be
located inside the property boundaries of the serviced property, dwelling, or
establishment. Whenever possible, and as determined by the Health Officer, the
minimum lateral distances from a proposed water well or closed loop well(s) to
potential sources of contamination shall be contained on the property on which
the water well or closed loop well(s) is proposed, and the minimum lateral
distances from a proposed closed loop well(s) to water wells shall be contained
on the property on which the closed loop well(s) is proposed, where neighboring
properties are affected.
      (3)   Shared water wells. The Health Officer shall refuse to issue a
permit to construct a new water well that will serve more than one single-
family dwelling, or more than one unit of a multifamily dwelling where the
residents own their individual units in the building.
         (a)   Conditions allowing approval of shared water wells. The Health
Officer shall consider for approval a permit to construct a new water well that
will serve more than one single-family dwelling, or more than one unit of a
multifamily dwelling where the residents own their individual units in the
building when:
            1.   The applicant(s) submit a variance request in accordance with
§
170.08; and
            2.   A legal document(s) is submitted that clearly establishes any
required easements for the location of the water well and/or water lines, the
costs and obligations for the upkeep and maintenance of the water system, the
continuation of the agreement for new property owners, and any other special
conditions unique to the affected properties. After review and approval by the
Health Officer, the document(s) shall be recorded with the affected properties
with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds and shall run with the land of the
affected properties.
         (b)   Approval of the permit will not be granted until the Health
Officer has received and approved the required documentation, and has
determined that there is a valid public health, economic, and/or water quality
issue that warrants the granting of the permit. Final approval for the shared
water system will not be granted until the required documents are recorded with
the affected properties.
      (4)   Geothermal heat exchange water well systems.
         (a)   A permit shall be required to construct a water well to be used
for a geothermal heat exchange system.
         (b)   The system shall be closed and shall return the water to the
aquifer from which it was drawn.
         (c)   There shall be no chemicals added to the water used for the
geothermal exchange system.
      (5)   Additional minimum lateral distance to sources of contamination.
         (a)   The following minimum lateral distances to sources of
contamination shall be enforced by the Health Officer in addition to the
minimum lateral distances specified in the "Minimal Lateral Distances in Feet
Between Water Wells, Closed Loop Wells and Sources of Contamination" Table of
the Water Well Construction Code:
 
Sources of Contamination                 Minimum Lateral Distance for Clay and
                                         Loam Soils
In-ground swimming pool                  10 feet
Septic field (soil absorption component) 75 feet
reserve area
 
      (6)   Excluding water bearing formations. Upper water bearing formations
shall be excluded by installing casing or a liner, grouted in place in
accordance with the grouting requirements of the Water Well Construction Code,
whenever a water well is constructed to withdraw water from a deeper formation.
      (7)   Closed loop well construction, modification and sealing
requirements. Closed loop wells shall be constructed, modified and sealed in
accordance with the requirements of the Water Well Construction Code.
   (E)   Fees. Fees for permits shall be assessed in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.07 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Newly constructed or modified wells.
      (1)   Inspections. The Health Officer shall inspect all water wells and
closed loop well systems that are constructed or modified to determine
compliance with this subchapter.
      (2)   Water samples. Prior to granting final approval for a potable water
well that has been constructed or modified, a satisfactory water sample result
shall be obtained and submitted to the Health Officer.
         (a)   The water sample may be collected for laboratory analysis by the
Health Officer, an Illinois-licensed water well contractor, or an Illinois-
licensed environmental health practitioner. The analysis must be conducted and
reported by the Illinois Department of Public Health certified laboratory.
         (b)   The report of the results shall indicate the presence or absence
of total coliform bacteria and E. Coli, results for nitrate and nitrite as
nitrogen, and laboratory confirmation of absence of chlorine residual.
         (c)   The report of the results of the first sample collected from the
water well shall be submitted to the Health Officer. If the results of this
sample indicate the presence of total coliform and/or E. coli bacteria, the
Health Officer shall refuse to grant final approval for the water well until a
satisfactory result is obtained and submitted to the Health Officer.
         (d)   The water sample shall be collected from a permanent fixture
inside the building or dwelling after all chlorine residual has dissipated from
the water system.
      (3)   Modified water wells in pits. When a water well in a pit is
modified, the pit shall be eliminated unless a request is made on the
application to retain the pit, and the request is approved by the Health
Officer. The Health Officer shall conduct a site inspection to determine the
condition of the well pit and may approve the request if the pit is required
for use as a tank or valve vault, and if the pit is in sound condition and is
not subject to flooding.
      (4)   Shared water wells. When a shared water well is permitted, a water
sample shall be collected from each dwelling or dwelling unit connected to the
water system, and shall be submitted to the Health Officer in accordance with
divisions (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(c), and (A)(2)(d) of this section.
   (B)   Well sealings.
      (1)   Inspections. The Health Officer shall inspect the sealing of wells
to determine compliance with this subchapter.
      (2)   Notification. The water well contractor, after receiving approval
of a permit application to seal a well, shall notify the Health Officer a
minimum of 24 hours prior to the time a well sealing will take place.
      (3)   Contractor responsibilities. If the Health Officer is not present
for the completion of a well sealing, the contractor shall:
         (a)   Clearly mark the location of the sealed well by flag, stake or
other means that make the location readily visible and identifiable; and
         (b)   Submit a completed report of the sealing to the Health Officer
on a form provided by the Health Officer within ten working days of the
completion of the well sealing.
            1.   The Health Officer shall verify the well sealing and return a
signed copy of the report to the contractor within ten working days of its
receipt.
      (4)   Sealed wells in pits. When a well in a pit is sealed, the pit shall
be eliminated unless a request to retain the pit is made on the application to
seal the well and is approved by the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall
conduct a site inspection to determine the condition of the well pit, and may
approve the request if the pit is required for use as a tank or valve vault,
and if the pit is in sound condition and is not subject to flooding.
   (C)   Non-community water systems.
      (1)   Inspections. The Health Officer shall inspect all non-community
water systems to determine compliance with this subchapter.
      (2)   Water samples. The Health Officer may collect water samples from a
non-community water system to determine compliance with this subchapter.
      (3)   Fees. The Health Officer shall assess fees for the collection and
analysis of water samples in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted
by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
   (D)   Supplemental irrigation wells.
      (1)   Inspections. The Health Officer shall inspect a supplemental
irrigation well prior to issuing approval of a registration to operate the
water well to determine compliance with this subchapter. The Health Officer
shall conduct future periodic spot checks of a selected portion of registered
supplemental irrigation wells to determine general compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter. The inspection shall include:
         (a)   An inspection of the water well for construction defects that
pose a contamination threat to the groundwater, or that create a public
nuisance as specified in division (D)(2) of this section;
         (b)   A determination that the water well is able to supply water to
an outside spigot or hydrant; and
         (c)   A determination that no chlorine residual is present in the
water, using total chlorine DPD reagent.
      (2)   Conditions. Conditions that pose a contamination threat to the
groundwater, or that create a public nuisance include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   A water well that no longer is used to provide water;
         (b)   A water well with a damaged or missing cap or seal;
         (c)   A water well with a damaged casing;
         (d)   A water well in a pit that is not in compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter;
         (e)   A dug water well that is not in compliance with the requirements
of this subchapter;
         (f)   A water well with a seal buried below ground;
         (g)   A water well that is located such that it is subject to
vehicular damage; or
         (h)   A water well that is located and constructed such that it is
subject to flooding by surface water.
      (3)   Fees. The Health Officer may assess fees for the recording of
registration certificates for supplemental irrigation wells in accordance with
the current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.08 VARIANCES; HEARINGS.
   (A)   Variances.
      (1)   Variance requests. Whenever approval as required by this subchapter
is denied by the Health Officer, or where compliance with the requirements of
this subchapter is impossible or impractical, an applicant may request a
variance as follows.
         (a)    Written requests. Variance requests shall be in writing and
shall detail those conditions where compliance is impossible or impractical.
         (b)   Supporting data. Variance requests shall include pertinent data,
as stipulated in the Water Well Construction Code, to support the requested
waiver of the requirements of this subchapter as being consistent with the
responsibility of the Health Officer to protect and provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the people of the county and of other affected
communities.
      (2)   Review process. The Health Officer shall review variance requests
and shall approve or refuse to approve the request within ten working days.
      (3)   Notification. The Health Officer shall notify in writing the person
requesting a variance of the approval or denial of the request and shall state
the reasons for that decision.
      (4)   Fee. Fees in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by
the County Board as codified in §
178.01 shall be submitted.
      (5)   Recording approval of variance. The document issued by the Health
Officer approving a variance shall be recorded with the property with the Lake
County Recorder of Deeds and shall run with the land.
   (B)   Hearings.
      (1)   Hearings. Whenever a variance request is denied, that person denied
approval may make a written request to the Health Officer for a hearing in
accordance with §
170.10.
      (2)   Fees. A fee for a hearing request shall be in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations. Violations of this subchapter shall be as set forth in §
170.99.
   (B)   Notice of violation; requirements.  Whenever the Health Officer
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this subchapter, the Department shall give notice
of the alleged violation to the owner and/or the person to whom the permit was
issued, as herein provided. The notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for the issuance of the notice;
      (3)   Allow reasonable time as determined by the Health Officer for the
performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the owner, operator, or permit or registration
holder as the case may require; provided that the notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon the owner, operator, or permit or
registration holder when a copy thereof has been sent by certified or
registered mail to his or her last known address as furnished to the Lake
County Health Department; or, when he or she has been served with the notice by
any other method authorized by the laws of Illinois; and
      (5)   Contain an outline of remedial action, which is required to effect
compliance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Emergencies. Whenever an emergency exists that requires immediate
action to protect the public safety or health, the Health Officer may, without
any administrative procedure and without notice of hearing, seek an injunction
to require that such action be taken as the court may deem necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the
order shall be effective immediately.
   (D)   Revocation of approval. 
      (1)   Site conditions. Whenever the condition of a site approved for the
construction or modification of a water well or closed loop well(s) has
changed, or if any information considered in the approval of a water well or
closed loop well(s) was omitted or found to be false or erroneous, the Health
Officer may revoke the approval of a permit issued pursuant to the approval.
      (2)   Non-community water systems. After providing the opportunity for a
hearing, the Health Officer may revoke a non-community water system permit if
an imminent health hazard exists due to the condition of the water system as
determined by inspection and or sampling of the water system.
      (3)   Revocation notice. Revocation of approval shall be in writing,
posted at the site and mailed to the owner and licensed contractor, as
applicable, by certified or registered mail.
         (a)   The notice shall contain information as follows:
            1.   A statement that work on the water well is prohibited;
            2.   An explanation of the reason(s) for the revocation of
approval;
            3.   An outline of action required to obtain reinstatement of the
approval, if determined; and
            4.   An explanation of rights and procedures for an administrative
hearing.
         (b)   Unless the Health Officer receives a request for a hearing in
accordance with §
170.10, the revocation of the approval shall be considered final.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.10 HEARINGS AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Hearing request. Any person whose approval for the construction or
modification of a water well or a closed loop well(s), or for the operation of
a non-community water system is revoked may request a hearing, provided that
the request is received in writing within ten days from receipt of the notice
of revocation.
   (B)   Scheduled hearing. The Health Officer shall conduct a hearing when so
requested within five days of his or her receipt of the request, unless
otherwise agreed. The Health Officer shall give notice by regular mail and by
telephone of the date, time, and place of hearing.
   (C)   Hearings. Hearings shall be conducted as set forth in §§
176.15 through
176.17 of this code.
   (D)   Decision. The Health Officer shall consider all relevant matters
pertaining to the revocation of approval, and shall make a ruling to sustain,
modify, or rescind the revocation. A written report of the hearing decision
shall be furnished within ten days of a hearing date.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.11 APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION.
   Whenever the revocation of the approval for the construction or modification
of a water well or closed loop well(s), or for the operation of a non-community
water system is final, any future consideration for approval shall be in
accordance with §
170.12.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.12 SERIOUS OR REPEATED VIOLATIONS.
   In the event of serious and/or repeated violations of this subchapter, the
Health Officer may refuse to issue a permit to the licensed or certified/
registered contractor that is responsible for these violations. The Health
Officer may also require that the licensed or certified/registered contractor
notify the Health Officer of the time schedule of all work. In addition, the
Health Officer may require that work not proceed until the Health Officer is on
site. The Health Officer may also request that license or certification/
registration suspension or revocation proceedings be initiated by the Illinois
Department of Public Health.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.13 LIABILITY.
   The Health Officer charged with the enforcement of this subchapter, while
acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be liable personally, and is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or
employee because of an act performed by the Health Officer in the lawful
discharge of duties and under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceeding, except as may be otherwise required by statute.
The Health Officer shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit, or
proceedings that may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this
subchapter; any officer of the Lake County Health Department shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any
act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith,
except as may be otherwise required by statute.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007)
§ 170.14 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICTS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, and general welfare.
Whenever a provision of this subchapter or any other applicable provisions of
law, whether set forth in this subchapter or any other applicable provisions of
law imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations or contains restrictions
covering similar subject matter, the provision which imposes higher standards
or requirements for the promotion of public health and safety of the people of
this county shall prevail, but are not in conflict with the requirements of the
Water Well Construction Code, the Illinois Water Well Pump Installation Code,
or the Illinois Water Well and Pump Installation Contractor’s License Code.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.15 STATE AND LOCAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Compliance with this subchapter does not release applicant from compliance
with applicable state or local ordinances or regulations governing wells and
water wells.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007)
§ 170.16 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective on and after September 1, 1999.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007)
§ 170.17 ADOPTED MATERIALS.
   (A)   The following materials are adopted by reference in this subchapter:
      (1)   Water Well Construction Code (Title 77 Ill. Adm. Code, Chapter I,
Subchapter r: Water and Sewage, Part 920), 1998;
      (2)   Illinois Water Well Pump Installation Code (Title 77 Ill. Adm.
Code, Chapter I, Subchapter r: Water and Sewage, Part 925), 1994;
      (3)   Illinois Drinking Water Systems Code (Title 77 Ill. Adm. Code,
Chapter I, Subchapter r: Water and Sewage, Part 900), 1996; and
      (4)   Illinois Public Area Sanitary Practice Code (Title 77 Ill. Adm.
Code, Chapter I, Subchapter r: Water and Sewage, Part 895), 1992.
   (B)   All referenced materials are available for inspection and copying at
the offices of the Lake County Health Department, Population Health Services.
Three copies are also on file with the Clerk of the county pursuant to 55 ILCS
5/5-6002.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV, Appx A] passed 11-13-
2007; Am. Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any section or provision of §§
170.01 through
170.17, or any rule or regulation adopted by the Lake County Health Department,
or who violates any determination or order of the Lake County Health Department
under §§
170.01 through
170.17, shall be fined not more than $1,000. Each day that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. The Lake County State’s Attorney or the
Attorney General shall bring this action in the name of the county or the
people of Illinois, or may, in addition to other remedies provided in §§
170.01 through
170.07, bring action for an injunction to restrain the violation.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-15) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV] passed 11-13-2007; Am.
Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 170.100 OTHER REMEDIES.
   As an alternative remedy to any other remedy that may be available to the
Health Department in this subchapter, the Health Officer may, when the owner,
operator, or permit or registration holder of a well or well system regulated
by this subchapter violates the provisions of this subchapter, issue a notice
of ordinance violation ticket in accordance with the provisions of the Lake
County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.66). The ticket shall identify the violation for which it is being issued,
the corresponding fine amount as established in the Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.66) and shall require the alleged violator to appear before the county's
administrative hearing officer, provide the alleged violator the option to
appear before the county's administrative hearing officer, or pay the
established fine.
(Ord. 15-1242, passed 12-8-2015)
CHAPTER 171: ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
Section
Administration
   
171.001   General
   
171.002   Applicability
   
171.003   Validity
   
171.004   Duties and Powers of the Health Officer
   
171.005   Existing systems
Definitions
   
171.020   General
   
171.021   General definitions
General Requirements
   
171.035   General
Unsanitary Conditions
   
171.050   General
Project Approval Categories
   
171.065   General
   
171.066   Approval conditions for new onsite wastewater treatment systems
   
171.067   Approval conditions for replacement onsite wastewater treatment
systems
   
171.068   Approval conditions for alterations to properties
   
171.069   Approval conditions for repairs to onsite wastewater treatment
systems
   
171.070   Approval conditions for proposed subdivisions
   
171.071   Approval conditions for onsite wastewater treatment systems with
atypical flow
   
171.072   Approval conditions for non-soil based onsite wastewater treatment
systems
   
171.073   Approval conditions for the elimination of abandoned onsite
wastewater treatment system components
   
171.074   Approval conditions for artificial site drainage effectiveness
investigation plans
Site Suitability
   
171.085   Soil evaluation
   
171.086   Soil profile descriptions
   
171.087   Minimum soil conditions
   
171.088   Soil limitations
   
171.089   Conflict
Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Design
   
171.100   General
   
171.101   Performance objectives for soil based onsite wastewater treatment
systems
   
171.102   General requirements for soil based onsite wastewater treatment
systems
   
171.103   Design requirements for Type 1 and Type 2 soil treatment trench
systems
   
171.104   Design requirements for Type 3 modified mound systems
   
171.105   Design requirements for Type 4 at-grade systems
   
171.106   Design requirements for Type 5 mound systems
   
171.107   Design requirements for drip distribution systems
   
171.108   Design requirements for Illinois raised filter bed systems
   
171.109   Design requirements for systems with atypical wastewater flow
   
171.110   Design requirements for non-soil based systems
   
171.111   Design requirements for repairs to onsite wastewater treatment
systems
Plans and Other Required Information
   
171.125   General
   
171.126   Site plan specifications for a new, replacement, or alteration-
replacement onsite wastewater treatment system, or an onsite wastewater
treatment system with atypical wastewater flow
   
171.127   Site plan specifications for a repair to an onsite wastewater
treatment system, alterations or additions to properties not requiring
replacement of system components, or system component elimination
   
171.128   Proposed subdivisions and lot splits
Construction Requirements
   
171.140   General
   
171.141   Permit and license requirements
   
171.142   Soil treatment area preparation
   
171.143   Fill placement
   
171.144   Excavation
   
171.145   Gravel placement
   
171.146   Piping installation
   
171.147   Backfilling
   
171.148   Accessories
   
171.149   Inspections
Materials
   
171.160   General
   
171.161   Pretreatment components
   
171.162   Lift stations
   
171.163   Distribution devices
   
171.164   Valves
   
171.165   Piping
   
171.166   Fill and gravel aggregate
   
171.167   Backfill and topsoil cover
   
171.168   Items not specified
Licensing, Certification, and Training
   
171.180   General
   
171.181   Soil classifier/scientist
   
171.182   Onsite wastewater treatment system designer
   
171.183   Onsite wastewater treatment system installation contractor
   
171.184   Onsite wastewater treatment system service provider
   
171.185   Onsite wastewater treatment system pumper
   
171.186   License application and renewal
Waste Haulers and Septage Disposal
   
171.200   General
   
171.201   Land application site approval
   
171.202   Site management
   
171.203   Equipment
   
171.204   Inspections
   
171.205   Reporting
   
171.206   Other requirements
System and System Component Management Activities
   
171.220   General
   
171.221   Certified pre-treatment components
   
171.222   Surface discharging onsite wastewater treatment systems
   
171.223   Holding tanks
   
171.224   Reporting
Enforcement
   
171.235   General
   
171.236   Notice of violation
   
171.237   Emergencies
   
171.238   Revocation of site plan approval
   
171.239   Suspension of construction approval
   
171.240   Revocation of licenses
   
171.241   Other remedies
Fees and Administrative Procedures/Requirements
   
171.255   Fees
   
171.256   Applications
   
171.257   Plans and plan reviews
   
171.258   Variances
   
171.259   Hearings
   
171.260   Construction approval
   
171.261   Other
Relief from Personal Responsibility
   
171.275   General
Interpretation and Conflict
   
171.290   General
   
171.291   State and local requirements
   
171.292   Effective date
Appendices
   
Appendix A   Incorporated Materials
   
Appendix B   Tables: Soil Resource Groups, Maximum Loading Rates, Treatment
Credits and Discharge Effluent Limitations
   
Appendix C   Tables: Design Daily Wastewater Flow and System Component Sizing
Standards
   
Appendix D   Minimum Separation Distances
   
Appendix E   Tables: Perforation Discharge Rates, Friction Loss, Illustrations:
Deflection, System Design Illustrations by System Type
ADMINISTRATION
§ 171.001 GENERAL.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as the “Onsite Wastewater Treatment
System Ordinance of the County of Lake”, hereinafter referred to as “this
chapter”.
   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall regulate onsite wastewater
treatment systems (OWTSs), which are required and permitted where no public
sewer is available to a building containing interior plumbing fixtures that
upon use will produce domestic sewage.
   (C)   Intent. This chapter is enacted in order to assure the proper design
and installation of systems for the treatment and disposal of wastewater, to
establish and provide for the enforcement of minimum standards for the
location, installation, alteration, operation, maintenance, management,
monitoring and continued use of all onsite wastewater treatment systems so as
to protect the health of the public and the natural resources within the County
of Lake from impairment, pollution, or destruction.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.002 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   General. The provisions of these regulations shall cover all matters
affecting or relating to onsite wastewater treatment and disposal as set forth
in this chapter.
   (B)   Matters not provided for. Any onsite wastewater treatment system’s
requirement essential for the sanitary conditions of an existing or proposed
building or structure, or essential for the health or safety of the occupants
thereof, and which is not specifically established in this chapter, the
referenced standards or Lake County Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Program
Administrative Procedures and Policies shall be determined by the Health
Officer.
   (C)   Continued use. The continued use of an onsite wastewater treatment
system, or part thereof, contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a violation, and subject to the penalties prescribed in §§
171.235 through
171.240.
   (D)   Referenced standards. The standards referenced in this chapter and
listed in
Appendix A shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the
prescribed extent of each reference. Where differences occur between provisions
of this chapter and referenced standards, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply except as specified in §§
171.290 through
171.292.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.003 VALIDITY.
   (A)   Partial. In the event any part or provision of this chapter is held to
be illegal or void, such finding shall not have the effect of making void or
illegal any of the other parts or provisions thereof, that are determined to be
legal, and it shall be presumed that this chapter would have been approved
without such illegal or invalid parts or provisions.
   (B)   Segregation. Any invalid part of this chapter shall be segregated from
the remainder of the chapter by the court holding each part invalid, and the
remainder shall remain effective.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.004 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE HEALTH OFFICER.
   The Health Officer shall enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and
shall act on any question relative to the mode or manner of the design or
construction and the materials to be used in the installation of onsite
wastewater treatment systems, except as otherwise specifically provided for by
statutory requirements, and shall specifically act as follows:
   (A)   Applications and permits. The Health Officer shall receive
applications and issue permits for the installation of onsite wastewater
treatment systems, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued
and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Product approvals. The Health Officer shall refuse to approve the use
of an onsite wastewater system component, or system, approved by the Illinois
Department of Public Health if the use and application fails to meet the
minimum requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Notices and orders. The Health Officer shall issue all necessary
notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the
necessary safeguards during construction, and to insure compliance with all
chapter requirements. Any written order posted on premises involved shall not
be removed except by order of the Health Officer. Removal without such order
shall constitute a violation of this chapter to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of the public. The Health Officer may revoke, by writing, any
permit or approval issued contrary to this chapter or based upon a false
statement or misrepresentation in the application.
   (D)   Authority to enter premises. The Health Officer, after identification,
shall have the authority to enter any property at any reasonable time to
inspect any for health and sanitation purposes, and for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. The Health Officer may also make any necessary
test, including dye tests or obtaining effluent samples for laboratory
analysis, on any property to determine compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Health Officer is authorized to engage such expert opinion as
deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise.
   (E)   Licenses. The Health Officer shall issue licenses, after a
determination of competence pursuant to the provisions of §§
171.180 through
171.186 to any person engaged in the evaluation of the soils or in the design,
construction, or maintenance of onsite wastewater treatment systems with the
County of Lake, and may suspend or revoke any license for cause.
   (F)   Credentials. The Health Officer and authorized representatives shall
carry proper credentials of their respective office for the purpose of
inspecting any and all systems in the performance of duties under this chapter.
   (G)   Official records. The Health Officer shall keep official records of
applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports
of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained
in the official records so long as the building or structure to which they
relate remains in existence unless otherwise provided for.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.005 EXISTING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Continued system use. The legal use and occupancy of any building
serviced by an onsite wastewater treatment system, that had been approved, or
constructed prior to the adoption of this chapter, shall be permitted to be
continued without change, except as specifically addressed in this chapter.
   (B)   System maintenance and protection. The owner of an onsite wastewater
treatment system shall be responsible for its safe and sanitary operation and
maintenance. All system components that are required by this chapter shall be
maintained in working order.
      (1)   Repeated regular pumping of pretreatment components and/or soil
absorption components to prevent unsanitary conditions as described in §
171.050(A) shall not be considered safe and sanitary operation and maintenance
of a system.
      (2)   The pasturing of animals, staging of events with large numbers of
people, and/or driving or parking of vehicles on primary or reserve soil
absorption areas, distribution components, treatment tanks and units, and lift
stations is prohibited.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
DEFINITIONS
§ 171.020 GENERAL.
   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, or defined in materials
adopted by reference in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings indicated in this section. Where terms are defined in both
materials adopted by reference in this chapter as well as in this section, the
definition in this section shall apply in the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.021 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   ALTERATION-REPLACEMENT ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. An onsite
wastewater treatment system that is designed to comply with the requirements of
this chapter when an alteration to a property or building occurs, or when a
change in use of a building is made that affects the wastewater flow. An
ALTERATION- REPLACEMENT ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM may consist of the
complete replacement of all components of the system, or the replacement of
selected system components, and may include the soil treatment component.
   ANIMAL PEN WASHWATER. Water that has been used to wash floors of animals
pens.
   ATYPICAL WASTEWATER FLOW. Wastewater flow that is not typical of domestic
sewage due to conditions described in §
171.065.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation delineating the level of flooding
resulting from the 100-year flood frequency storm event.
   BEDROOM. Any room in a dwelling that is suitable for regular use as private
sleeping quarters for a person, including a room in a basement, that contains a
closet and shares a common hallway with, or is adjoining a bathroom containing
at least a toilet, lavatory and shower stall. A room is not considered to be
suitable for regular use as private sleeping quarters for a person if the room
is the sole means for accessing other rooms in the house (i.e., functions as a
hallway) with the exception of bathrooms and mechanical rooms.
   BUILDING FOOTPRINT. The outside perimeter of a building including attached
garages, seasonal rooms, breezeways and covered porches, excluding covered
decks and patios.
   BUILDING PLAN. A plan prepared to depict the floor plan of a building,
including both existing and proposed space.
   CLASS I AEROBIC TREATMENT UNIT. A mechanical wastewater treatment unit
classified, listed and labeled as Class I by an ANSI accredited third-party
testing and certification organization, and certified compliant with the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)/International Electro-
chemical Commission (IEC) Guide 65 to determine compliance with the
requirements of NSF ANSI Standard 40 for wastewater treatment systems.
   COARSE SAND. Fill material having an effective diameter of 0.15 to 0.30 mm
with a coefficient of uniformity <5.0, and having less than 20% material
coarser than 2 mm and less than 5% silt and clay.
   CONCEPTUAL SITE PLAN. A plan that depicts the design of a code compliant
Alteration-Replacement OWTS submitted in accordance with the requirements of §
171.068(D). The development of the site plan may require the determination of
wetlands boundaries and the base flood elevation from appropriately licensed
professionals.
   CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL. A non-transferable approval issued to a licensed
onsite wastewater treatment system installation contractor to construct/install
an onsite wastewater treatment system in accordance with the approved site plan
and the requirements of this chapter.
   DEFLECTION (OF A CONCAVE SOIL TREATMENT COMPONENT). The maximum distance
between the down slope edge of a soil treatment component to the length of a
perpendicular line that intersects furthest points of the contour line along
the down slope edge of the soil treatment component. The percent deflection is
determined by dividing the amount of deflection by the effective soil treatment
component length. The effective length of a soil treatment component is the
distance between the furthest points along the contour line of the down slope
edge of the soil treatment component.
   DISCHARGE RATE. The volume of wastewater discharged from a low pressure
distribution system expressed as gallons per minute, and applied as a rate
either per perforation, per line, or per system.
   DISTAL END PRESSURE. A measure of system pressure in a low pressure
distribution system made at the end of a lateral distribution pipe opposite the
force main connection, and expressed as feet of pressure head.
   DIVERTER VALVE. A valve with a single inflow that may be adjusted to direct
outflow into any one of two or more directions.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Wastewater derived principally from dwellings, businesses,
office buildings, institutions, food establishments, or similar facilities.
   EFFLUENT FILTER. A removable, cleanable, or disposable device installed on
the outlet piping of a septic tank for the purpose of retaining solids of a
specific size and/or modulating effluent flow rate.
   FAILING ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. An onsite wastewater treatment
that is not properly and/or adequately treating and dispersing wastewater,
causing unsanitary conditions as described in §
171.050(A), and as a result, creating an imminent health hazard or a public
nuisance.
   FLOW CONTROL DEVICE. A device specially designed to equalize the outflow
elevation of effluent from a distribution box, typically a rotating pipe cap
provided with an off center outflow orifice that can adjust the flow line by
rotation of the cap.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department
or an appropriate designated agent.
   HIGH STRENGTH WASTEWATER.
      (1)   Sewage having a 5-Day Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5) greater than
300 mg/l, Total Suspended Solids (TSS) greater than 200 mg/l, or fats, oils,
and greases greater than 50mg/l entering a primary pretreatment component; or
      (2)   Effluent from a septic tank or other pretreatment component that
has a BOD5 greater than 170 mg/l, TSS greater than 60 mg/l, or fats, oils, and
grease greater than 25 mg/l that is intended to be applied to an infiltrative
surface.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. A discharge or dumping of material into a drain or
stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except for
discharges allowed under the provisions of this chapter or NPDES Permit No.
ILR40 Part I.B.2.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. A hazard to public health when the evidence is
sufficient to show that a condition or practice, posing or contributing to a
significant threat of danger to health or safety, creates or may create a
public health situation that should be corrected immediately to prevent injury
or illness, and that should not be permitted to continue.
   INCREASED WATER USAGE. A projected increase in the amount of water required
to be treated by an onsite wastewater treatment system as a result of an
alteration to a property or a change in the use of a property. Alterations to
properties that result in INCREASED WATER USAGE include, but based on the
determination of the Health Officer, are not limited to:
      (1)   The addition of a bedroom to a dwelling.
      (2)   The addition of square footage to any building that is greater than
50% of the original building square footage. The square footage increase
calculation shall include the area of all approved building addition projects
on record. The square footage of the building prior to the first approved
project shall be the initial building square footage.
      (3)   An increase in the amount of water required to be treated by the
onsite wastewater treatment system serving a non-residential building of
greater than 150 gallons per day, as determined by the Health Officer in
accordance with the requirements of
Table C.1 in Appendix C, water meter data, or other acceptable means.
   ISOLATION DISTANCE. The vertical measurement from a wastewater application
point to a limiting layer.
   LIFT STATION. A watertight containment intended solely to collect pretreated
effluent and containing a submersible effluent pump, external pump switch(es),
an audio-visual alarm, and additional pump control devices.
   LIMITING LAYER. That plane in a soil profile that restricts the placement of
a wastewater application point due to conditions including, but not limited to,
seasonal soil saturation or permanent saturated conditions, restrictive
permeability (loading rate of 0 gpd/ft2), excessive permeability (gravelly
coarse sand or coarser texture), or fractured bedrock.
   MAINTENANCE. Action taken by a Lake County licensed installation contractor
or homeowner to restore proper onsite wastewater treatment system performance
or function. The following actions shall be considered MAINTENANCE:
      (1)   Replacement of baffles, pumps, electrical components, switches,
motors or controls, disinfection components, pretreatment component manholes,
or risers;
      (2)   One-to-one replacement of header lines, building sewers, effluent
conveyance piping, force mains, drip system supply and return lines, drop boxes
or distribution boxes, in order to maintain or improve unrestricted flow of
wastewater; and
      (3)   Removal of pipe blockages using mechanical auguring equipment.
   MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES. Routine or periodic action, as required by this
chapter, taken by an appropriately licensed service provider or a homeowner to
assure continued proper onsite wastewater treatment system performance, extend
onsite wastewater treatment system longevity, and/or assure an onsite
wastewater treatment system meets performance standards. The following actions
shall be considered management activities:
      (1)   Servicing certified system pretreatment component(s);
      (2)   Sampling or servicing surface discharging onsite wastewater
treatment system(s);
      (3)   Pumping holding tank(s);
      (4)   Reporting, by means required by this chapter, system management
activities to the Health Officer;
      (5)   Services performed on drip distribution onsite wastewater treatment
systems.
   NEW ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. A newly constructed onsite
wastewater treatment system designed to serve:
      (1)   A new dwelling or non-residential building on a property on which a
dwelling or non-residential building had not previously existed;
      (2)   A new dwelling or non-residential building on a property on which a
dwelling or non-residential building had previously existed, but which has not
been standing for at least one year; or
      (3)   A new dwelling or non-residential building that replaces an
existing dwelling or non-residential building and the new dwelling or non-
residential building has a different building footprint and/or location than
the existing.
   ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM (OWTS). A wastewater treatment and
disposal system that is installed on the site at which the wastewater is
produced, and:
      (1)   Disperses treated wastewater into the soil;
      (2)   Discharges treated wastewater to a discharge point open to the
environment when the projected daily flow is less than 1500 gallons; or
      (3)   Contains wastewater in a tank or tanks for removal and disposal at
a remote site.
   ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM COMPONENT. A component of a wastewater
treatment and disposal system that is installed on the site at which the
wastewater is produced including, but not limited to, a septic tank, a lift
station, a secondary pretreatment unit or soil treatment area. For the purposes
of this chapter, an ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM COMPONENT may also be
referred to as a SYSTEM COMPONENT.
   PRE-TREATMENT SYSTEM COMPONENT. One or more septic tanks in parallel or
series, exterior grease interceptor(s), or secondary treatment units designed
to treat wastewater prior to it being treated by another onsite wastewater
treatment system component.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer that is part of an Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency regulated wastewater treatment and disposal system that is owned and/or
operated by a governmental body or public utility.
   REDOXIMORPHIC FEATURES. Soil characteristics associated with seasonal
saturation that result from the chemical reduction and oxidation of iron and
manganese compounds in the soil, and are indicative of the extent of soil
saturation.
   REPAIR TO AN ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. Actions taken by a licensed
installation contractor or homeowner to improve or correct the performance of
an onsite wastewater treatment system, including, but not limited to, repairing
or replacing an onsite wastewater treatment system component (not including the
replacement of, or addition to, the soil treatment component), or to facilitate
operation and maintenance of an existing onsite wastewater treatment system
including, but not limited to, the following actions:
      (1)   Replacing a pretreatment system component.
      (2)   Replacing a lift station.
      (3)   Adding aerobic remediation, filtration, or distribution components.
      (4)   Replacing pressure distribution piping or drip tubing.
      (5)   Replacing the gravel bed in a Wisconsin mound system.
      (6)   Extending the basal width along the entire length of the downslope
toe of a system using gravel or coarse sand, as applicable when reserve area is
designated on an existing approved site plan.
      (7)   Installing a shallow toe drain at the downslope toe of a Wisconsin
at-grade, mound, or modified mound system, or an Illinois raised filter bed
system seeping to the ground surface provided the seeping water does not meet
the definition of domestic sewage, and all system inflow and infiltration has
been corrected. The toe drain shall discharge to a seepage trench and shall
meet the setback distances in
Appendix D.
   REPLACEMENT ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. An onsite wastewater
treatment system that is designed to comply with the requirements of this
chapter to replace all system components, or selected system components, but in
all cases includes the replacement of the soil treatment component, of an
existing onsite wastewater treatment system.
   RESERVE SOIL TREATMENT AREA. An area designated for the replacement or
enlargement of a soil based onsite wastewater treatment system.
   SEPTAGE. Liquid and solid material removed from domestic septic tanks or
other approved pretreatment systems, and specifically excluding wastes from
portable toilets, holding tanks, grease traps and sewage treatment plant sludge
material.
   SITE PLAN. A prepared plan that depicts a proposed onsite wastewater
treatment system design on a property in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.125 through
171.128 of this chapter and that meets all other applicable requirements of
this chapter.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A prepared plan that depicts the finished contouring
of a site, including modifications to the site associated with proposed work on
the onsite wastewater treatment system, to specifications acceptable to the
controlling village or municipality or the County of Lake.
   SOIL BASED ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. A wastewater treatment and
disposal system that is designed to discharge pretreated wastewater, for
further treatment and dispersal, to an appropriate soil treatment component.
   SOIL CLASSIFIER/SOIL SCIENTIST. A Certified Professional Soil Classifier
(CPSC), as determined by the Illinois Soil Classifiers Association (ISCA), or a
Certified Professional Soil Classifier (CPSC) or Certified Professional Soil
Scientist (CPSS) as determined by the Soil Science Society of America (SSSA).
   SOIL LOADING RATE. The maximum rate, based upon a soil’s texture, structure,
and consistence and expressed as gallons per day per square foot (gpd/ft2) of
infiltration area, at which effluent may be applied to a soil treatment system.
   SOIL RESOURCE GROUP. A group of soils specific to this chapter that share
common traits and similar subsoil materials.
   SQUARE FOOTAGE OF A BUILDING. The calculation, measuring the outside
dimensions, of the floor area of an existing or proposed dwelling or non-
residential building, or part of an existing or proposed dwelling or non-
residential building, that is a habitable portion of the dwelling or non-
residential building, and as further described below. The Health Officer shall
not include the following areas in the calculation of the square footage of an
existing or proposed dwelling or non-residential building, or part of an
existing or proposed dwelling or non-residential building:
      (1)   Unheated or unfinished attics with exposed structural construction.
      (2)   Unheated screened or covered porches and breezeways.
      (3)   Unfinished basements.
      (4)   Finished basements that do not contain a bedroom.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division or re-division of a parcel of land into two or
more parts by means of mapping, platting, conveyance, change or rearrangement
of boundaries.
   SYSTEM TYPE. A category of onsite wastewater treatment system, as
illustrated in
Appendix E, and distinguished by system profile features that are designed to
meet the required separation distance between the wastewater application point
and the limiting layer.
   TOPOGRAPHICAL SURVEY. A representation of changes in elevation of a property
prepared to scale by an Illinois licensed surveyor or engineer, that depicts
each one-foot change in elevation by a contour line, is referenced to a
benchmark of known or assumed elevation, and which encompasses a sufficient
area to include the proposed structure, the onsite wastewater treatment system
area and any other topographical feature relevant to the wastewater system.
   WASTEWATER. For the purposes of the enforcement of this chapter, and unless
otherwise specified, the term WASTEWATER shall refer to domestic sewage.
   WASTEWATER APPLICATION POINT. The point lowest in elevation at which
wastewater applied to a soil treatment component of an onsite wastewater
treatment system will first contact with soil or fill material.
   WETLAND. Land that is inundated or saturated by surface or shallow ground
water at a sufficient  frequency and duration to support, under ordinary
conditions, a prevalence of vegetation adapted to such conditions (hydrophytic
vegetation).
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 19-0775,
passed 5-14-2019; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 171.035 GENERAL.
   (A)   Authority. The Health Officer, in order to protect and promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of Lake County, Illinois, and
other affected communities, is authorized and directed to develop procedures,
practices and policies; to interpret and enforce these rules and regulations
establishing minimum standards for sewage discharges, the location,
installation, alteration, operation, maintenance, and monitoring of all onsite
wastewater treatment systems, so as to protect land, water, groundwater and
other natural resources within the County of Lake from impairment, pollution,
or destruction; to minimize the risk of spreading communicable diseases, and to
prevent and avoid other health and ecologic hazards, as well as illicit
discharges and chemical contamination of lands and waters.
   (B)   Minimum standards. This chapter establishes minimum standards to
minimize the risk that onsite wastewater treatment systems:
      (1)   Contaminate any drinking water supply;
      (2)   Are accessible to insects, rodents, or other possible carriers of
disease that may come into contact with human food or drinking water;
      (3)   Pollute or contaminate the water of any bathing beach or surface
waters used for public or domestic water supply or recreational purposes;
      (4)   Give rise to a nuisance due to odor or unsightly appearance; and
      (5)   Violate any other laws or regulations governing control of water
pollution or sewage disposal.
   (C)   Onsite wastewater treatment system construction. No person shall
construct an onsite wastewater treatment system without prior approval of the
Health Officer, which shall include the approval of the site plan for the
onsite wastewater treatment system, and the issuance of construction approval,
with the exception that construction approval shall not be required for a
replacement onsite wastewater treatment system, non-soil based onsite
wastewater treatment system, or repair to an onsite wastewater treatment
system.
   (D)   Alterations or additions to properties. No person shall alter, expand,
remodel, replace or add to a dwelling or non-residential building served by an
onsite wastewater treatment system without prior approval of the Health
Officer.
   (E)   Subdivision of property. No property, where onsite wastewater
treatment systems are proposed to be used, shall be subdivided into two or more
lots, nor shall there be a change or rearrangement of lot lines without prior
approval of the Health Officer.
   (F)   Public sewer availability. The Health Officer shall refuse to issue
approval for a site plan to install, replace, or repair an onsite wastewater
treatment system where a public sewer is available. A public sewer shall be
deemed available when the nearest property boundary line of the property to be
served is located within a reasonable distance of the public sewer connection
point, and the connection is permitted by the controlling authority of the
public sewer. Investigation of public sewer availability shall be conducted by
the licensed onsite wastewater system installation contractor or designer and
shall be indicated on a plan submitted with an application for approval.
      (1)   Reasonable distance. A reasonable distance shall be 300 feet from
the nearest property boundary of a single family dwelling, and 1,000 feet from
the nearest property boundary of a non-residential, multi-family, or proposed
subdivision property boundary, except where the subdivision does not result in
the creation of an additional parcel or parcels. The distance shall be measured
along the proposed route of the sewer, as required by the controlling authority
or by other persons or agencies having authority to determine the route of the
sewer.
      (2)   Annexation exclusion. If annexation is required by the controlling
authority for permission to connect to the public sewer, the sewer shall be
deemed unavailable.
      (3)   Pre-treatment component exclusion. The Health Officer may issue a
permit to replace an OWTS pre-treatment component or lift station that is
creating an imminent health hazard where a public sewer is available if the
controlling authority of the public sewer does not object to the issuance of
the permit.
   (G)   Property boundaries. Onsite wastewater treatment systems shall be
located on property owned, either in whole or in part, by the owner of the
building(s) served.
      (1)   Off-lot systems. A system component of an onsite wastewater
treatment system may be located on property not owned by the owner of the
onsite wastewater treatment system, provided a platted easement exists for the
location of the system component and associated conveyance piping.
   (H)   Regulatory floodway. No component of an onsite wastewater treatment
system shall be installed in a regulatory floodway.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 19-0775,
passed 5-14-2019; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
UNSANITARY CONDITIONS
§ 171.050 GENERAL.
   (A)   Unsanitary conditions. It shall be unlawful and shall be considered an
imminent health hazard for any person to permit or cause unsanitary conditions
due to: the discharge of wastewater derived from domestic sewage with a
laboratory confirmed fecal coliform bacteria concentration of greater than 400
colony forming units (cfu) per 100 ml, directly or indirectly to any wetland,
surface waters, ground surface, well or abandoned well; the malfunctioning of
an onsite wastewater treatment system or system component that results in
wastewater backing up into, or not adequately flowing from a building; allowing
the contents of any onsite wastewater disposal system or system component to
emit offensive odors or become objectionable so as to be dangerous or
prejudicial to health; or allowing an illicit discharge. Further, it shall be
unlawful and shall be considered a public nuisance for any person to maintain
an onsite wastewater treatment system in a condition that the Health Officer
determines is unsanitary, and is detrimental or potentially detrimental to the
health and/or safety of the inhabitants of Lake County, Illinois.
   (B)   Abatement order. Upon verification of a failing onsite wastewater
treatment system by laboratory analysis, dye testing and/or direct visual
observation, the Health Officer shall give written notice to the owner and/or
legal occupant responsible for such acts ordering abatement of same. Failure of
any person to obey such an abatement order shall also constitute a violation of
this chapter. Any person receiving an abatement order may request a hearing as
outlined in §§
176.15 through
176.17.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
PROJECT APPROVAL CATEGORIES
§ 171.065 GENERAL.
   (A)   Approval categories. A site plan for the construction of the following
onsite wastewater treatment systems, and the following development projects or
activities require Health Officer approval for determination of adequate
treatment and disposal of wastewater and to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of Lake County.
      (1)   New Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems.
      (2)   Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems.
      (3)   Alterations or Additions to Properties.
         (a)   Alterations or Additions Not Requiring Replacement of System
Components.
         (b)   Alterations or Additions Requiring Replacement of System
Components (Alteration- Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems).
      (4)   Repairs to an Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems.
      (5)   Subdivisions.
      (6)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems for Atypical Wastewater Flow.
      (7)   Non-Soil Based Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems.
      (8)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Pre-Treatment Component
Elimination.
      (9)   Artificial Site Drainage Effectiveness Investigation Plans.
   (B)   Required component maintenance. When a site plan is approved in
accordance with the requirements of §§
171.065 through
171.074 that includes the relocation or replacement of any existing onsite
wastewater treatment system component, or the installation of a new onsite
wastewater treatment system component, the owner of record of the onsite
wastewater s treatment system shall be required to meet the requirements of §§
171.220 through
171.224 and
171.255 through
171.261 for the maintenance and inspection of any new or existing component
that is subject to the requirements of those sections.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.066 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR NEW ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. Approval of a site plan for the construction of a New Onsite
Wastewater Treatment System, shall be granted when the requirements of this
section are met.
      (1)   Soil evaluation report. A soil evaluation report issued in
accordance with the requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089 determines the soil to be suitable for the projected flow and assigned
loading rates in the proposed soil treatment areas.
      (2)   Plans and other information. A site plan and other required
information prepared in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.100 through
171.111 and
171.125 through
171.128 are submitted.
      (3)   Primary soil treatment area. The primary soil treatment area of the
proposed onsite wastewater treatment system, of the type specified by the soil
evaluation, is designed in an adequately sized area of suitable soils for the
proposed flow, the assigned loading rates and required separation distance
between the wastewater application point and the limiting layer.
      (4)   Reserve soil treatment area. A reserve soil treatment area exists
in suitable soil, as specified in subsection (A)(3) above and can be sized as
follows:
         (a)   Equal to the primary soil treatment area when calculated as
square footage for systems other than Types 3, 4 and 5.
         (b)   At least equal to 50% of the primary soil treatment basal area
for Type 3, 4 and 5 systems when contiguous to the entire length of the
downslope of the primary soil treatment area.
      (5)   Primary and reserve soil treatment area. As an alternative to
meeting the requirements of subsections (A)(3) and (A)(4) above, the system
type as specified by the soil evaluation may be designed in an area of suitable
soils for the proposed flow, at the assigned loading rates and required
separation distance between the wastewater application point and the limiting
layer, reserve soil treatment area may exist in a suitable soil area, the site
plan may indicate the installation of 150% of the primary soil treatment area,
to be installed as two approximately equal soil treatment areas with a manual
or automatic alternating device.
      (6)   Land slope. The land slope of the primary and reserved soil
treatment areas does not exceed 25%.
      (7)   Floodplain elevation.
         (a)   The wastewater application point of Type 3, 4 or 5 systems, or
Illinois raised filter bed systems, shall not be located below the base flood
elevation.
         (b)   The existing grade over Type 1, 2 and drip distribution systems
shall not be located below the base flood elevation.
      (8)   Setback requirements. All components of the primary soil treatment
area and the reserve soil treatment areas comply with the setback distances
established by
Appendix D.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.067 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR REPLACEMENT ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. Approval for a Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment System
shall be granted when the requirements of this section are met.
      (1)   Soil evaluation report. A soil evaluation report issued in
accordance with the requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089 determines the soil to be suitable for the projected flow and assigned
loading rates in the proposed soil treatment areas.
      (2)   Site plan and system design. A site plan prepared in accordance
with the requirements of §§
171.100 through
171.111 and
171.125 through
171.128.
      (3)   Primary soil treatment area. The primary soil treatment area of the
proposed onsite wastewater treatment system, of the type specified by the soil
evaluation, is designed in an adequately sized area of suitable soils for the
proposed flow, the assigned loading rates and required separation distance
between the wastewater application point and the limiting layer.
      (4)   Land slope. The land slope of the primary soil treatment area does
not exceed 25%.
      (5)   Floodplain elevation.
         (a)   The wastewater application point of Type 3, 4 or 5 systems, or
Illinois raised filter bed systems, shall not be located below the base flood
elevation.
         (b)   The existing grade over Type 1, 2 and drip distribution systems
shall not be located below the base flood elevation.
      (6)   Existing components. Components not proposed for replacement shall:
         (a)   Be inspected by a Lake County licensed onsite wastewater
treatment system installation contractor to determine if the component in
question is in sound condition and can be expected to function as designed and
originally installed. The installation contractor performing the inspection
shall submit a report of the inspection that indicates that the component in
question is in sound condition and can be expected to function as designed and
originally installed.
      (7)   Setback requirements. All components of the primary system and the
reserve soil treatment area, if proposed, comply with the setback distances
established by
Appendix D.
   (B)   Compliance impossible.
      (1)   Site plan approval conditions. A site plan for the construction of
a Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment System to correct a failing onsite
wastewater treatment system may be approved when the requirements of subsection
(A) above cannot be met when the Health Officer determines that the proposal:
         (a)   Is in substantial and reasonable compliance with these
requirements; and
         (b)   Is protective of the health of the public and the natural
resources of the County of Lake.
      (2)   Restrictions. The Health Officer may place restrictions upon the
use of the system to reduce flow and/or manage the risk of domestic sewage on
the ground surface, entering a limiting layer and/or discharging to a surface
water resource. Such restrictions shall be recorded as a covenant with the
property at the Lake County Recorder of Deeds Office and shall run with the
land.
      (3)   System design approval criteria. When considering the approval of a
site plan for the construction of a Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment
System when compliance with the requirements of subsection (A) above is
impossible, the Health Officer shall apply the criteria described in this
section, and shall issue approval when the requirements of this section are
met. Emphasis shall be for treatment and dispersal of wastewater onsite. Site
accessibility, available space, local regulations, and/or existing structural
conditions may preclude some actions.
         (a)   When site conditions preclude the ability to meet the
requirements of subsections (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5) and (A)(7) above, the
following improvements shall be considered:
            1.   Addition of a pretreatment component certified to produce
Class I effluent to compensate for reduced setback distances and undersized
soil treatment components.
            2.   Addition of a pretreatment component certified to produce
Class I effluent to recover function of a previously malfunctioning soil
treatment component.
         (b)   When existing soil conditions fail to meet the requirements of
subsections (A)(3) or (A)(5) above, the following improvements shall be
considered, in descending order of desirability, when supplemented by a
pretreatment component certified to produce Class I effluent:
            1.   The elevation of the grade, raised by importing sand fill as a
filter media to overcome the soil limitation subject to an approved site
development plan and compensatory storage requirements, when applicable. The
application point of the soil treatment component shall be located to create an
unsaturated soil treatment zone below the wastewater application point.
            2.   A bottomless media filter subject to: appropriate loading
rates of the filter and dispersal soil; acceptable application point (above
saturated elevation) elevation of the bottom of the media; and the presence of
permeable subsoil which will accept the effluent directly from the filter or
from imported permeable soil under the filter, subject to an approved site
development plan and compensatory storage requirements, when applicable.
            3.   The wastewater stream separated into gray water and black
water with treatment and dispersal requirements commensurate with the strength
of the wastewater such that black water shall receive the higher degree of
treatment.
            4.   A holding tank(s) to supplement the existing onsite wastewater
treatment system on properties lacking any area for a soil treatment component
as follows:
               a.   At the lowest invert elevation of the system to capture
wastewater unable to be absorbed by an upstream soil treatment system.
               b.   As a separate zone for alternating use and/or separated
flows.
            5.   Discharge of effluent to an effluent receiving trench with an
overflow invert elevation at or above the top of the gravel/media in the
receiving trench. The discharge from the effluent receiving trench shall meet
the requirements of §
171.222.
            6.   A surface discharging onsite wastewater treatment system
meeting the requirements of §
171.222.
   (C)   System design approval criteria; performance-based proposals. As an
alternative to meeting the requirements of subsections (A) and (B)(3) above,
the Health Officer shall consider the approval of a site plan to install an
onsite wastewater treatment system when the proposal clearly and convincingly
establishes that the requirements of subsections (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(b) and §
171.101 are met. In approving such a proposal, and in addition to any
restrictions stipulated in subsection (B) above, the Health Officer may
require, as a condition of the approval, routine and ongoing monitoring,
inspection and/or sampling of the treated wastewater to confirm that the onsite
wastewater treatment system is performing as designed, and in accordance with §
171.101. Any such conditions shall be recorded as a covenant with the property
at the Lake County Recorder of Deeds Office and shall run with the land.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.068 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR ALTERATIONS TO PROPERTIES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   General. No building or property served by an onsite wastewater
treatment system may be added to or altered without prior approval of the
Health Officer.
      (2)   Building and site plans. A proposal to the Health Officer for an
alteration or addition to a property served by an onsite wastewater treatment
system must include a building plan depicting the existing and proposed final
floor plan, and must also indicate any proposed site alterations.
   (B)   Approval for alterations not requiring replacement of system
components. When the Health Officer determines that the proposed property
alteration project does not conflict with the setback distances in
Appendix D, and does not otherwise impact the onsite wastewater treatment
system by increasing water usage, wastewater flow, or the strength of the
wastewater, the Health Officer shall approve the project without requiring
replacement of onsite wastewater treatment system components, and in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
      (1)   Proposals not resulting in increased water usage. Proposals for an
alteration or addition to a dwelling or non-residential building that will not
result in increased water usage, as defined in this chapter, shall be approved
when the following requirements are met:
         (a)   A site plan indicates the proposal meets the required setbacks
to all existing components of the primary onsite wastewater system and reserve
soil treatment area, if applicable, as established by
Appendix D.
         (b)   A search of Lake County Health Department records indicates
satisfactory past performance of the onsite wastewater treatment system, and
that any required system management activities and reports are up-to-date,
current and indicate that the system is functioning in a satisfactory manner.
      (2)   Proposals to replace building - primarily in the same building
footprint. Proposals to replace an existing dwelling or non-residential
building when the dwelling or nonresidential building is proposed primarily in
the same building footprint location as the existing structure shall be
approved when the requirements of this section are met. A proposal shall be
deemed to be primarily in the same building footprint if 80% or more of the
proposed building footprint square footage falls within the original building
footprint. An existing non-compliant setback distance shall not be increased.
In the case of a catastrophic loss caused by fire, flooding, wind, collapse,
and/or life safety issues, the owner of record at the time of loss shall submit
a proposal for replacing the lost building within one year of the occurrence of
the damage to the building.
         (a)   A site plan indicates the proposal meets the required setbacks
to all existing components of the primary onsite wastewater treatment system
and reserve soil treatment area, if applicable, as established by
Appendix D, or a site plan indicates the proposal does not meet the required
setbacks to all existing components of the primary onsite wastewater treatment
system and reserve soil treatment area, if applicable, as established by
Appendix D, but the proposal meets the requirements of §
171.067(B). A system component that does not meet the setback requirements
established by
Appendix D may be replaced in accordance with the requirements of §
171.069.
         (b)   The new dwelling or non- residential building will not result in
increased water usage, as defined in this chapter.
         (c)   A search of Lake County Health Department records indicates
satisfactory past performance of the onsite wastewater treatment system, and
that any required system management activities and reports are up-to-date,
current and indicate that the system is functioning in a satisfactory manner.
         (d)   All of the existing wastewater disposal system components will
continue to be used.
         (e)   A report prepared by a licensed septic system installation
contractor or designer, signed and dated, detailing the size of the components
of the system, current performance and integrity of all tanks, controls and
distribution system is submitted and approved. The report shall indicate that
in the professional judgment of the evaluator, the building project will not
negatively impact the overall functioning of the onsite wastewater treatment
system.
   (C)   Approval for alterations requiring replacement or removal of system
components. When a proposed property alteration project requires the relocation
or removal of any component of an onsite wastewater treatment system because of
conflict with the setback distances in
Appendix D, except as specified in subsection (B)(2)(a) above, or when the
project otherwise impacts the onsite wastewater treatment system by resulting
in increased water usage, increased wastewater flow or strength of the
wastewater, the Health Officer shall require approval of a site plan to
construct an Alteration-Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment System as a
condition for approval of the property alteration project. Such approval may
consist of the approval of a site plan to replace onsite wastewater treatment
system components or the replacement of the entire onsite wastewater treatment
system.
      (1)   Replacement of a system component other than the soil treatment
component. The Health Officer shall approve a site plan to construct an
Alteration-Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment System that does not include
the replacement of the soil treatment component when the proposal for the
system meets the requirements of §
171.067(A)(2) and (A)(7). The requirements of §
171.067(A)(6) shall also apply to existing system components that are not
replaced.
         (a)   Residential lift stations. The Health Officer may approve a site
plan to construct an Alteration-Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment System
for an increased water usage proposal that allows the use of an existing
undersized lift station providing the lift station is undersized by no more
than one bedroom and the following actions are taken:
            1.   A Lake County licensed onsite wastewater treatment system
installation contractor inspects the lift station and submits a report of
inspection that indicates the lift station is in sound condition and can be
expected to satisfactorily function.
      (2)   Soil treatment component replacement with or without replacement of
other system components. The Health Officer shall approve a site plan to
construct an Alteration-Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment System that
includes the replacement of the soil treatment component when the proposal
meets the requirements of §
171.067(A), though the requirements of §
171.067(A)(6) shall apply only when existing system components are not
replaced. The following alterations to properties require the approval of a
site plan to construct an Alteration-Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment
System in accordance with the requirements of this section:
         (a)   Proposals resulting in increased water usage. Proposals for an
alteration or addition to a dwelling or nonresidential building that result in
increased water usage, as defined in this chapter.
      (3)   Soil treatment area reduction for setback compliance. When the
proposed property alteration project does not comply with the setback distance
requirements established in
Appendix D, the Health Officer shall approve the removal of a portion of the
soil treatment component of the system to meet a setback distance requirement
when the conditions and requirements of this section and subsection (C)(1)
above are met. Any discrepancy between the record(s) on file with the Health
Department and the site plan submitted for the proposal shall be resolved by an
onsite inspection by a Lake County licensed OWTS installer/designer to be
reviewed by the Health Officer.
         (a)   Reduction of up to 10%. The soil treatment area may be reduced
up to 10% upon the Health Officer’s review and approval of a report prepared by
a licensed septic system installation contractor or designer, signed and dated,
detailing the size of the components of the system, current performance and
integrity of all tanks, controls and distribution system. The report shall also
indicate any ponding of the soil treatment component(s) and the level of any
such ponding, and shall indicate that the reduction in up to 10% of the soil
treatment area will not negatively impact the overall functioning of the onsite
wastewater treatment system.
         (b)   Reduction of up to 20%. The soil treatment area may be reduced
up to 20% upon the Health Officer's review and approval of the following:
            1.   A report prepared by a licensed septic system installation
contractor or designer, signed and dated, detailing the size of the components
of the system, current performance and integrity of all tanks, controls and
distribution system. The report shall also indicate any ponding of the soil
treatment component(s) and the level of any such ponding, and shall indicate
that, in conjunction with the installation of a Class I aerobic treatment unit,
the reduction in up to 20% of the soil treatment area will not negatively
impact the overall functioning of the onsite wastewater treatment system.
            2.   A repair plan meeting the requirements of §
171.111 for the installation of a Class I aerobic treatment unit.
   (D)   Approval for alterations requiring conceptual site plans. When a
proposed property alteration project meets the conditions described in this
section, the Health Officer shall approve the proposal when the requirements,
as specified by this section, are met.
      (1)   Alterations with an increase in square footage between 50% and 75%.
Proposals for an alteration or addition to a dwelling that do not result in
increased water usage, as defined in this chapter, with the exception that the
proposal includes a square footage increase of between 50% and 75% may be
approved without meeting the requirements of §
171.067(A), if the following requirements are met.
         (a)   Submission of a conceptual site plan that indicates that the
requirements of §
171.067(A) can be met if the existing onsite waste water treatment system
fails, as defined in §
171.021. The requirements of §
171.067(A)(6) shall apply only when existing system components are not
replaced. Should installation of the replacement OWTS be necessary in the
future, a site plan shall be submitted in accordance with §
171.125.
         (b)   Submission of a report prepared by a licensed onsite wastewater
treatment system installation contractor or designer, signed and dated,
detailing the size of the components of the system, current performance and
integrity of all tanks, controls and distribution systems. The report shall
include:
            1.   A calculation of the current used and unused capacity of the
soil treatment component, including a description of any ponding of the soil
treatment component(s) and the level of any such ponding.
            2.   An indication that the existing onsite wastewater treatment
system components are operating as designed and, in the professional judgment
of the evaluator, that the increase in building square footage will not
negatively impact the overall functioning of the onsite wastewater treatment
system.
            3.   An indication that the wastewater application point of an
existing Type 3, 4 or 5 system is not located below the base flood elevation,
or that the existing grade over an existing in-ground distribution system is
not located below the base flood elevation.
            4.   An indication that the system does not contain a cesspool or
seepage pit as a system component.
            5.   The results of a dye test of the onsite wastewater treatment
system, indicating that the system is not failing as defined in §
171.021.
         (c)   A search of Lake County Health Department records indicates
satisfactory past performance of the onsite wastewater treatment system, and
that any required system management activities and reports are up-to-date,
current and indicate that the system is functioning in a satisfactory manner.
         (d)   All site development requirements for the project proposal have
been met.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017; Ord. 19-0775,
passed 5-14-2019)
§ 171.069 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR REPAIRS TO ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. Approval for a repair to an onsite wastewater treatment
system shall be limited to the work described under the definition of “Repair
to Onsite Wastewater Treatment System” in §
171.021, and shall be granted when the requirements of this section are met.
      (1)   Site plan and system design. A site plan prepared in accordance
with the requirements of §§
171.100 through
171.111 and
171.125 through
171.128.
      (2)   Setback requirements. All system components being replaced comply
with the setback distances established by
Appendix D.
   (B)   Emergency replacement of septic tank, lift station or aerobic
treatment unit. A licensed onsite wastewater treatment system installation
contractor may replace a septic tank, lift station or aerobic treatment unit
prior to receiving site plan approval if a part of the component has collapsed
or the component is structurally weakened in such a way that it creates a
health or safety hazard. Installation of the component(s) may proceed under
these conditions:
      (1)   The licensed onsite wastewater treatment system installation
contractor shall notify the Health Officer of the circumstances of the
emergency situation, the location of the property in question, and the
component(s) that he or she intends to replace prior to installation of the
component(s).
      (2)   The licensed onsite wastewater treatment system installation
contractor shall provide assurance to the Health Officer that the installation
of the component(s) will meet the setback and sizing/capacity requirements of
subsection (A) above.
      (3)   The licensed onsite wastewater treatment system installation
contractor shall pay the plan review fee as set by the current fee schedule
adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01  prior to installation of the system component(s).
      (4)   After the system component(s) has/have been installed the licensed
onsite wastewater treatment system installation contractor shall:
         (a)   Request an inspection of the system component(s) in accordance
with the requirements of §
171.149; and
         (b)   Submit an as-built site plan that meets the requirements of §
171.127.
   (C)   Compliance impossible. When the requirements of subsection (A) above
cannot be met, the Health Officer shall consider for approval the repair to an
onsite wastewater treatment system in accordance with §
171.067(B)(1) and (B)(2).
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.070 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General. When onsite wastewater treatment systems are to be used for a
subdivision, the applicant shall submit, for review by the Health Officer, a
soil suitability report and/or soils evaluation prepared by a Lake County
licensed Soil Classifier/Soil Scientist, in accordance with the requirements of
§§
171.085 through
171.089, that establishes that each proposed lot contains an area suitable for
an onsite wastewater treatment primary and reserve soil treatment area.
Proposed subdivisions shall be reviewed for the following:
      (1)   Suitability. The suitability of each lot shall be determined by the
results of the soil evaluations that are conducted in accordance with the
requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089 and by the platting of proposed lots in accordance with the
requirements of §§
171.125 through
171.128.
      (2)   Subdivision plans. An Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer shall
prepare, seal and sign plans for a subdivision except as authorized by the
Health Officer. Any onsite wastewater treatment system depicted on the plans
shall be designed by a licensed onsite wastewater treatment system designer.
      (3)   Review of plans. Each lot served by an onsite wastewater treatment
system shall have an area of suitable soil for wastewater disposal sufficient
for both a primary and a reserve soil treatment area, with respect to soil
conditions and system design. The location of an existing onsite wastewater
treatment system that will remain shall comply with the requirements of
Appendix D.
      (4)   Area protection. All designated primary and reserve soil treatment
areas must be protected
from damage during the construction of the infrastructure of the subdivision.
Temporary fencing shall be placed to protect soil treatment areas.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.071 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS FOR
ATYPICAL WASTEWATER FLOW.
   (A)   General. When an onsite wastewater treatment system has atypical
wastewater flow as described in this section, the Health Officer may require a
system design, construction plan, construction procedure, inspection schedule
and method, system materials, or other agreements and conditions in addition to
the requirements of §§
171.066 through
171.069.
      (1)   Description of atypical wastewater flow. The following conditions
describe and define atypical wastewater flow and render the onsite wastewater
treatment system subject to the requirements of the entirety of this section:
         (a)   Projected wastewater flow. The projected wastewater flow exceeds
1,500 gpd;
         (b)   Shared systems. Any part of the proposed onsite wastewater
treatment system is shared by two or more dwellings or non-residential
buildings, including community systems or clustered systems;
         (c)   Collection system. The wastewater collection system is of low
pressure sewer design with septic tank effluent pump units (STEP tanks) or
grinder pump units;
         (d)   High strength wastewater. The wastewater influent quality is
projected to exceed 300 mg/l BOD5;
         (e)   Wastewater reuse or recycling. Any portion of the treated
wastewater is proposed for reuse or recycling.
   (B)   Pre-proposal review and determination of additional requirements. When
an applicant proposes to construct a new or replacement onsite wastewater
treatment system, or repair an onsite wastewater treatment system that has
atypical wastewater flow as described in this section, the Health Officer shall
require a pre-review of the proposal to determine and establish additional
requirements, if any, appropriate to the proposal. The review shall consider
the elements of the proposal that may stress the onsite wastewater treatment
system, such as waste strength (BOD, solids, greases and oils, etc.), peak
flows, seasonal flow variations, soil or site limitations, and elements of the
proposal that may require special arrangements for access or maintenance, such
as shared ownership.
      (1)   Pre-proposal review meeting. As part of the pre-review, the Health
Officer shall require a meeting with the applicant and/or individuals involved
with the design of the system and project. Any additional requirements imposed
by the Health Officer shall be established in this meeting, and shall be agreed
to by the Health Officer and the applicant and/or individuals involved with the
design of the system and project prior to the Health Officer approving the
proposal.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.072 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR NON-SOIL BASED ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. Non-soil based systems shall include holding tanks and
surface discharging onsite wastewater treatment systems. These systems shall be
approved only for uses specified in this section and shall not be approved in
lieu of a reserve soil treatment area when required. Subject to the
restrictions of §
171.110, the uses for, or conditions under which a non-soil based onsite
wastewater treatment system may be approved include:
   (B)   Conditions for the approval of holding tanks. A holding tank may be
approved by the Health Officer in the following conditions and for the
following uses:
      (1)   Awaiting public sewer extension. A holding tank may be approved as
a temporary onsite wastewater treatment system while awaiting the extension of
a public sewer, when the provision of the public sewer will occur within one
year.
         (a)   Proof of eventual connection. Approval for the proposed
connection and the time frame in which the sewer will be available shall be
provided in documentation from the controlling authority of the sewer.
      (2)   Awaiting installation of an onsite wastewater treatment system. A
holding tank may be approved as a temporary onsite wastewater treatment system
when a soil based onsite wastewater treatment system is approved, but its
construction is delayed by weather conditions. The use of a temporary holding
tank shall not exceed 180 days.
      (3)   Sanitary dumping station. A holding tank may be approved as a
sanitary dumping station to receive wastewater from the holding facilities of
recreational vehicles.
      (4)   Non-residential building - low flow. A holding tank may be approved
as an onsite wastewater treatment system for a non-residential building when
the peak daily wastewater flow is projected to be less than 150 gallons per day
as determined from Table C.1, or when the average daily flow is projected to be
less than 150 gallons per day calculated over a one week period during peak
usage.
      (5)   Seasonal home - inaccessible. A holding tank may be approved as an
onsite wastewater treatment system for a seasonal dwelling on land inaccessible
to vehicles.
      (6)   Publicly owner facility. A holding tank may be approved as an
onsite wastewater treatment system for a publicly owned and operated seasonal
recreational facility with an average daily flow of less than 150 gallons per
day calculated over a one week period during peak usage.
      (7)   Overflow capture. A holding tank may be approved for use as an
overflow capture tank in accordance with the requirements of §
171.067(B)(2)(b)4.
      (8)   Waste not allowed in a soil based onsite wastewater treatment
system. A holding tank may be approved to receive the discharge from fixtures
or drains that receive waste products such as automotive grease, oils, solvents
or chemicals that are not allowed to be discharged into an onsite wastewater
treatment system. These waste products shall be handled according to rules for
the disposal of oil, gas and grease promulgated under the Environmental
Protection Act, or according to 35 Ill. Adm. Code Subtitle G, or shall be taken
to an oil and gas reclamation center. Domestic sewage shall not be comingled
with these waste products. Note: Also see Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm.
Code 890). Holding tanks to be utilized for applications within this section
shall be listed and labeled by Underwriters Laboratories, and constructed of
materials approved for gas and oil interceptors as specified in 77 Ill. Adm.
Code 890.520, and shall be properly anchored to prevent flotation.
      (9)   Vault privy/waterless toilet. A holding tank may be approved as an
onsite wastewater treatment system for the collection of human waste where
there are toilet facilities but no potable water source to the building, such
as a comfort station.
      (10)   Existing non-soil based system. A holding tank may be approved as
an onsite wastewater treatment system to replace an existing non-soil based
onsite wastewater treatment system.
   (C)   Conditions for the approval of surface discharging onsite wastewater
treatment systems. A surface discharging onsite wastewater treatment system may
be approved by the Health Officer in the following conditions and for the
following uses:
      (1)   Failing onsite wastewater treatment system. A surface discharging
onsite wastewater treatment system shall only be approved to replace an onsite
wastewater treatment system that is documented to be failing as defined in §
171.021 and in when the requirements of §
171.067(B) are met.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.073 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR THE ELIMINATION OF ABANDONED ONSITE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM COMPONENTS.
   (A)   General. An onsite wastewater treatment system component shall be
considered abandoned when it is no longer in use, is in such a state of
disrepair that its intended function and performance cannot be restored, or is
not in use and is in a condition that presents a health or safety hazard to the
people of Lake County. An abandoned onsite wastewater treatment system
component, other than a soil treatment component, shall be eliminated as
described in this section. These system components include, but are not limited
to:
      (1)   Septic/trash tank;
      (2)   Lift station;
      (3)   Holding tank;
      (4)   Vault privy;
      (5)   Grease tank/interceptor;
      (6)   Seepage pit;
      (7)   Cesspool.
   (B)   Site plan approval. When the eliminated system component will not be
replaced, a site plan shall be submitted that meets the requirements of §
171.127.
   (C)   Procedure. Elimination of system components shall be performed as
follows:
      (1)   The contents of the system component must be pumped by a Lake
County licensed septic tank pumper.
      (2)   The system component may be unearthed and removed or destroyed in
place. If destroyed in place the floor and walls shall be cracked or crushed by
a Lake County licensed OWTS installation contractor or by a person supervised
by a Lake County licensed OWTS installation contractor so the remaining pieces
will not hold water.
      (3)   After removing or destroying the system component, the remaining
cavity shall be filled with soil by a Lake County licensed OWTS installation
contractor or by a person supervised by a Lake County licensed OWTS
installation contractor. The backfill soil shall be mounded to compensate for
settling.
   (D)   Final approval. The Health Officer shall issue final approval of the
elimination of a system component when:
      (1)   The licensed onsite wastewater treatment system installation
contractor requests an inspection in accordance with the requirements of §
171.149, and the Health Officer observes the elimination of the system
component during, or immediately after the process; or
      (2)   The licensed onsite wastewater treatment system installation
contractor submits a signed and dated document to the Health Officer indicating
the date that the system component(s) was eliminated, and that the procedure
was in accordance with the requirements of subsection (C) above. The Health
Officer shall verify on-site that the system component(s) has been eliminated.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.074 APPROVAL CONDITIONS FOR ARTIFICIAL SITE DRAINAGE EFFECTIVENESS
INVESTIGATION PLANS.
   Approval of an artificial site drainage effectiveness investigation plan
shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of §
171.088(B)(1).
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
SITE SUITABILITY
§ 171.085 SOIL EVALUATION.
   (A)   General. All proposed soil based onsite wastewater treatment systems
shall be designed based on soil characteristics of the soil as identified by a
Lake County licensed Soil Classifier/Soil Scientist. It is not permissible to
deposit fill on a site in an effort to achieve the minimum requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089.
   (B)   Soil evaluations by the Health Officer. Soil evaluations conducted by
the Health Officer shall be conducted by appointment and shall be completed by
the Health Officer within 15 days of the receipt of the request and when the
conditions of this section are met. The applicant requesting the soil
evaluation shall provide as follows:
      (1)   Proposed site. The proposed site shall be reasonably cleared of
brush, weeds, and tall grass. The applicant shall assure that no one drives
equipment on sites that are wet enough to become compacted and/or create ruts
in the soil.
      (2)   Lot corners. The lot corners shall be marked on individually
platted lots, or permanent reference points established for proposed
subdivisions.
      (3)   Soil pits. Soil observation pits shall be excavated to a minimum of
24 inches in width, and shall be 60 inches deep.
         (a)   Soil cores. The Health Officer may accept soil cores as meeting
the requirement of this section.
   (C)   Minimum number of observation points. Soil observation points can be
soil pits or soil cores as specified in this section.
      (1)   Individual sites. On individual sites, a minimum of four
observation points is required with at least one point located in an area lower
in elevation than the proposed primary and reserve soil treatment area.
      (2)   Proposed subdivisions. A minimum of one observation point shall be
required at each intersection of the lines of a 200-foot grid established on
the parcel(s). Observation points between the grid points may be required to
accurately establish boundaries between soil mapping units. Additionally, at
least one observation point shall be located on each proposed lot.
         (a)   Smaller parcels. On parcels too small to lay out a 200-foot
grid, a smaller grid, as approved by the Health Officer, or individual site
soil evaluation described in subsection (C)(1) above be used to identify
primary and reserve soil treatment areas.
      (3)   Additional observation points. As determined by the Health Officer,
additional observation points may be necessary for accurate and appropriate
evaluation of an individual site or parcel when there is concern about the
consistency and landscape association of the soils.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.086 SOIL PROFILE DESCRIPTIONS.
   (A)   General. Soil characteristics shall be described based upon United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
National Standards. Soil profile descriptions shall include depth in inches
from the ground surface to changes in soil texture, soil structure, soil
consistence and/or compaction, observed saturation, soil coloration, and
redoximorphic features indicative of saturation including, but not limited to,
common (2% - 20%) or greater low chroma redox depletions (equal to or less than
two and a value of four or more based upon Munsell color chart). Descriptions
shall be recorded to a depth of 60 inches.
   (B)   Additional determination and assignments. In addition to the meeting
the requirements of subsection (A) above, in describing soil characteristics, a
Lake County Licensed Soil Classifier/Soil Scientist shall make determinations
and assignments based upon soil profile descriptions as follows:
      (1)   Soil resource group. Each soil profile description shall be
classified in accordance with the requirements of
Appendix B to establish a soil resource group, soil series or classification,
the depth to a limiting layer and observed water, if present.
      (2)   Wastewater loading rates. Each soil profile description shall
assign maximum wastewater loading rates in accordance with the requirements of
Appendix B, as follows:
         (a)   Soil profile descriptions shall be segregated by horizon.
         (b)   Each segregated horizon shall be assigned a loading rate between
zero gallons per day per square foot (gpd/ft2) and 0.8 gpd/ft2.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.087 MINIMUM SOIL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Soil suitability. The soil located in a proposed primary or reserve
soil treatment area must meet the requirements of this section.
      (1)   Seasonally saturated. The soil is not seasonally saturated to
within six inches of the ground surface.
      (2)   Texture, structure, and consistence. The texture, structure, and
consistence are such that the loading rate, assigned in accordance with the
requirements of §
171.086(B)(2) and
Appendix B, is greater than zero gpd/ft2.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.088 SOIL LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Limiting layer remediation. If a soil layer has a soil loading rate of
zero gpd/ft2, either due to existing conditions, or caused by activity known to
compact soil (e.g., vehicular/machine traffic, fill being deposited) deep
chisel plowing may be performed to attempt to render the soil suitable.
Suitability and loading rate shall be determined by a soil evaluation conducted
by a Lake County Licensed Soil Classifier/Scientist in accordance with the
requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089, after the deep chisel plowing has occurred. Deep chisel- plowing shall
be performed as described in this section, based on the conditions of the site.
      (1)   For soil profiles comprised of 12 inches or more of fill deposited
at the surface, chisel plowing shall be performed to a minimum depth of 12
inches.
      (2)   When one or more suitable surface horizons overlays a thin limiting
layer that in turn overlays suitable soil, and the soil loading rate of the
soil horizon below the limiting layer is greater than or equal to 0.2 gpd/ft2,
chisel plowing shall extend through the limiting layer.
      (3)   When limiting surface soil horizon(s) overlay suitable soil, chisel
plowing shall extend through the limiting soil horizon.
   (B)   Artificial drainage effectiveness investigation. When a soil
evaluation performed in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089 establishes that soil is not suitable because it does not meet the
requirements of §
171.087(A)(1), the Health Officer may approve an onsite wastewater treatment
system when artificial drainage creates conditions such that the depth from the
ground surface to the saturated soil is ten inches or more, and the proposed
onsite wastewater treatment system meets the requirements of §§
171.100 through
171.111.
      (1)   Monitoring. The artificial drainage system shall be installed as
proposed, and the saturation depth of the soil shall be monitored, using
monitoring wells or piezometers, by an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer
or a Certified Professional Soil Classifier/Soil Scientist and the Lake County
Health Department.
      (2)   Agreement for investigation plan. The construction, installation
and location of the monitoring wells or piezometers, and the frequency of
observations shall be established through a written agreement between the
Health Officer and the onsite wastewater treatment system designer.
      (3)   Monitoring period. Monitoring shall occur at least weekly during
March, April and May with the first reading occurring no later than March 15.
      (4)   Monitoring data. Monitoring data may be used to establish the
limiting layer as follows:
         (a)   Monitoring data submission. All monitoring data shall be
submitted to the Health Officer no more than 60 days after the conclusion of
the investigation.
         (b)   Depth observations and suitability assessment. The drains shall
maintain an unsaturated zone of at least ten inches below the ground surface at
all times. If at any time, water is observed at a depth shallower than ten
inches, a reading shall be conducted two days later. If water is shallower than
ten inches at this subsequent reading, the site shall be considered unsuitable
for a soil based onsite wastewater treatment system.
         (c)   Monitoring data validity. Monitoring shall only be valid if the
nearest precipitation recording station records a precipitation amount of at
least 90% of the historical average during March, April and May. Artificially
flooding the soil area being monitored to simulate naturally occurring seasonal
saturation shall not substitute for precipitation.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.089 CONFLICT.
   (A)   Resolution. Whenever there is a substantive disagreement between the
Lake County Health Department and any Lake County Licensed Soil Classifier/Soil
Scientist, the Health Officer shall, at the request of either party, solicit
the assistance of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Area
Resource Soil Scientist, or other NRCS employee who is certified as a Soil
Classifier/Soil Scientist as defined in §
171.021 for an additional professional opinion.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM DESIGN
§ 171.100 GENERAL.
   (A)   Soil based and non-soil based systems. Proposed onsite wastewater
treatment system (OWTS) designs y shall meet the requirements of §§
171.100 through
171.111. Onsite wastewater treatment systems shall be classified into two
general categories: soil based and non-soil based.
   (B)   Design sizing. All system components of an onsite wastewater treatment
system shall be properly sized for the peak projected wastewater flow as
established by
Appendix C.
   (C)   Minimum separation distances. Onsite wastewater treatment systems and
system components shall be located no closer than the minimum separation
distances to the features specified in
Appendix D. When no minimum separation distance and/or feature is specified,
the Health Officer shall determine a reasonable distance to the feature.
   (D)   Prohibited wastes. Onsite wastewater treatment systems shall receive
only domestic sewage. Water discharges from footing drains, air conditioners,
heating units, water cooled ice machines, humidifiers and dehumidifiers, or
other similar sources shall not be discharged to an onsite wastewater treatment
system. The disposal of water softener backwash discharge shall be in
accordance with the Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code (77 IL Administrative
Code 905). Automotive or industrial greases, oils, solvents or other similar
wastes shall be discharged into a holding tank system in accordance with the
requirements of §
171.072(B)(7).
   (E)   Construction and materials. Onsite wastewater treatment systems shall
be designed to facilitate their construction in accordance with the
requirements of §§
171.140 through
171.149 of this chapter and shall specify and incorporate approved materials in
accordance with the requirements of §§
171.160 through
171.168
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.101 PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES FOR SOIL BASED ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Performance objectives. Soil based onsite wastewater treatment systems
shall meet the performance objectives described in this section, as the
objectives apply to the system type, and shall perform so as not to create an
imminent health hazard or a public nuisance.
      (1)   Long term wastewater treatment and infiltration. Proposed soil
based onsite wastewater treatment systems shall be designed to best facilitate
the long term treatment and infiltration of wastewater employing the most
appropriate soil and linear loading rates taking into consideration vertical
and horizontal water movement through the soil, and application methods.
      (2)   System capacity. Proposed soil based onsite wastewater treatment
systems shall be designed to be of adequate capacity to treat and infiltrate
the projected daily wastewater flow.
      (3)   Wastewater treatment. Proposed soil based onsite wastewater
treatment systems shall be designed to treat wastewater to the following
standards prior to the wastewater coming into contact with a limiting layer:
BOD5 and TSS < 10 mg/l; and Fecal Coliform < 3,000 cfu/100 ml. It is recognized
that septic tank effluent, solely or comingled with exterior grease interceptor
effluent, subjected to the following treatment processes shall meet or exceed
the treatment standards specified in this section:
         (a)   Unsaturated flow through at least 24 inches of year-round
unsaturated soil, as determined in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089.
         (b)   Unsaturated flow through at least 16 inches of year-round
unsaturated soil, as determined in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089 and after receiving treatment by a pretreatment component certified by
an ANSI accredited third party testing and certification organization to meet
NSF ANSI Standard Number 40, maintained as follows:
            1.   Service, inspection and necessary maintenance shall be
performed in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.220 through
171.224 by a service provider licensed in accordance with the requirements of §
171.184.
         (c)   Unsaturated flow through at least 12 inches of year round-
unsaturated soil, as determined in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089 and after receiving treatment by a pretreatment component certified by
an ANSI accredited third party testing and certification organization to meet
NSF ANSI Standard Number 350, maintained as follows:
            1.   Service, inspection and necessary maintenance shall be
performed in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.220 through
171.224 by a service provider licensed in accordance with the requirements of §
171.184.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.102 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SOIL BASED ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. Proposed soil based onsite wastewater treatment systems shall
meet the design requirements specified in this section, as the requirements
apply to the system type, and in accordance with the design requirements
further specified in the incorporated materials of
Appendix A for a system type not specified.
   (B)   Suitable soil. A soil treatment component and its required reserve
soil treatment area shall be located in suitable soil in accordance with the
requirements of §
171.087. The shallowest limiting layer depth of the soil borings that define
the area proposed for the soil treatment component shall determine the system
type.
   (C)   Minimum vertical separation distance. Proposed soil based onsite
wastewater treatment systems shall be designed to use a system type most
appropriate for a site’s soil characteristics in order to maintain a minimum
vertical separation distance between the limiting layer and the wastewater
application point.
   (D)   System type. Any soil treatment system and its required reserve soil
treatment area shall be of an onsite wastewater treatment system type as
specified by
Table B.3 (
Appendix B), and the design for that onsite wastewater treatment system type
shall conform to the requirements of this section and any applicable elements
of materials incorporated by
Appendix A. An onsite wastewater treatment system may be comprised of two
different types of systems.
   (E)   Site contour. Any primary soil treatment component and its required
reserve soil treatment area shall be designed to be parallel to the site
contour. Soil treatment systems shall not be situated on slopes that are
concave to the extent that horizontal subsurface movement of wastewater may
concentrate that flow in a small downslope area.
      (1)   Tolerance. The maximum variation off contour along the entire
length of the soil treatment component shall be no more than 1%.
      (2)   Concave configuration. For Type 3, 4 and 5 systems, the maximum
deflection of a concave soil treatment component shall be no more than 10%.
   (F)   Low pressure pipe distribution networks. Distribution of wastewater
into onsite wastewater treatment systems by low pressure pipe (LPP), when part
of an onsite wastewater treatment system designed in accordance with the
requirements of this section, shall meet the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Minimum supply/manifold line diameter shall be two inches.
      (2)   Minimum lateral wastewater distribution pipe diameter shall be one
and one-half inches.
      (3)   Minimum perforation size shall be three-sixteenths inches.
      (4)   Maximum perforation spacing shall be six feet in Type 1 and 2
systems and three feet in Type 3, 4 and 5 systems.
      (5)   Minimum distal end pressure on any lateral line shall be one foot
of pressure head (0.43 psi).
      (6)   Maximum distal end pressure on any lateral line shall be five feet
of pressure head (2.16 psi).
      (7)   Construction shall comply with the requirements of §§
171.140  through
171.149  and all materials shall comply with the requirements of §§
171.160  through
171.168 .
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.103 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 1 AND TYPE 2 SOIL TREATMENT TRENCH
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. Type 1 and 2 soil treatment trench systems shall be designed
to the minimum requirements as follows:
      (1)   Pretreatment. The pretreatment component shall be required based
upon the design soil treatment zone in accordance with the requirements of
Table B.3 (
Appendix B).
      (2)   Distribution. Distribution to the soil treatment trench may be by
serial distribution using drop boxes and header pipe, manufacturer approved
chamber connections, or by equal flow distribution. Piping and distribution
device size and material shall comply with the requirements of §§
171.160 through
171.168.
      (3)   Lift station. Lift stations, if required, shall be sized in
accordance with the requirements of
Appendix C.
      (4)   Distribution piping. Distribution into the soil treatment trench
shall be by perforated pipe. No perforation shall be located closer than three
feet to the proximal end of the soil treatment trench.
      (5)   Piping invert elevation. The invert elevation of the distribution
pipe shall be a minimum of six inches above the trench bottom.
      (6)   Soil treatment area size calculation. Only the trench bottom area
shall be used in calculating the required soil treatment area. The square
footage of trench bottom area shall be equal to the projected flow in gallons
per day (gpd) divided by the assigned wastewater loading rate in gallons per
day per square foot.
      (7)   Maximum trench length. The maximum trench length shall be 100 feet
from the distribution device. All trenches connected to an equal flow
distribution box shall be of equal length.
      (8)   Maximum trench width. The maximum trench width shall be 36 inches;
the minimum trench width shall be 12 inches.
      (9)   Trench separation. Trenches shall be separated by a minimum of four
feet of undisturbed soil.
      (10)   Minimum gravel depth. The minimum depth of gravel in the soil
treatment trench shall be 12 inches, with six inches of gravel beneath the
distribution pipe and two inches above. Gravel shall not be placed closer than
12 inches to the distribution device.
      (11)   Soil cover over trenches. The maximum depth of soil cover over the
top of a soil treatment trench shall be 24 inches. The minimum depth of soil
cover over the top of a soil treatment trench shall be six inches.
      (12)   Low pressure pipe distribution. When distribution in a Type 1 or 2
system is by low pressure pipe, the applicable requirements of §
171.102(F) and this section shall apply.
         (a)   The soil loading rate may be increased by up to 10% above the
original soil loading rate found in
Table B.2
         (b)   No perforation shall be located closer than five feet to the
proximal end of the soil treatment trench.
         (c)   The invert elevation of the distribution line shall be a minimum
of six inches above the trench bottom.
         (d)   The square footage of trench bottom area shall be equal to the
projected daily flow in gallons per day divided by the assigned wastewater
loading rate in gallons per day per square foot.
         (e)   The maximum trench width shall be 24 inches; the minimum trench
width shall be 12 inches.
         (f)   Trenches shall be separated by a minimum of four feet of
undisturbed soil.
         (g)   The minimum depth of gravel in the soil treatment trench shall
be ten inches, with six inches of gravel beneath the pipe and two inches above.
         (h)   Gravel shall not be placed closer than 24 inches to the manifold
trench.
         (i)   The design of the pressure distribution network shall be in
accordance with the requirements of Design of Pressure Distribution Networks
For Septic Tank-Soil Absorption Systems as incorporated in
Appendix A.
      (13)   Seepage beds. Seepage beds shall be sized at one and one-half
times the required trench soil treatment area.
      (14)   Seepage chambers. The soil treatment area per lineal foot for soil
absorption components using seepage chambers shall be calculated by multiplying
the average inside width of the chamber times an equivalency factor of 1.5. For
example:
         (a)   Using a chamber with an average inside width of 24 inches, the
soil treatment area per lineal foot would be calculated as:
            24 in x 1 ft/12 in x 1 ft x 1.5/lineal ft = 3 ft2/lineal ft
         (b)   For a system that requires 600 feet2 of soil treatment area, 200
lineal feet of chamber would be required using 24-inch chambers (600 ft2/3 ft2/
lineal foot = 200 lineal feet).
The trench bottom area of end caps may be included in the minimum required soil
treatment area.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.104 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 3 MODIFIED MOUND SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Type 3 modified mound systems. Type 3 Modified Mound Systems shall be
designed to minimum requirements as follows:
      (1)   Pretreatment. The pretreatment component shall be dependent on the
design soil treatment zone in accordance with the requirements of
Table B.3 (
Appendix B).
      (2)   Plowing and filling of soil treatment area. The soil treatment area
shall be plowed in accordance with the requirements of §
171.142 and filled in accordance with the requirements of §
171.143. The fill material shall cover the entire basal area to a maximum depth
of six inches. The sand must be placed prior to chisel plowing so it becomes
incorporated into the original soil. All vegetation shall be cut to the ground
surface and removed from the soil treatment area prior to placing the sand.
      (3)   Distribution piping. Distribution to and into the application bed
shall be by low pressure pipe (LPP), which shall be installed in accordance
with the requirements of §
171.102(F).
      (4)   Lift station. The lift station shall be sized according to
Appendix C.
      (5)   Piping invert elevation. The invert elevation of the distribution
piping shall be a minimum of 12 inches above original grade.
      (6)   Application bed area size calculation. The square footage of the
application bed shall be equal to the projected daily flow in gallons per day
divided by the loading rate of the coarse sand fill, one gallon per day per
square foot (1.0 gpd/ft2) or 1.2 gpd/ft2, when an aerobic treatment unit is
proposed for pretreatment.
         (a)   Seepage chamber application bed. Seepage chambers may be used in
lieu of gravel for the application bed in accordance with the following:
            1.   The minimum inside width (MIW) of seepage chambers shall be
calculated as follows:
               (Linear Loading Rate/Sand
               Loading Rate)/1.5 = MIW
            2.   The end caps of the chambers shall not be included in the
length of the application bed.
            3.   The invert elevation of the distribution pipes shall be a
minimum of six inches above the trench bottom with the distribution pipes
mounted in the chamber in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
            4.   The perforations shall be located on top of the distribution
lines.
            5.   Each distribution line shall have at least one perforation on
the bottom, at either the proximal or distal end, to allow for drainage of the
line. There shall be a concrete splash block of at least one square foot
directly under the perforation to prevent erosion of the infiltrative surface.
            6.   There shall be at least one four inch diameter observation
pipe installed in the length of each application bed. The observation pipe
shall terminate at or above final grade.
      (7)   Soil treatment area size calculation. The square footage of the
soil treatment area shall be equal to the projected daily flow in gallons per
day divided by the assigned wastewater loading rate in gallons per day per
square foot.
      (8)   Minimum length. The minimum length of the modified mound soil
treatment area shall be limited by the maximum linear loading rate. The linear
loading rate is equal to the projected daily flow in gallons per day divided by
the total length of the soil treatment area in feet, and shall be limited as
follows:
         (a)   Systems on soils in resource groups A or B shall be designed
with a maximum linear loading rate of eight gallons per day per foot. A maximum
of two basal areas may be connected perpendicular to the slope.
         (b)   Systems on soils in resource groups C, D or E shall be designed
with a maximum linear loading rate of four gallons per day per foot. A maximum
of two basal areas may be connected perpendicular to the slope.
      (9)   Laterals at different elevations. When laterals are at different
elevations, a flow control valve shall be used to control the inline pressure
of the laterals.
      (10)   Minimum gravel depth. The minimum depth of gravel in the modified
mound soil treatment area shall be ten inches, with six inches of gravel
beneath the pipe and two inches above.
      (11)   Minimum sand depth. The minimum depth of coarse sand fill material
covering the soil treatment area shall be six inches.
      (12)   Minimum soil cover. The entire modified mound soil treatment
component shall be covered with a minimum of eight inches of topsoil to support
vegetative cover. Additional cover shall be placed over the application bed(s)
as is necessary to shed storm water.
      (13)   Geotextile fabric cover. The application bed shall be completely
covered with an appropriate geotextile fabric prior to the placement of
topsoil.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.105 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 4 AT-GRADE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Type 4 at-grade systems. Type 4 At-Grade Systems shall be designed to
minimum requirements as follows:
      (1)   Pretreatment. The pretreatment component shall be dependent on the
design soil treatment zone in N accordance with the requirements of
Table B.3 (
Appendix B).
      (2)   Plowing of soil treatment area. The soil treatment area shall be
plowed in accordance with the requirements of §
171.142. All vegetation shall be cut to the ground surface and removed from the
soil treatment area prior to placing the gravel aggregate. A coarse sand layer,
one to four inches in depth may be placed on the proposed soil treatment area
prior to plowing to improve effluent infiltration.
      (3)   Distribution piping. Distribution to and into the soil treatment
area shall be by low pressure pipe (LPP), which shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of §
171.102(F).
      (4)   Lift station. The lift station shall be sized according to
Appendix C.
      (5)   Piping invert elevation. The invert of the distribution lines shall
be a minimum of six inches above original grade.
      (6)   Soil treatment area size calculation. The square footage of soil
treatment area shall be equal to the projected daily flow in gallons per day
divided by the assigned wastewater loading rate in gallons per day per square
foot.
      (7)   Minimum length. The minimum length of the at-grade soil treatment
area shall be limited by the maximum linear loading rate. The linear loading
rate is equal to the projected daily flow in gallons per day divided by the
total length of the soil treatment area in feet, and shall be limited as
follows:
         (a)   Systems on soils in resource groups A or B shall be designed
with a maximum linear loading rate of 12 gallons per day per foot. A maximum of
two basal areas may be connected perpendicular to the slope.
         (b)   Systems on soils in resource groups C, D or E shall be designed
with a maximum linear loading rate of six gallons per day per foot. A maximum
of two basal areas may be connected perpendicular to the slope.
      (8)   Laterals at different elevations. When laterals are at different
elevations, a flow control valve shall be used to control the inline pressure
of the laterals.
      (9)   Minimum gravel depth. The minimum depth of gravel in the at-grade
soil treatment area shall be ten inches, with six inches of gravel beneath the
pipe and two inches above.
      (10)   Minimum soil cover over gravel. The gravel of an at-grade soil
treatment system shall be covered with a minimum of 12 inches of topsoil to
support vegetative cover. Additional cover shall be placed as is necessary to
shed stormwater.
      (11)   Geotextile fabric cover. The gravel shall be completely covered
with an appropriate geotextile fabric prior to the placement of topsoil.
      (12)   Other design requirements. Type 4 At- grade Systems shall comply
with the provisions of the Wisconsin At-Grade Soil Absorption System Siting,
Design, and Construction Manual as incorporated in
Appendix A.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.106 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 5 MOUND SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Type 5 mound systems. Type 5 Mound Systems shall be designed to
minimum requirements as follows:
      (1)   Pretreatment. The pretreatment component shall be dependent on the
design soil treatment zone in accordance with the requirements of
Table B.3 (
Appendix B).
      (2)   Basal area, fill. The basal area is defined, based upon the slope
of the site, illustrated in
Appendix E. The basal are shall be plowed in accordance with the requirements
of the requirements of §
171.142 and filled in accordance with the requirements of §
171.143. The fill material shall cover the entire basal area. The fill shall
slope away from the top of the application bed at a maximum slope of 3:1 in all
directions. All vegetation shall be cut to the ground surface and removed from
the soil treatment area prior to placing the sand.
      (3)   Distribution piping. Distribution to and into the application bed
shall be by low pressure pipe (LPP), which shall be installed in accordance
with the requirements of § 102(F).
      (4)   Lift station. The lift station shall be sized according to
Appendix C.
      (5)   Piping invert elevation. The invert of the distribution line(s)
shall be a minimum of six inches above the fill material.
      (6)   Application bed area size calculation. The square footage of the
application bed shall be equal to the projected daily flow in gallons per day
divided by the loading rate of the coarse sand fill, one gallon per day per
square foot (1.0 gpd/ft2) or 1.2 gpd/ft2, when an aerobic treatment unit is
proposed for pretreatment.
         (a)   Seepage chamber application bed. Seepage chambers may be used in
lieu of gravel for the application bed in accordance with the following:
            1.   The minimum inside width (MIW) of seepage chambers shall be
calculated as follows:
               (Linear Loading Rate/Sand
               Loading Rate)/1.5 = MIW
            2.   The end caps of the chambers shall not be included in the
length of the application bed.
            3.   The invert elevation of the distribution lines shall be a
minimum of six inches above the trench bottom with the line mounted in the
chamber in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
            4.   The perforations shall be located on top of the distribution
lines.
            5.   Each distribution line shall have at least one perforation on
the bottom, at either the proximal or distal end, to allow for drainage of the
line. There shall be a concrete splash block of at least one square foot
directly under the perforation to prevent erosion of the infiltrative surface.
            6.   There shall be at least one four inch diameter observation
pipe installed in the length of each application bed. The observation pipe
shall terminate at or above final grade.
      (7)   Minimum length. The minimum length of the application bed shall be
limited by the maximum linear loading rate. The linear loading rate is equal to
the projected daily flow in gallons per day divided by the total length of the
application bed in feet, and shall be limited as follows:
         (a)   Type 5 systems on soils in resource groups A or B shall be
designed with a maximum linear loading rate of eight gallons per day per foot.
A maximum of three basal areas may be connected perpendicular to the slope.
         (b)   Type 5 systems on soils in resource groups C, D or E shall be
designed with a maximum linear loading rate of four gallons per day per foot. A
maximum of two basal areas may be connected perpendicular to the slope.
      (8)   Laterals at different elevations. When laterals are at different
elevations, a flow control valve shall be used to control the inline pressure
of the laterals.
      (9)   Basal area size calculation. The square footage of the basal area
shall be equal to the projected daily flow divided by the assigned soil
wastewater loading rate in gallons per day per square foot.
      (10)   Basal area minimum length. The minimum length of the basal area
shall be equal to the minimum length of the application bed.
      (11)   Fill material placement. The fill material shall be extended
beyond the basal area, tapering to grade at 3:1 slope.
      (12)   Minimum gravel depth. The minimum depth of gravel in the
application bed shall be ten inches with six inches of gravel beneath the pipe
and two inches above.
      (13)   Minimum sand depth. The minimum depth of coarse sand fill material
covering the basal area shall be 12 inches.
      (14)   Minimum soil cover. The application bed shall be covered with a
minimum of 12 inches of topsoil. The sand fill of the end slopes and side
slopes shall be covered with a minimum of six inches of topsoil. Additional
cover shall be placed over the application bed(s) as is necessary to shed storm
water.
      (15)   Geotextile fabric cover. The application bed shall be completely
covered with an appropriate geotextile fabric prior to the placement of
topsoil.
      (16)   Other design requirements. Type 5 Mound Systems shall comply with
the provisions of the Wisconsin Mound Soil Absorption System Siting, Design,
and Construction Manual as incorporated in
Appendix A.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.107 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIP DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Drip distribution systems. Drip distribution systems shall be
designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with the
corresponding current manufacturer’s specification manual, with the exception
that the requirements of this section shall apply.
      (1)   Pretreatment. Pretreatment shall be by process designed to meet NSF
ANSI Standard 40 for wastewater treatment systems.
      (2)   Pretreatment capacity. The daily design flow, plus the backwash
water from the system, shall not exceed the treatment capacity of the pre-
treatment device if backwash water discharges to the pre-treatment device.
      (3)   Lift station. The lift station shall be sized in accordance with
Appendix C.
      (4)   Soil loading rate. The soil loading rate (in gallons/day/square
foot) shall be based upon the least permeable soil encountered within 24 inches
below the proposed depth of the drip distribution tubing. The soil loading rate
shall be no more than 75% of the loading rate reported on the soil evaluation
in accordance with the requirements of
Table B.2 (
Appendix B).
      (5)   Drip tubing requirements. Drip tubing installation and
configuration shall be as follows:
         (a)   The drip irrigation system shall be configured so that the
length of the soil treatment area is at least two times its width.
         (b)   If required, plowing shall be conducted in accordance with the
requirements of §
171.142.
         (c)   All piping and components shall be installed to allow wastewater
to drain back to the pretreatment tank or dosing tank.
         (d)   To allow for drain back, a check valve shall not be installed in
the supply and return lines.
         (e)   An audio-visual alarm shall be provided to warn of a high water
condition in the dosing tank.
            1.   The alarm shall be on a separate dedicated electrical circuit.
            2.   If an alarm is being used by another component of the onsite
wastewater system, is compliant with this section, and is able to connect
additional devices, it may be used without the need for an additional alarm.
      (6)   System management. System management notification by the
manufacturer and installation contractor shall be as follows:
         (a)   The manufacturer shall provide specifications for the management
of all components within the drip distribution system.
         (b)   The manufacturer shall provide a management plan to ensure that
maintenance is conducted as required to achieve and maintain proper system
function.
         (c)   The following information shall be provided by the installation
contractor or manufacturer to the owner of the system:
            1.   An operation manual.
            2.   A management plan for the drip irrigation system.
            3.   The manufacturer of the components and a description of the
function of the components.
            4.   The service contract information.
            5.   A trouble-shooting/repair guide.
            6.   A list of safety concerns.
            7.   Manufacturer’s specification sheets for all electrical and
mechanical components.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.108 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR ILLINOIS RAISED FILTER BED SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Illinois raised filter bed system. Illinois raised filter bed systems
shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with the
Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code, with the exception that the requirements
of this section shall apply.
      (1)   Pretreatment. Pretreatment shall be by process designed to reduce
the CBOD5 (carbonaceous five-day biochemical oxygen demand) to a maximum
concentration of 25 mg/l, and total suspended solids to a maximum concentration
of 30 mg/l.
      (2)   Mantle area size calculation. The square footage of the mantle area
shall be equal to the projected daily flow in gallons per day divided by the
assigned wastewater loading rate in gallons per day per square foot.
      (3)   Minimum lateral setback distance. The minimum lateral setback
distance shall be measured from the edge of the mantle area.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.109 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEMS WITH ATYPICAL WASTEWATER FLOW.
   (A)   General. Onsite wastewater treatment systems that are intended to
treat and dispose of atypical wastewater flow, as described in §
171.071(A)(1), shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.100 through
171.111 that apply to the specific system type proposed, and in accordance with
the requirements of §
171.071. In enforcing any additional requirements on an onsite wastewater
treatment system with atypical wastewater flow, as described in §
171.071(A), and in accordance with the requirements of §
171.071(A)(1), the Health Officer apply the following guidelines regarding the
system design:
      (1)   Pretreatment. Pretreatment of wastewater shall be sufficient to
provide effluent suitable for the proposed disposal process. Any requirement
for pretreatment that is beyond the specifications of this ordinance shall be
established based upon projections of wastewater strength, wastewater
components, peak flows, soil conditions, or other factors recognized by
standard practice as stressful to onsite wastewater treatment systems in order
to achieve the performance objectives as described in §
171.101.
      (2)   Effluent application. Application of effluent to a soil treatment
system shall be designed to preserve the infiltrative capacity of the soil.
Consideration shall be given to application methods, such as dosing and
alternating soil treatment components, and to the potential effect on the soil
matrix, such as clogging and groundwater mounding in order to achieve the
performance objectives as described in §
171.101.
      (3)   Management responsibility. Management and operational procedure and
responsibility shall be closely established and provided for in a recordable
covenant, or other legal agreement(s) as determined by the Health Officer to
assure compliance with the performance objectives as described in §
171.101.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.110 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-SOIL BASED SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. Non-soil based systems shall include holding tanks and
surface discharging onsite wastewater treatment systems. These systems shall be
approved only for uses specified in this section and shall not be approved in
lieu of a reserve soil treatment area.
      (1)   Management responsibility. Management and operational procedure and
responsibility shall be closely established and provided for in a recordable
covenant, or other legal agreement(s) as determined by the Health Officer to
assure compliance with the objectives as described in §
171.101.
   (B)   Holding tanks. Holding tanks shall be approved only for the use listed
in §
171.072, and when the conditions of this section are met. Wastes removed from
holding tanks shall be disposed of only at an approved wastewater treatment
plant or a landfill permitted and designed to accommodate untreated domestic
sewage.
      (1)   Site plan and system design. A site plan prepared in accordance
with the requirements of §§
171.100 and
171.125 through
171.128 and that also demonstrates:
         (a)   Flotation prevention. When installed below the base flood
elevation, the tanks shall be sufficiently anchored to prevent floatation.
Anti-buoyancy calculations shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by an Illinois
licensed professional engineer.
         (b)   Capacity. Holding tanks shall be sized at a minimum of two times
the projected daily flow or a minimum of 1,500 gallons, unless otherwise
approved.
         (c)   Audio-visual alarm. Holding tanks shall be equipped with an
audio-visual alarm to signal two-thirds of the total capacity.
         (d)   Holding tank agreement. The owner of the property served shall
sign a Department Holding Tank Agreement.
         (e)   Agreement to pump. The owner of the property shall submit
verification that he or she has an agreement with a Lake County licensed OWTS
pumper for the pumping and transporting of the wastewater in the holding tank
on an as needed basis.
   (C)   Surface discharging onsite wastewater treatment systems. Surface
discharging onsite wastewater treatment systems shall be approved only for the
use listed in §
171.072(C) and when the conditions of this section are met.
      (1)   Site plan and system design. A site plan prepared in accordance
with the requirements of §§
171.100 and
171.125 through
171.128 and that also demonstrates:
         (a)   Flotation prevention. When installed below the base flood
elevation, the tanks shall be sufficiently anchored to prevent floatation.
Anti-buoyancy calculations shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by an Illinois
licensed professional engineer.
         (b)   Dilution. A discharge point to a surface water or wetland
provides a minimum 5:1 dilution of the effluent.
         (c)   Discharge point. The proposed discharge point is a minimum of
one-quarter mile from a public bathing beach.
         (d)   System performance. The proposed system is designed to meet
final discharge effluent standards in accordance with the requirements of NPDES
Permit No. ILG62 as incorporated in
Appendix A.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.111 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR REPAIRS TO ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. The design of a repair to an onsite wastewater system, as
defined in §
171.021, shall meet the applicable requirements of this section.
   (B)   Site plan and system design. A site plan prepared in accordance with
the applicable requirements of this section and §§
171.125 through
171.128 demonstrates:
      (1)   Location. The location of all proposed system components complies
with the setback distances established by
Appendix D.
      (2)   Capacity. The capacity of all proposed system components complies
with the requirements established by
Table C.2 (
Appendix C).
      (3)   Distribution components. The size, materials and functionality of
all proposed distribution components are equivalent to the components being
replaced, and are compatible with the onsite wastewater treatment system.
      (4)   Basal area extension. When the basal area is extended, it shall be
extended along the entire length of the downslope toe of a system using gravel
or coarse sand, as applicable when reserve area is designated on an existing
approved site plan. The width of the extension shall be determined in
accordance with site conditions and best engineering practices.
      (5)   Toe drain addition. When a toe drain is installed, it shall be at
the downslope toe of a Wisconsin at-grade, mound, or modified mound system, or
an Illinois raised filter bed system seeping to the ground surface provided the
seeping water does not meet the definition of domestic sewage, and all system
inflow and infiltration has been corrected. The toe drain shall discharge to a
seepage trench and shall meet the setback distances in
Appendix D. The depth and width of the toe drain shall be determined in
accordance with site conditions and best engineering practices.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
PLANS AND OTHER REQUIRED INFORMATION
§ 171.125 GENERAL.
   (A)   Plans required. Prior to granting approval to construct, replace, or
repair an onsite wastewater treatment system or system component, the Health
Officer shall review a site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements
of §§
171.125 through
171.128 and all other plans and information as required by §§
171.125 through
171.128 to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Public sewer location and availability. All site plans submitted must
indicate the location of, and distance to any public sewer or other Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency regulated wastewater treatment and disposal
system that is within a reasonable distance from the nearest property boundary
line of the property to be served, as described in §
171.035(F), or must indicate that these services are not located within a
reasonable distance from the nearest property boundary line of the property to
be served, as described in §
171.035(F).
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.126 SITE PLAN SPECIFICATIONS FOR A NEW, REPLACEMENT, OR ALTERATION-
REPLACEMENT ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM, OR AN ONSITE WASTEWATER
TREATMENT SYSTEM WITH ATYPICAL WASTEWATER FLOW.
   (A)   Minimum standards. A site plan submitted for approval for a New Onsite
Wastewater Treatment System, Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment System,
Alteration-Replacement Onsite Wastewater Treatment System or an Onsite
Wastewater Treatment System with Atypical Waste Water Flow shall meet minimum
standards as established in this section.
   (B)   Other required information. A proposal to construct or replace an
onsite wastewater treatment system, or to construct an onsite wastewater
treatment system with atypical wastewater flow shall be submitted in accordance
with the requirements of §§
171.125 through
171.128 on forms provided by the Lake County Health Department, and shall
include the following information unless otherwise determined by the Health
Officer:
      (1)   Soil evaluation. A soil evaluation report, prepared in accordance
with the requirements of §§
171.085 through
171.089.
      (2)   Projected wastewater flow calculation. A calculation of the
projected wastewater daily flow.
      (3)   Building plans. A building plan depicting the proposed and/or
existing floor plan.
      (4)   Component capacity. A calculation of the capacity of the components
of the onsite wastewater treatment system, including the soil treatment
component.
      (5)   Length calculation. A calculation of the bed length of a Type 3, 4,
or 5 system in accordance with §§
171.104(A)(8),
171.105(A)(7), and
171.106(A)(7).
      (6)   Low pressure pipe distribution system calculation. A calculation of
low pressure pipe distribution system size and configuration in accordance with
the requirements of §§
171.100 through
171.111.
      (7)   Other information. Reports from engineers, wetland consultants, or
other professionals, as required by the Health Officer to establish stormwater
drainage, wetland delineations, surface water elevations, floodplain or other
information necessary for the evaluation of the proposal.
      (8)   Plat of survey. An accurate Plat of Survey of the property prepared
by a licensed surveyor.
   (C)   Licensed designer. The site plan shall be prepared by a person
licensed as a Lake County licensed onsite wastewater treatment system designer,
in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.180 through
171.186.
   (D)   Topographical survey. The site plan shall be drawn on a topographical
survey, as defined in §
171.021, to provide accurate contour lines depicting each one foot change in
elevation. If approved by the Health Officer, a topographical study may be
submitted by a licensed onsite wastewater treatment system designer in lieu of
a topographical survey.
   (E)   Site plan size, scale. The site plan shall be drawn on a minimum size
sheet of 11-1/2" by 17" and to a scale of 1" = 10', 1" = 20' or 1" = 30',
unless otherwise approved by the Health Officer.
   (F)   Readable copies. The site plan shall be prepared and copied so as to
be easily readable.
   (G)   Number of copies. Five copies of the site plan shall be submitted.
   (H)   Site information. The site plan shall properly locate and specify
dimensions, when applicable, for the following:
      (1)   Property lines. All property lines and dimensions.
      (2)   Improvements. All existing and proposed buildings, driveways and
other improvements.
      (3)   Utilities.
         (a)   All utility easement locations and dimensions;
         (b)   All underground utility and service lines, and any overhead
utility lines within 25 feet of the proposed well location.
      (4)   Water wells. All existing, proposed or sealed water wells, or
closed loop wells on the property or within 75 feet of a property line of the
subject property.
         (a)   The distance from all existing, proposed or sealed water wells,
or closed loop wells to proposed components of a proposed onsite wastewater
treatment system shall be dimensioned.
         (b)   A 75-foot radius for any proposed water well shall be contained
on the subject property, whenever possible.
      (5)   Onsite wastewater treatment systems. All existing and proposed
onsite wastewater treatment systems on the subject property or within 75 feet
of a property line of the subject property.
      (6)   Drainage. All drainage features including but not limited to
ditches, streams, swales, storm sewers and other stormwater pathways.
      (7)   Surface waters/wetlands. All surface waters or wetlands on the
subject property or within 25 feet of a property line of the subject property.
   (I)   Onsite wastewater treatment system specifications. The site plan shall
properly locate and provide dimensions or specifications for the proposed
onsite wastewater treatment system as follows:
      (1)   Onsite wastewater disposal system components. Location and size of
all onsite wastewater treatment system components and features, including:
         (a)   Septic tanks, pretreatment units and lift stations and piping to
these components;
         (b)   Piping to the soil treatment component;
         (c)   Distribution boxes, drop boxes, diverter valves;
         (d)   Soil treatment components;
         (e)   Distribution piping;
         (f)   Gravel application beds in mound systems; and
         (g)   Areas of approved filling.
      (2)   Soil evaluation. Location of all soil evaluation points.
      (3)   Storage/traffic. Location for material storage and a pathway for
construction traffic.
   (J)   Specific elevations. The site plan shall provide specific elevations,
referenced to the topographical survey as follows:
      (1)   Benchmark. The elevation of a permanent benchmark.
      (2)   Floodplain. The Base Flood Elevation, if applicable.
      (3)   Sewer/septic. The elevation of the invert(s) of the inlet(s) of the
septic tank and other pretreatment units.
      (4)   Distribution box. The elevation of the invert of the distribution
box, except when a lift station is proposed.
      (5)   Distribution line. The elevation of any low pressure lateral
distribution line.
   (K)   Detailed cross section. A detailed cross section of the soil treatment
component specifying original grade and the relative placement of fill
material, gravel, piping and cover material.
   (L)   Required additional information. The site plan shall include
additional information as follows:
      (1)   Legal description. A legal description of the property.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017; Ord. 19-0775,
passed 5-14-2019)
§ 171.127 SITE PLAN SPECIFICATIONS FOR A REPAIR TO AN ONSITE WASTEWATER
TREATMENT SYSTEM, ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS TO PROPERTIES NOT REQUIRING
REPLACEMENT OF SYSTEM COMPONENTS, OR SYSTEM COMPONENT ELIMINATION.
   (A)   Minimum standards. A site plan submitted for approval for a repair to
an onsite wastewater treatment system, an alteration or addition to a property
not requiring replacement of system components, or system component elimination
shall, meet minimum standards as established in this section.
   (B)   Other required information. A proposal to repair an onsite wastewater
treatment system, to alter or add to a property without the requirement to
replace system component(s), or to eliminate a system component shall be
submitted in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.125 through
171.128 on forms provided by the Lake County Health Department and shall
include the following information unless otherwise determined by the Health
Officer:
      (1)   Building plans. A building plan depicting the proposed and/or
existing floor plan.
      (2)   Component capacity. A calculation of the capacity of the component
(s) of the onsite wastewater treatment system.
      (3)   Other information. Reports from engineers, wetland consultants, or
other professionals, as required by the Health Officer to establish stormwater
drainage, wetland delineations, surface water elevations, floodplain or other
information necessary for the evaluation of the proposal.
      (4)   Plat of survey. An accurate Plat of Survey of the property prepared
by a licensed surveyor.
   (C)   Licensed designer or licensed installation contractor. The site plan
shall be prepared by a person licensed as a Lake County onsite wastewater
treatment system designer or installation contractor in accordance with the
requirements of §§
171.180 through
171.186, with the exception of site plans for alterations or additions to
properties not requiring the replacement of system components.
   (D)   Scale. The site plan shall be drawn on a minimum size sheet of 8-1/2"
by 11" and to a scale of 1" = 10', 1" = 20' or 1" = 30', unless otherwise
approved by the Health Officer.
   (E)   Readable copies. The site plan shall be prepared and copied so as to
be easily readable.
   (F)   Number of copies. Five copies of the site plan shall be submitted.
   (G)   Site plan requirements. The site plan shall indicate the location of
all buildings, structures, and proposed site alterations, as applicable, for
the proposed project.
      (1)   Building alterations and additions. For building alterations and
additions, two copies of an existing and final floor plan must be submitted.
      (2)   Existing onsite wastewater treatment system components. The
location of the existing components of the onsite wastewater treatment system.
      (3)   Proposed onsite wastewater treatment system. When applicable, the
location and size of any proposed system components.
      (4)   Water. The location of water wells and/or water supply lines.
      (5)   Setback requirements. Other information as is applicable to
establish that the proposal is in accordance with the requirements of
Appendix D.
      (6)   Legal description. A legal description of the property.
      (7)   Property location. A geographical sketch of the property location.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.128 PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS AND LOT SPLITS.
   (A)   Minimum standards. A plan for a new subdivision submitted for approval
shall meet minimum requirements as established in this section.
   (B)   Other required information. A proposal to subdivide or split a
property shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of §§
171.125 through
171.128 on forms provided by the Lake County Health Department, and shall
include the following information unless otherwise determined by the Health
Officer:
      (1)   Other information. Reports from engineers, wetland consultants, or
other professionals, as required by the Health Officer to establish stormwater
drainage, wetland delineations, surface water elevations, floodplain or other
information necessary for the evaluation of the proposal.
      (2)   Plat of survey. An accurate Plat of Survey of the property prepared
by a licensed surveyor.
   (C)   Licensed professional engineer. The plan shall be prepared by an
Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer, except as authorized by the Health
Officer.
   (D)   Topographical survey. The plan shall be drawn on a topographical
survey as defined in §
171.021.
   (E)   Scale. The plan shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 100' or less.
   (F)   Soil evaluation points. The plan shall locate all soil evaluation
points.
   (G)   Site features. The plan shall identify and detail site features as
follows:
      (1)   Water wells/onsite wastewater treatment systems. All existing water
wells and/or onsite wastewater treatment systems.
      (2)   Waters and drainage. All existing surface water resources,
wetlands, agricultural and other subsurface drain tiles, flood plains and
floodways.
      (3)   Stormwater systems. All proposed stormwater systems including
runoff channels, storm sewers, detention or retention areas and drain tiles.
      (4)   Roadways. Proposed roadways and other areas where existing soils
will be disturbed.
      (5)   Restricted areas. All deed restricted, easement, and conservancy
areas.
   (H)   Lot specifications. The plan shall identify each proposed lot and
shall demonstrate the capacity of each lot to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   (I)   Soil maps and soil boring logs. Soil maps and soil boring logs must
accompany the plan submittal.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 171.140 GENERAL.
   (A)   General. Every onsite wastewater treatment system, once approved,
shall be constructed in a manner to preserve the condition of the soil
treatment area, and to promote the long-term treatment and disposal of
wastewater.
   (B)   Inspections. The Health Officer shall conduct inspections of onsite
wastewater treatment systems under construction to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.141 PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Construction approval. No onsite wastewater treatment system, or
component thereof, shall be constructed or installed until construction
approval has been issued by the Health Officer, with the exception that
construction approval shall not be required for a replacement onsite wastewater
treatment system, a non-soil based onsite wastewater treatment system and a
repair to an onsite wastewater treatment system.
      (1)   Site evaluation. The Health Officer shall evaluate each site prior
to the issuance of construction approval to ensure that the soil treatment area
has not been altered or disturbed, that the soil treatment area is protected by
fencing or other site protective barrier, and that the information previously
submitted and approved is substantially unchanged.
      (2)   Refusal to issue permit. The Health Officer shall refuse to issue
construction approval when conditions on the site are determined to be
inconsistent with the approved site plan, the soil treatment area has been
altered or disturbed, or when the soil treatment area is unprotected from
construction traffic by an effective barrier. When the issuance of construction
approval is refused, the Health Officer shall require corrective action or the
re-initiation of the original approval process as appropriate.
   (B)   Licensed installation contractor. No person shall conduct work on an
onsite wastewater treatment system in Lake County unless such person holds a
valid onsite wastewater treatment system installation contractor’s license in
accordance with the requirements of §§
171.180 through
171.186. The licensed installation contractor shall directly supervise all work
conducted on an onsite wastewater treatment system, and shall be responsible to
ensure that the work is in accordance with the approved site plan and complies
with this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.142 SOIL TREATMENT AREA PREPARATION.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Preparation of the soil treatment area shall be
conducted only when the soil is dry. Site preparation shall be conducted under
the supervision of the licensed installation contractor.
   (B)   Mowing. All sites shall be mowed to as close to the ground surface as
is practical, and shall be cleared of brush. The mowed and cut material shall
be removed without the use of machinery.
   (C)   Tree removal. Removal of trees shall be accomplished by cutting as
close to the ground surface as is practical. Stumps may be removed by grinding
or cutting, but shall not be uprooted.
   (D)   Plow. Sites approved for onsite wastewater treatment system types 4
and 5, and where applicable, drip distribution and trench systems, shall be
plowed prior to the placement of fill, gravel, or distribution piping as
follows:
      (1)   Equipment. Equipment shall be a chisel plow or an implement
designed for use with a skid-loader or backhoe that performs similarly to an
agricultural chisel plow. The use of a frost tooth plow is prohibited.
      (2)   Contour. Plowing shall be performed parallel to the site contour.
      (3)   Depth. Plowing shall be performed to break the consistency of the
sod to a depth of six to eight inches, unless an increased depth is needed to
break the consistency and massive structure described in §
171.088(A).
      (4)   Protection. Once plowed, the site shall not be graded or smoothed,
and shall be protected from precipitation or construction activity.
         (a)   Precipitation. If precipitation falls upon a plowed area, the
placement of fill or gravel shall not occur until the soil is dry. The Health
Officer shall determine if it is necessary to re-plow the soil after it has
dried.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.143 FILL PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The placement of fill material for onsite
wastewater treatment system types 3, 4 and 5 shall be as established in this
section.
   (B)   Fill placement. Fill shall be placed in accordance with the approved
site plan and shall be placed immediately after site preparation.
   (C)   Storage and transportation. The storage and transportation of fill
shall be as specified on the approved site plan; no traffic shall be allowed
directly on the plowed area.
   (D)   Filling procedure. Fill shall be placed only from the upslope or ends
of the proposed soil treatment area as follows:
      (1)   Using backhoe. Material may be placed with a backhoe reaching into
the soil treatment area.
      (2)   Using low compression equipment. Material may be pushed into the
soil treatment area by low compression equipment maintaining a minimum of six
inches of material beneath the equipment. Rubber tire machinery shall not be
used unless approved by the Health Officer.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.144 EXCAVATION.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Excavation for system components shall be as
established by this section.
   (B)   System components. Excavations for septic tanks, pretreatment
components, lift stations, sewer lines, header lines, pressure supply lines,
and system components other than soil treatment components shall be as follows:
      (1)   Appropriate elevations or overcut. Excavations shall be made to the
appropriate elevation or overcut only to accommodate bedding material.
      (2)   Grading. Excavations shall be level or uniformly graded as
appropriate so that tanks, containers, and piping is supported and secure.
      (3)   Slope. Excavations for piping shall be uniformly sloped so that
wastewater does not pond in bowed areas.
   (C)   Soil treatment component excavation. Excavation for soil treatment
components shall be as follows:
      (1)   Site contour. Excavation shall be uniform along the site contour,
not exceeding the depth specified on the approved site plan.
      (2)   Bottom surface. The trench or bed shall be excavated with a level
bottom surface.
      (3)   Compaction and/or smearing protection. Excavation shall be done so
as to preserve the infiltrative trench or bed bottom and sidewalls from
compaction and/or smearing. Foot traffic on trench excavations shall be kept to
a minimum.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.145 GRAVEL PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Gravel shall be placed in soil treatment
trenches as follows:
      (1)   Gravel depth. The depth of gravel specified below the distribution
pipe shall be uniform, and of the minimum depth specified in §§
171.100 through
171.111.
      (2)   Placement. The gravel shall be placed carefully to avoid compaction
of the infiltrative surface.
      (3)   Gravel/piping. Gravel shall be placed around the distribution
piping and covering the piping a minimum of two inches.
      (4)   Covering. The top of the gravel shall be covered with geotextile
fabric prior to backfilling. Other approved barrier materials may be used
except when geotextile fabric is specifically required in §§
171.100 through
171.111.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.146 PIPING INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. All piping installed for onsite wastewater
treatment systems shall be uniformly supported, sloped as appropriate, and
otherwise installed as established in this section.
   (B)   Building sewers. Building sewers shall be sloped not less than one-
eighth inch per foot, nor more than one-quarter inch per foot.
   (C)   Connections. All piping shall be connected, solvent joined, or
attached with an appropriate adapter as acceptable for the material to ensure
that connections do not separate or allow the leakage of wastewater or
infiltration of groundwater.
   (D)   Sealing openings for piping. An opening for piping entering or exiting
septic tanks, pretreatment components, lift stations, distribution devices, or
other system components shall be sealed and shall be water tight.
   (E)   Pressure pipe connections. Pipe connectors and fittings on pressure
supply lines, manifolds, or lateral distribution pipes shall be pressure
connectors or fittings.
   (F)   Connections to distribution and drop boxes. Pipe directly connected to
distribution and drop boxes shall be rigid, non-corrugated, non-perforated pipe
extending into the soil treatment area as specified by §
171.103(A)(4).
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.147 BACKFILLING.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Backfilling operations shall be conducted as
established by this section. Backfill and topsoil cover materials shall meet
the specifications established by §
171.167.
      (1)   Weather conditions. Backfill material shall not be frozen or
contain wet soil clods.
      (2)   Timing. Backfilling and covering shall be completed as soon as
practical after the construction or installation of the system component.
      (3)   Drainage. The grade established by backfilling and covering shall
direct stormwater away from system components and the soil treatment area.
      (4)   Placement around system components. Backfill for excavations of
tanks, distribution devices, piping, etc., shall be carefully placed to avoid
displacing the system components. The backfill material shall be tamped or
compacted to secure the system components and minimize settling.
      (5)   Placement in soil treatment area. Backfill and/or cover for soil
treatment components shall be carefully placed to avoid displacing the barrier
material.
      (6)   Equipment traffic. Backfill or cover shall be placed with a minimum
of equipment traffic.
      (7)   Reserve soil treatment areas and prohibitive disturbance areas. No
traffic shall be allowed on reserve soil treatment areas or prohibitive
disturbance areas.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.148 ACCESSORIES.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Devices and piping employed for the distribution
of wastewater into soil treatment components or regulating the flow of
wastewater shall be constructed, installed or equipped as established in this
section.
      (1)   Equal flow distribution box. When an equal flow distribution box is
used to direct wastewater flow to two or more wastewater conveyance pipes, the
invert elevation of all outflow pipes shall be leveled with a pre-manufactured
cap specifically designed to adjust the flow line of distribution box piping.
      (2)   Perforations. Perforations drilled into low pressure wastewater
distribution pipe shall be carefully placed along a straight line, and drilled
perpendicular to the apex of the pipe.
      (3)   Other components. Diversion valves, flow control valves, effluent
filters or any other component that is located outside of a septic tank or
other enclosed buried system component shall be provided with access to final
grade sufficient to allow applicable adjustment or maintenance as required.
      (4)   Audio-visual alarm. Pumps, aerobic treatment units, or other
mechanical systems shall be provided with an audio-visual alarm, either inside
or outside a structure. Electrical wiring and connections shall conform to the
current National Electric Code.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.149 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Inspections of the construction and/or
installation of an onsite wastewater treatment system, or component thereof,
and the building served shall be conducted by the Health Officer to determine
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Inspection request. A request for an inspection shall be made by the
licensed installation contractor.
   (C)   Required system construction inspections. The following inspections
are required by the Health Officer prior to issuing final approval:
      (1)   Soil preparation. Inspection of the plowed surface of the soil
treatment area prior to the placement of gravel.
      (2)   System components. System components shall remain sufficiently
uncovered so as to allow adequate inspection. Inspections of the following
components of the onsite wastewater treatment system shall be conducted:
         (a)   Building sewer material, tank manufacturers, tank capacities,
risers, connecting piping;
         (b)   Selected locations along a force main including the lift station
outlet;
         (c)   Presence and operation of pumps, switches, high water floats,
control panels, timers, and audiovisual alarms;
         (d)   Pressure test of distribution piping network;
         (e)   Size of soil treatment component, quality of gravel,
distribution components, gravel cover;
         (f)   Final soil cover quality, depth, grading, seeding, mulching.
   (D)   Required building inspections. When applicable, inspections of the
following areas of the building served shall be conducted to verify conformance
with the approved site and building plan(s).
      (1)   Residential. A count of the number of bedrooms, as defined in §
171.021, and an inspection of discharge points of clear water discharges listed
in §
171.100(D).
      (2)   Non-Residential. Floor plan arrangement and an inspection of
discharge points of clear water discharges listed in §
171.100(D).
   (E)   Other inspections. The Health Officer may require or conduct any other
inspections as may be determined to be necessary.
   (F)   Nonconforming parts. When, during an inspection, the Health Officer
identifies defective material or parts that do not conform to the requirements
of this chapter, the defective material or nonconforming parts shall be
removed, replaced with conforming material or parts, and if required by the
Health Officer, re-inspected.
   (G)   Un-workmanlike construction. When, during an inspection, the Health
Officer identifies un-workmanlike construction that does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter, the un-workmanlike construction shall be
corrected, and if required by the Health Officer, re-inspected.
   (H)   Final approval. No onsite wastewater treatment system shall be placed
into service without the final written approval of the Health Officer.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
MATERIALS
§ 171.160 GENERAL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. All materials used in the construction or
installation of onsite wastewater treatment systems or system components shall
be at least to the minimum specifications of this chapter.
   (B)   Approval. All materials, equipment and devices approved for use shall
be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
   (C)   Technical data. The Health Officer may require that sufficient
technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any material or
assembly, and if it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory
proof of performance for the use intended, the Health Officer shall approve its
use, subject to the requirements of this chapter. The costs of all tests,
reports and investigations required under these provisions shall be paid by the
applicant.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.161 PRETREATMENT COMPONENTS.
   (A)   Septic tanks. A septic tank used in an onsite wastewater treatment
system shall meet the minimum standards for construction established in the
Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code and in this chapter.
   (B)   Aerobic treatment units. An aerobic treatment unit used in an onsite
wastewater treatment system shall be listed and labeled by an ANSI accredited
third party testing and certification organization as a Class I unit. An
accompanying septic/trash tank shall be sized in accordance with the aerobic
unit manufacturer recommendations.
   (C)   Effluent filters. An effluent filter used in an onsite wastewater
treatment system shall be designed for the specific purpose of filtering septic
tank effluent and shall be designed and installed to be easily maintained.
   (D)   Exterior grease interceptor. When the Health Officer determines that
the wastewater stream will contain significant quantities of fats, oil and
grease (FOG) such as from food processing establishment, food service
establishment licensed by the Lake County Health Department or other kitchen
operations more intensive than residential, an exterior grease interceptor
(EGI) designed as described in this section shall be installed.
      (1)   Wastewater segregation. The wastewater shall be segregated so that
only wastewater from kitchen/food operations shall be discharged to the
exterior grease interceptor. The EGI shall receive the entire waste discharge
from kitchens or food processing areas.
      (2)   Capacity and sizing. The minimum capacity shall be 1,000 gallons or
greater as calculated below:
         (a)   Restaurant. The minimum capacity of an exterior grease
interceptor serving a restaurant shall be equal to C when:
C = S x H x A
      S = number of seats (in lieu of, or in addition to seats, each drive-in
car service space shall count as 3 seats, and each drive-up service window
shall count as 60 seats)
      H = hours per day that meals are served (minimum of 6 hours; maximum 12
hours)
      A = Appliance factor: 0.75 for a kitchen with no dishwashing and no food
waste grinder; 1.0 for a kitchen with either a dishwashing machine or a food
waste grinder; 1.25 for a kitchen with both a dishwashing machine and a food
waste grinder.
         (b)   Other food service. The minimum capacity of an exterior grease
interceptor serving a dining hall, hospital, nursing home, school kitchen,
church kitchen or a kitchen for carryout or delivery service shall be equal to
C when:
C = (M x G x H)/2 x P
      M = meals served per day
      G = 3 gallons per meal served
      H = hours per day that meals are served at least 6 hours but not more
than 12 hours
      P = meal periods per day, 1, 2 or 3.
      (3)   Tank design specifications. The exterior grease interceptor shall
meet the construction standards of a septic tank as established in the Illinois
Department of Public Health Private Sewage Disposal Code, § 905.40, and shall
be modified as follows:
         (a)   Inlet/outlet. The inlet and outlet openings shall be provided
with open-end sanitary tee fittings or baffles, designed and constructed to
distribute the flow and retain the grease in the tank or tank compartments. The
sanitary tee fitting or baffle at the inlet opening shall extend below the
liquid level of the tank a distance equal to one-third of the total liquid
depth. The sanitary tee fitting or baffle at the outlet opening shall extend
below the liquid level of the tank a distance equal to two-thirds of the total
liquid depth.
         (b)   Orientation. The longest dimension of the tank shall be set
parallel to the direction of flow.
         (c)   Openings. Only watertight openings shall be used for the inlet
and outlet piping.
         (d)   Setbacks. The setback distances in
Appendix D shall apply to the placement of an exterior grease interceptor.
         (e)   Effluent flow. The effluent from an exterior grease interceptor
shall be merged with the remaining flow from the facility at a point after
primary treatment of that flow and before any additional treatment.
      (4)   Inspections and pumping. The owner of an exterior grease
interceptor shall assure that the exterior grease interceptor is inspected and
pumped as necessary to ensure its proper function.
   (E)   Media filters. If used, proprietary media filters shall be used in
accordance with manufacturer’s applications.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.162 LIFT STATIONS.
   (A)   General. A lift station used as a component of an onsite wastewater
disposal system shall be watertight and shall be designed to prevent floatation
when emptied.
   (B)   Risers. Every lift station shall be equipped with a riser extending a
minimum of four inches above grade, and shall be covered with a fitted lid
secured by the weight of the lid or other mechanism to prevent unauthorized
entry. Final grade shall be sloped away from the riser(s).
   (C)   Pumps and controls. A pump used in an onsite wastewater disposal
system shall be specified by its manufacturer as an effluent or sewage pump.
Pumps shall be non-automatic, operated by an external switch or control.
      (1)   Pump switches. Pump switches shall be sealed float switches or
equivalent. If the pumping volume cannot be accurately set by the tether of an
on-off float switch, then a double float switch must be used.
      (2)   Pump controls. Pump controls, if used, shall be operated by float
switches or equivalent means. Multiple pumps shall be operated by a control
panel.
      (3)   Electrical boxes. Electrical boxes containing wire connections
shall be water tight and located outside of the lift station. Electrical wiring
entering a lift station shall enter through cast-in-place openings in the riser
(s). Wiring shall not be placed in a groove chiseled or cut into the top of the
riser(s).
      (4)   Pump and switch placement. Lift station pumps shall be placed at
least six inches above the floor of the lift station. Float switches shall be
secured to the vertical piping with corrosion resistant straps or ties. All
pumps shall be provided with a threaded coupling or other disconnecting
fitting, and should be provided with a corrosion resistant rope, strap or other
device for removing the pump.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.163 DISTRIBUTION DEVICES.
   (A)   General. Distribution boxes used in an onsite wastewater treatment
system shall be constructed of concrete or plastic.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.164 VALVES.
   (A)   General. A valve used in an onsite wastewater treatment system or
system component shall be designed and installed as established in this
section.
      (1)   Diversion valves. Diversion valves shall be constructed of PVC and
shall be designed with one inlet, divert the flow into two or more outlets, and
shall be operated by a single valve control.
      (2)   Ball or gate valves. Ball valves or gate valves in low pressure
distribution pipe shall be constructed of PVC.
      (3)   Check valves. Check valves, when specified, shall be constructed of
PVC.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.165 PIPING.
   (A)   General. Piping used in an onsite wastewater treatment system shall be
as specified in this section, or equivalent for the intended use as specified
in the Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code, § 905, Appendix A, Illustration
C.
      (1)   Building sewers. Building sewers shall be Schedule 40 PVC or
equivalent, and four inches minimum diameter.
      (2)   Gravity effluent lines. Gravity effluent lines shall be at minimum
SDR 35 PVC and four inches minimum diameter.
      (3)   Pressure supply. Lines With the exception of drip distribution
systems, pressure supply lines shall be SDR 21 PVC, and:
         (a)   Low pressure piping systems. Two- inch minimum diameter on low
pressure piping systems.
         (b)   Drop boxes and distribution boxes. One and one-half inch minimum
diameter to distribution boxes.
      (4)   Low pressure lateral piping. Low pressure pipe lateral distribution
piping shall be at minimum SDR 26 PVC, and one and one-half inch minimum
diameter.
      (5)   Gravity lateral piping. Gravity lateral distribution piping shall
be corrugated polyethylene ASTM Standard F667-84 or equivalent, and four-inch
minimum diameter.
      (6)   Pipe connectors. Couplings, connectors and fittings shall be
appropriate for the size, material, and use.
         (a)   Pressure lines or low pressure piping. Fittings or other
connections in pressure lines or low pressure distribution piping shall be
solvent joined schedule 40 PVC pressure fittings.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.166 FILL AND GRAVEL AGGREGATE.
   (A)   Fill material. Fill material used in an onsite wastewater treatment
system shall be coarse sand as defined by the National Resources Conservation
Service.
   (B)   Gravel. Gravel used in an onsite wastewater treatment system shall be
sized between three-quarter inch and one and one-half inches, and shall be
washed to be essentially free of dust, sand or other material.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.167 BACKFILL AND TOPSOIL COVER.
   (A)   Backfill material. Soil material used in backfilling components of an
onsite wastewater treatment system shall be free of rocks, clods, frozen clods,
and extraneous materials.
   (B)   Topsoil cover material. Topsoil used to cover any component of an
onsite wastewater treatment system shall be considered good quality topsoil of
the texture loam, sandy loam, silt loam or light silty clay loam, and shall be
free of rocks, clods, frozen clods, and extraneous materials.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.168 ITEMS NOT SPECIFIED.
   (A)   Other materials. Any material used in an onsite wastewater treatment
system that is not specified in this section shall be approved only after a
review of the proposed usage by the Health Officer.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
LICENSING, CERTIFICATION AND TRAINING
§ 171.180 GENERAL.
   (A)   Authority. The Health Officer shall regulate the evaluation of soils
and the design, construction, repair, pumping and servicing/management of
onsite wastewater treatment systems in Lake County by requiring any individual,
or in the case of pumping, any company, who performs these services to possess
a valid Lake County license.
      (1)   Expiration date. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year
issued, except that a new license issued after October 1 and before December 31
shall expire on December 31 of the following year.
   (B)   License categories. When the requirements of §§
171.180 through
171.186 are met, the Health Officer shall issue the following categories of
licenses:
      (1)   Soil Classifier/Scientist;
      (2)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Designer;
      (3)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Installation Contractor;
      (4)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Designer/Installation
Contractor;
      (5)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Installation Contractor/Service
Provider;
      (6)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Designer/Installation
Contractor/Service Provider;
      (7)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Pumper.
   (C)   Homeowner activities. A person who owns and occupies a single family
dwelling may construct an onsite wastewater treatment system or install a
system component to serve the dwelling, or maintain, manage and/or service the
onsite wastewater treatment system that serves the dwelling provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   System construction/installation. Prior to receiving construction
approval and beginning work on his or her onsite wastewater treatment system or
system component, the owner must meet with the Health Officer and establish
that he or she is knowledgeable of the proper construction materials and
methods required by this chapter for the construction/installation of the
onsite wastewater treatment system or system component. The Health Officer
shall refuse to issue construction approval until this meeting has taken place
and the Health Officer is reasonably assured that the owner possesses
sufficient capability to construct/install the onsite wastewater treatment
system or system component.
      (2)   System management activities. Prior to performing management
activities on their onsite wastewater treatment system or system component, the
owner must establish to the Health Officer that they are knowledgeable of the
proper system management methods required by this chapter and possesses the
necessary instructional materials for managing their onsite wastewater
treatment system or system component, and about reporting the activities to the
Health Officer as required in this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.181 SOIL CLASSIFIER/SCIENTIST.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. A person evaluating soils for an onsite
wastewater treatment system shall be knowledgeable of the methods and
principles of soil classification and experienced in determining the formation,
morphology and description of soils and their applicable characteristics.
   (B)   License. The Health Officer shall license Soil Classifiers/Scientists
by the review and verification of valid certification by either the Illinois
Soil Classifiers Association or the Soil Science Society of America.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.182 ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM DESIGNER.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. A person designing an onsite wastewater
treatment system shall be knowledgeable of the rules and regulations of the
State of Illinois and the County of Lake, and of the general provisions of the
materials incorporated in this chapter.
   (B)   License, examination. The Health Officer shall license an onsite
wastewater treatment system designer by the administration of an examination. A
passing score on the examination shall be 70% or above. After successfully
passing the examination, the applicant shall pay for the license within the
calendar year he or she passed the examination, but in all cases no later than
January 1 of the following year. Illinois Professional Engineers shall not be
required to complete the examination, but shall be required to apply and pay
for an onsite wastewater treatment system designer license in order to submit a
design for approval for an onsite wastewater treatment system in Lake County.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.183 ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. A person constructing, installing, or repairing
an onsite wastewater treatment system must be licensed by the Illinois
Department of Public Health as a Private Sewage Disposal System Installation
Contractor and shall be knowledgeable of the construction procedures specified
herein, and of the interpretation of plans, drawings, and specifications
relative to the construction or repair of an onsite wastewater treatment
system.
   (B)   License, examination. The Health Officer shall license an onsite
wastewater treatment system installation contractor by the administration of an
examination. A passing score on the examination shall be 70% or above. After
successfully passing the examination, the applicant shall pay for the license
within the year of passing the examination but no later than January 1 of the
following year.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.184 ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. A person performing manufacturer specified
management activities on pretreatment components, dispersal and disinfection
components and/or system management required by this chapter or as a condition
for site plan approval must be licensed by the Health Officer, with the
exception of an owner of record who meets the requirements of §
171.180(C)(2).
   (B)   License. The Health Officer shall license onsite wastewater treatment
system service providers by the review and verification of documentation that
the individual possesses a license from the Illinois Department of Public
Health as a Private Sewage Disposal System Installation Contractor, and has
received training in manufacturer’s service specifications and requirements.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.185 ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM PUMPER.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. A person cleaning or pumping waste from an
onsite wastewater treatment system or portable toilet, or hauling or disposing
of these removed wastes must be licensed by the Illinois Department of Public
Health as a Private Sewage Disposal System Pumping Contractor and shall be
knowledgeable of the requirements of §§
171.200 through
171.206 of this chapter.
   (B)   License. The Health Officer shall license onsite wastewater treatment
system pumpers by issuing the license to the company providing the service.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.186 LICENSE APPLICATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   License application. The Health Officer shall provide forms for
applications for licenses established in §§
171.180 through
171.186. The Health Officer shall issue a license when the requirements of §§
171.180 through
171.186 are met and the applicable fee(s), as set in the current fee schedule
adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01, have been paid.
   (B)   License renewal. The Health Officer shall provide renewal application
notices to all currently licensed individuals and companies in December of the
current year. The renewal application notices shall be sent to the last known
address of record of the licensee. The Health Officer shall renew a license
when the requirements of this section are met.
      (1)   Application and fee submittal. Licensed individuals shall submit a
completed and signed application to the Health Officer, proof of continuing
education credits during the previous year, and the applicable fee(s). Upon
receipt of the application and fee, the Health Officer shall mail the license
to the licensed individual within 30 days.
         (a)   Continuing education. Onsite wastewater treatment system
installation contractors, designers, pumpers, and service providers shall
obtain at least three hours of continuing education credits per year in the
field of onsite wastewater treatment and disposal from a training session
approved by the Health Officer. Approved sessions include, but are not limited
to, professional organization conferences, workshops, company training
sessions, and online classes.
   (C)   Expired license. A license issued by the Health Officer in accordance
with this chapter that has been expired for a period of less than two years may
be reinstated in accordance with the requirements of subsection (B)(1) above. A
license that has been expired for more than two years may be restored only by
meeting the requirements for a new license as established in §§
171.180 through
171.186.
   (D)   Multiple or combined licenses. An individual may hold multiple Lake
County licenses, or where applicable, may hold combined licenses as specified
in §
171.180(B).
   (E)   Revoked license. A license that has been revoked may be reinstated
only by meeting the requirements for a new license as established in §§
171.180 through
171.186.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
WASTE HAULERS AND SEPTAGE DISPOSAL
§ 171.200 GENERAL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Domestic septage may be disposed of only by
methods established in this section.
      (1)   Sewage treatment facility. Septage may be disposed of at a sewage
treatment plant appropriately licensed to operate by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
      (2)   Application to agricultural land. Septage may be applied to
agricultural land as specifically established in §§
171.200 through
171.206.
      (3)   Other approved methods. Septage may be disposed of by other methods
subject to the approval of that method by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency and the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.201 LAND APPLICATION SITE APPROVAL.
   (A)   General. Septage shall not be land applied on any site without prior
approval of the Health Officer.
      (1)   Permit. Sites approved for land application of septage shall
receive a permit from the Health Officer.
      (2)   Permit renewal. Permits issued for septage land application sites
shall expire on December 31 of each year, and must be renewed annually.
      (3)   Permit suspension. The Health Officer may suspend, for good cause,
the permit of any septage land application site. An appeal of such suspension
and any penalty for continued use of a site after permit suspension shall be as
established by this chapter.
   (B)   Approval conditions. A site submitted for approval as a septage land
application site shall meet minimum standards as established by this section.
      (1)   Notification of municipality. No site within the boundaries of a
municipality may be approved for septage land application without the written
approval of the municipality’s corporate authority.
      (2)   Limiting layer. Septage shall not be applied on land having a
limiting layer, as defined in §
171.021, within four feet of the ground surface.
      (3)   Floodplain. Sites proposed for septage land application shall be
above base flood elevation.
      (4)   Slope. The slope of sites proposed for septage land application
shall not exceed 5%.
      (5)   Offset requirements. An areas designated for septage land
application shall be located at least the minimum setback distances from
features as established by this section.
         (a)   Water wells. Application areas shall be a minimum of 300 feet
from any water well.
         (b)   Public roads. Application areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet
from any public road.
         (c)   Residential, commercial or industrial areas. Application areas
shall be a minimum of 1,400 feet from any residential, commercial or industrial
property.
         (d)   Surface waters. Application areas shall be a minimum of 200 feet
from any surface water, wetland, drainage ditch, or surface inlet to subsurface
drains.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.202 SITE MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Site posted. A septage land application site shall be appropriately
posted by the owner of the property when there is potential for public access.
   (B)   Ponding. Septage shall not be applied where water is ponded in the
application area.
   (C)   Pooling. Septage shall be evenly spread over the application area to
prevent pooling.
   (D)   Rainfall. Septage shall not be applied to a site that has been
saturated by rainfall during the 24 hour period preceding the intended
application time.
   (E)   Application rates. The volume of septage applied per year shall not
exceed the nitrogen requirements of the cover crop.
      (1)   Cover crop. A cover crop, such as winter wheat, hay, alfalfa or
clover must be established on land application sites prior to the first
application of septage, even when the crop is not intended for harvest.
   (F)   Application season. Septage shall only be applied from May through
October.
   (G)   Vegetation restricted. The use of a septage application site for
vegetation shall be restricted.
      (1)   Vegetables and fruits. The cultivation of root vegetables or other
low growing fruits or vegetables on septage disposal sites is prohibited.
      (2)   Pasture. Pasture utilized for septage application shall be
restricted from harvest or animal grazing for a minimum of 30 days following
septage application.
   (H)   Spillage. Septage shall be transported and land applied in such a
manner as to prevent spillage of wastes or the deposition of wastes or mud onto
any public road or right-of-way.
   (I)   Soil incorporation. When conditions exist at a septage land
application site that are determined by the Health Officer to be a nuisance,
septage shall be appropriately incorporated into the soil after application.
   (J)   Soil injection and tillage. If septage is injected or tilled into the
soil throughout the growing season as a method of pathogen control, application
must be done on a rotational basis within the site to maintain vegetative
growth.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.203 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   General. A vehicle used for the collection and transportation of
septage shall be properly equipped and maintained as established by this
section.
      (1)   Container. Vehicle tanks shall be completely enclosed and leak
free.
      (2)   Pump. Septage pumps shall be vacuum or self-priming and shall be
leak free.
      (3)   Hoses. Septage hoses shall be leak free, and stored in such a
manner that contamination will not create a health risk or nuisance.
      (4)   Discharge nozzle. Septage tank discharge nozzles shall be located
in such a manner that discharging waste does not flow or drip onto the vehicle,
and shall be capped when not in use.
      (5)   Equipment condition. Equipment utilized in the pumping, storage,
hauling and land application of septage shall be kept reasonably clean and in
good working condition.
      (6)   Vehicle identification. The name and address of the septage hauling
business shall be displayed in eight inch letters on both sides of a septage
hauling vehicle.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.204 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Land application sites. The Health Officer shall inspect all sites
utilized for the land application of septage for compliance with this chapter
no less often than two times per year.
   (B)   Vehicles and equipment. The Health Officer shall inspect a vehicle
utilized for the pumping and hauling of septage for compliance with this
chapter no less often than once per year.
   (C)   Enforcement. The Health Officer may issue notices and orders requiring
action as may be necessary to assure compliance with this section.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.205 REPORTING.
   (A)   Reporting requirements. On a quarterly basis, licensed pumpers land
applying septage must report the following information:
      (1)   Volume of septage land applied each month during the quarter.
      (2)   Acreage treated each month during the quarter.
      (3)   Site map showing area of application for each month during the
quarter.
      (4)   Signature.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.206 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   State and federal regulations. The requirements established by §§
171.200 through
171.206 shall in no way preclude compliance with any applicable state or
federal regulation.
   (B)   Conflict. Whenever the provisions of §§
171.200 through
171.206 conflict with any applicable ordinance, regulation or rule, the most
stringent requirement shall be applied.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
SYSTEM AND SYSTEM COMPONENT MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
§ 171.220 GENERAL.
   (A)   General. The Health Officer shall require that the owner of record of
an onsite wastewater treatment system or system component specified in §§
171.220 through
171.224 assure that management activities are conducted and reported as
required in §§
171.220 through
171.224.
   (B)   Fees. The owner of record of an onsite wastewater treatment system who
fails to submit a report of required management activities shall be assessed a
fee in accordance with this section, §
171.261 and the current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in
§
178.01.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.221 CERTIFIED PRE-TREATMENT COMPONENTS.
   (A)   Owner’s responsibilities. The owner of record of an onsite wastewater
treatment system that contains a component certified by an ANSI accredited
third party testing and certification organization to meet NSF/ANSI Standard
Number 40 or 350 for pretreatment of wastewater, shall assure that management
activities on the system component are conducted and reported as required in
this section.
      (1)   Management activities. Management activities on the certified pre-
treatment component shall be conducted a minimum of two times per calendar
year, no less than four months apart, and/or in accordance with the
manufacturer’s requirements. These activities shall include the repair,
replacement, adjustment or modification of any part of the certified pre-
treatment component and any additional inspections or management activities as
are necessary to ensure its proper operation.
      (2)   Management activity reporting. The owner of record shall be
responsible to assure that a report of the management activities is provided to
the Health Officer within 30 days of the activities. If disinfection is
required for a treatment unit to meet NSF/ANSI Standard Number 350, management
activity reporting shall include confirmation that the disinfection component
is disinfecting the wastewater.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.222 SURFACE DISCHARGING ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Owner’s responsibilities. The owner of record of a surface discharging
onsite wastewater treatment system shall assure that management activities on
the system are conducted and reported as required in this section.
      (1)   Management activities. If a component certified by an ANSI
accredited third party testing and certification organization to meet NSF/ANSI
Standard Number 40 or 350 for pretreatment of wastewater is a part of a surface
discharging onsite wastewater treatment system, management activities on the
certified pre-treatment component shall be conducted a minimum of two times per
calendar year, no less than four months apart, and/or in accordance with the
manufacturer’s requirements. These activities shall include the repair,
replacement, adjustment or modification of any part of the certified pre-
treatment component, and any additional inspections or management activities as
are necessary to ensure its proper operation.
         (a)   Other advanced secondary pre-treatment component. If a surface
discharging onsite wastewater treatment system contains an advanced secondary
pre-treatment component, either solely or in conjunction with a pre-treatment
component described in subsection (A)(1) above, management activities on the
pre-treatment component shall be conducted a minimum of two times per calendar
year, no less than four months apart, and/or in accordance with the
manufacturer’s requirements. These activities shall include the repair,
replacement, adjustment or modification of any part of the certified pre-
treatment component, and any additional inspections or management activities as
are necessary to ensure its proper operation.
      (2)   Effluent discharge sampling and analysis. A surface discharging
onsite wastewater treatment system shall have its effluent discharge sampled a
minimum of two times per calendar year. Samples shall be analyzed in accordance
with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and the
results shall comply with the performance and monitoring criteria in
Table B.4 (
Appendix B).
         (a)   For systems approved prior to November 12, 2013, the discharge
effluent limitations that were in effect at the time of system approval shall
apply.
      (3)   Management activity reporting. The owner of record shall be
responsible to assure that a report of management activities is provided to the
Health Officer within 30 days of the activities.
      (4)   General National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit. The owner of record of a surface discharging onsite wastewater
treatment system shall assure that the system is in compliance with the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit requirements of
the Federal Clean Water Act, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.223 HOLDING TANKS.
   (A)   Owner’s responsibilities. The owner of record of a holding tank onsite
wastewater treatment system shall assure that the required maintenance and
pumping of the holding tank(s) occurs and that all services are provided by
appropriately licensed individuals or companies. The owner shall assure that a
holding tank is pumped as often as is necessary to prevent overflow, and the
repair, replacement, adjustment or modification of any component of the holding
tank onsite wastewater treatment system to assure its proper operation.
      (1)   Pumping reporting. The owner of record shall be responsible to
assure that reports of all pumping events are provided to the Health Officer
upon request.
   (B)   Inspections. The Health Officer shall inspect all holding tank systems
at least two times per year to determine compliance with §§
171.220 through
171.224. The Health Officer may request reports of all pumping activities as
part of the inspection(s). Vault privies, waterless toilets, and overflow
capture holding tanks are exempt from the inspection requirement.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-06-05, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.224 REPORTING.
   (A)   Requirements. Management activities conducted on an onsite wastewater
treatment system subject to the requirements of §§
171.220 through
171.224 shall be reported as outlined in this section.
      (1)   Management or sampling activity. The owner of record of an onsite
wastewater treatment system subject to the management requirements specified in
§§
171.220 through
171.224 or by any other agreement conditional to its initial approval, shall
submit to the Health Officer a report of all required management or sampling
activity.
      (2)   Reporting requirements. Reports shall be submitted as specified in
§§
171.220 through
171.224, with the exception that a report of a discharge of inadequately
treated effluent to the ground surface or a surface water shall be reported
within 24 hours.
      (3)   Form specifications. A report submitted to the Health Officer as
required by §§
171.220 through
171.224 shall be on forms or other means provided by, or acceptable to the
Health Officer including, as a minimum, the name of the owner of record, a
complete mailing address, a complete legal description, the Permanent Index
Number (PIN) and the onsite wastewater treatment system permit number.
      (4)   Fees. An owner who performs required management activities and
fails to submit a report within 30 days of performing the activities shall be
assessed a fee in accordance with this section, §
171.261 and the current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in
§
178.01.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-06-05, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 171.235 GENERAL.
   (A)   Violations. A person who violates any provision of this chapter, or
who violates any determination or order of the Lake County Health Department
under this chapter, shall be fined not more than $1,000. Each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. The Lake County State’s
Attorney or the Attorney General shall bring such action in the name of the
County of Lake or the People of Illinois, or may in addition to other remedies
provided in this chapter, bring action for an injunction to restrain such
violation.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.236 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Requirements. Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision
of this chapter, the Lake County Health Department shall give notice of such
alleged violation to the person or company responsible, including but not
limited to: the property owner, the property owner’s tenant or renter, and/or
licensed person or company licensed under the provisions of this chapter. The
notice of violation shall:
      (1)   Be in writing.
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for the issuance of the notice.
      (3)   Allow reasonable time as determined by the Health Officer for the
performance of any act it requires.
      (4)   Be served upon the owner, operator, or permit holder as the case
may require; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner, operator or permit holder when a copy thereof
has been sent by regular, certified or registered mail to his or her last or
her known address as furnished to the Lake County Health Department; or, when
he or she has been served with such notice by any other method authorized by
the laws of the State or Illinois; and
      (5)   Contain an outline of corrective actions that are required to
affect compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.237 EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   General. When an emergency exists that requires immediate action to
protect the public safety or health, the Health Officer may, without any
administrative procedure and without notice of hearing, seek an injunction to
require that such action be taken as the court may deem necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such order
shall be effective immediately.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.238 REVOCATION OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Revocation of approval. When the condition of a site approved for an
onsite wastewater treatment system has changed after approval, any information
considered in the approval of an onsite wastewater treatment system was omitted
or found to be false or erroneous, or there has been a serious violation of the
provisions of this chapter that would require resubmission of the plan to
correct the problem(s), the Health Officer may revoke the approval of the site
plan and any associated construction approval. For the purposes of this
section, a serious violation of the provisions of this chapter refers to a
violation or deficiency in the construction of the system that would require
the resubmission of a plan to correct the problem(s).
   (B)   Revocation notice. Notice of revocation of approval shall be in
writing, posted at the site and mailed to the owner, licensed designer, and
licensed installation contractor, as applicable, by regular, certified or
registered mail. The notice shall contain information as follows:
      (1)   A statement that any further work on the onsite wastewater
treatment system is prohibited.
      (2)   An explanation of the reason for the revocation of approval.
      (3)   An outline of actions required to reinstate the approval.
      (4)   An explanation of rights and procedures to appeal the revocation
decision.
   Unless the Health Officer receives written actions or drawn plans to correct
the problems that caused the issuance of the notice of intent to revoke the
approval, or receives a request for a hearing within ten business days of the
date of the notice, the revocation of approval shall be considered final.
   (C)   Hearing request. A person whose approval for an onsite wastewater
treatment system has been revoked may request an administrative appeal before
the Board of Health Hearings Committee, provided that the request is received
in writing within ten days from receipt of the notice of intent to revoke
approval.
      (1)   Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with §§
176.15 through
176.17.
      (2)   Fees. A fee for a hearing request shall be in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01, and shall be submitted by the person who has ben provided notice of
intent to revoke their approval for an onsite wastewater treatment system with
the request for hearing. If a judicial review is sought, the licensee shall pay
for the cost of a transcript.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-06-05, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.239 SUSPENSION OF CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL.
   (A)   Suspension. When, during the construction of an onsite wastewater
treatment system, a licensed installation contractor violates the provisions of
this chapter or is not constructing the system in accordance with the approved
site plan, the Health Officer shall suspend the construction approval issued
pursuant to the site plan approval.
   (B)   Suspension notice. The notice of suspension shall be in writing,
posted at the site and mailed to the owner and licensed installation
contractor, as applicable, by regular, certified or registered mail. The notice
shall contain information as follows:
      (1)   A statement that any further work on the onsite wastewater
treatment system is prohibited.
      (2)   An explanation of the reason for the suspension of construction
approval.
      (3)   An outline of actions and the process required to avoid the
revocation of the plan approval, if determined.
      (4)   A statement that a written corrective action plan must be submitted
within ten business days or the approval is subject to revocation.
   (C)   Revocation of plan approval. If the Health Officer does not receive
written actions or drawn plans to correct the problems that caused the
suspension of the construction approval within ten business days of the date of
the notice, the Health Officer may issue notice revoking the plan approval in
accordance with §
171.238.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.240 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Cause for revocation. When a person licensed under the provisions of
this chapter violates a provision of this chapter, or provides information
toward the evaluation of soil or site conditions, the installation of an onsite
wastewater treatment system, or required management activities or the reporting
of management activities that is false, the Health Officer may issue a notice
of intent to revoke that person’s license.
      (1)   Written notice. The Health Officer shall give written notice to the
licensee by regular, certified or registered mail stating as follows:
         (a)   The alleged violation(s) of this chapter or incident(s) of
providing false or erroneous information.
         (b)   An indication of intent to revoke the license.
         (c)   Notification that the license will be revoked unless the person
requests a hearing as provided for in subsection (B) within ten business days.
   (B)   Hearing not requested. If the Health Officer does not receive a
request for a hearing within ten business days of the date of the notice, the
revocation of approval shall be considered final.
   (C)   Board of Health hearing. When a licensee receives notice of intent to
revoke their license from the Health Officer, that person may make a written
request to the Health Officer for a hearing before the Board of Health Hearings
Committee. The request for a hearing shall be made in accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17.
      (1)   Hearing determination. Within 15 business days after the closing of
the hearing, the Board of Health Hearings Committee, having considered the
record made at the hearing, shall render a decision in writing, setting forth
the reasons for the decision. The action taken by the Board of Health Hearings
Committee shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review.
         (a)    Imposition of decision and judicial review. A decision by the
Board of Health Hearings Committee to revoke a license in accordance with this
section shall be imposed 35 days after the date of the decision in order to
allow the licensee to seek judicial review. The decision shall provide written
instructions to the licensee for complying with the decision, including the
dates the actions required by the decision take effect, and remain in effect.
      (2)   Fees. A fee for a hearing request shall be in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01, and shall be submitted by the licensee with the request for hearing. If
a judicial review is sought, the licensee shall pay for the cost of the
transcript.
   (D)   Reinstatement of license. When a person licensed under the provisions
of this chapter has that license revoked, they may re-apply for the license in
the next calendar year renewal cycle.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Res. passed 2-10-2015; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-
2017; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.241 OTHER REMEDIES.
   As an alternative remedy to any other remedy that may be available to the
Health Department in this subchapter, the Health Officer may, when the owner,
or leasee of the owner of an onsite wastewater treatment system regulated by
this subchapter violates the provisions of this subchapter, issue a notice of
ordinance violation ticket in accordance with the provisions of the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§ 94.50 through 94.66). The ticket
shall identify the violation for which it is being issued, the corresponding
fine amount as established in the Lake County Administrative Adjudication
Ordinance (§§ 94.50 through 94.66) and shall require the alleged violator to
appear before the county's administrative hearing officer, provide the alleged
violator the option to appear before the county's administrative hearing
officer, or pay the established fine.
(Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
FEES AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES/REQUIREMENTS
§ 171.255 FEES.
   (A)   Fees. All fees assessed by the Health Officer in the enforcement and
implementation of this chapter shall be in accordance with the current fee
schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.256 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications. An application shall be submitted, on forms provided by,
or acceptable to the Health Officer, to obtain approval from the Health Officer
as required by this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.257 PLANS AND PLAN REVIEWS.
   (A)   Plans. Plans shall be submitted in accordance with requirements of §§
171.125 through
171.128 to obtain approval from the Health Officer as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Site plan review. Upon receipt of an application, properly submitted
plans, and receipt of the appropriate fee, the Health Officer shall review the
application and site plan for compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and shall approve, approve with comments, or deny approval of the proposal.
   (C)   Notification of non-approval. The Health Officer shall notify an
applicant whose application is not approved of the reason(s) preventing the
approval and of any technical or administrative solution remaining.
   (D)   Site plan validity and expiration. A site plan that has been reviewed
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless revoked, shall be
valid for a period of 24 months from the date of approval, or the date of the
notification of non- approval. After revocation or expiration a site plan shall
be void and shall no longer be valid. Subdivision plans are exempt from the
expiration requirement.
      (1)   One-time renewal of a valid approved site plan. Prior to the
expiration date of an approved site plan, the approved site plan may be renewed
one time for an additional 24-month period that shall begin at the expiration
date of the original site plan, upon submittal and approval of the following:
         (a)   An application for renewal.
         (b)   A fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the
County Board as codified in §
178.01 .
         (c)   Five copies of the original site plan that was initially
approved. The type, size and location of the soil treatment component and
surrounding grading shall be as approved on the original approved site plan.
      (2)   Re-submittal of a valid unapproved site plan. Prior to expiration,
a site plan that has been reviewed and was not approved may be re-submitted for
review and: potential approval upon submittal of a fee in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01 and five copies of the proposed revisions to the original site plan that
was initially not approved.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.258 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variance requests. When compliance with the requirements of this
chapter is impossible or impractical, an applicant may request a variance as
follows:
      (1)   Written requests. Variance requests shall be in writing and shall
detail those conditions where compliance is considered impossible or
impractical.
      (2)   Supporting data. Variance requests shall include pertinent data
from an appropriately licensed or credentialed person to support the requested
waiver of the requirements of this chapter and shall be consistent with the
responsibility of the Health Officer to protect and provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the people and the environment of Lake County
and of other affected communities.
         (a)   Public sewer availability. A variance request to install,
replace or repair an onsite wastewater treatment system on a property where a
public sewer is available, as described in §
171.035(F), shall include documentation that the controlling authority of the
public sewer does not object to the granting of the variance and the approval
of a OWTS site plan.
   (B)   Review process. The Health Officer shall review variance requests and
shall approve or refuse to approve the request within ten working days.
   (C)   Notification. The Health Officer shall notify the person requesting a
variance in writing of the approval or denial of the request, and shall state
the reasons for the decision.
   (D)   Recording approval of variance. The document issued by the Health
Officer approving a variance shall be recorded with the property with the Lake
County Recorder of Deeds and shall run with the land.
   (E)   Fee. A fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the
County Board as codified in §
178.01 shall be submitted with a variance request.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017; Ord. 19-0775,
passed 5-14-2019)
§ 171.259 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Hearings. When approval as required in this chapter is denied by the
Health Officer and a subsequent variance request is denied, that person denied
approval may make a written request to the Health Officer for a hearing before
the Board of Health Hearings Committee.
   (B)   Request. A request for a hearing shall be made in accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17.
   (C)   Hearing rules. A hearing shall be conducted in accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17.
   (D)   Fee. A fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the
County Board as codified in §
178.01 shall be submitted with a hearing request. If a judicial review is
sought, the person denied approval shall pay for the cost of a transcript.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13- 2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
§ 171.260 CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL.
   (A)   General. A request for construction approval to conduct work on an
onsite wastewater treatment system for which a site plan has been approved
shall be submitted as follows:
      (1)   Application. An application, on forms provided by or acceptable to
the Health Officer, shall be completed and submitted.
      (2)   Fee. A fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by
the County Board as codified in §
178.01 shall be submitted.
      (3)   Revised site plan. A revision to the approved site plan, if
applicable, depicting any changes to the site plan or site may be submitted,
with the exception that the type, size and location of the soil treatment
component and associated surrounding grading may not be altered.
   (B)   Permit review. Upon receipt of an application for construction
approval and the appropriate fee, the Health Officer shall review the
application and construction plan for compliance with this chapter and for
conformance with the approved site plan.
   (C)   Notification process. The Health Officer shall issue or refuse to
issue construction approval within five working days of its receipt, and shall
notify any applicant whose permit is denied of the reason(s) preventing
approval and of any technical or administrative solution(s) remaining.
   (D)   Permit period. Construction approval shall be valid for a period of
120 days from the date of approval.
      (1)   Extension. The Health Officer may, without additional fee, extend
construction approval for 30 days provided that such extension shall apply only
to the licensed onsite wastewater treatment system installation contractor to
whom the permit was originally issued.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
§ 171.261 OTHER.
   (A)   Procedural/fee requirements. The Health Officer may impose procedural
requirements and/or charge fees in accordance with the current fee schedule
adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01 for reviews, permits or services including but not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Examination and license fees. Examination and license fees for soil
classifiers, onsite wastewater treatment system designers, installation
contractors, service providers, and pumpers.
      (2)   Onsite wastewater treatment system evaluations. Evaluation of
onsite wastewater treatment system upon request.
      (3)   Septage disposal. Inspection of septage disposal sites.
      (4)   Mandatory inspection and management program. Administrative fees
associated with the mandatory onsite wastewater treatment system management
program.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY
§ 171.275 GENERAL.
   (A)   Personal liability. The Health Officer charged with the enforcement of
this chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be liable
personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage
that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any
officer or employee because of an act performed by the Health Officer in the
lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall be
defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceeding, except as may be otherwise required by statute.
The Health Officer shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit, or
proceedings that may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this
chapter, any officer of the Lake County Health Department shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any
act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith,
except as may be otherwise required by statute.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT
§ 171.290 GENERAL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and
general welfare. Whenever a provision of this chapter or any other applicable
provisions of law, whether set forth in this chapter or any other applicable
provisions of law imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations or contains
restrictions covering similar subject matter, the provision that imposes higher
standards or requirements for the promotion of public health and safety of the
people of Lake County shall prevail.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.291 STATE AND LOCAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Compliance. Compliance with this chapter does not release applicant
from compliance with applicable State of Illinois or local ordinances or
regulations governing onsite wastewater treatment systems.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
§ 171.292 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall be effective on and after the first day of April, 1997,
and shall be enforced as amended.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
APPENDIX A: INCORPORATED MATERIALS
   The following materials are incorporated as a part of this Ordinance for
reference purposes:
   A.   Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act (225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.)
and Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code (Title 77 Illinois Administrative
Code, Chapter I, Subchapter r, Part 905)
   B.   Wisconsin Mound Soil Absorption System Siting, Design, and Construction
Manual, Small Scale Waste Management Project, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
January, 1990.
   C.   Wisconsin Mound Soil Absorption System: Siting, Design and Construction
Manual, Small Scale Waste Management Project, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
January, 2000.
   D.   Wisconsin At Grade Soil Absorption System Siting, Design and
Construction Manual, Small Scale Waste Management Project, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, January, 1990.
   E.   At Grade Systems for On-Site Wastewater Treatment and Dispersal, Small
Scale Waste Management Project, University of Wisconsin-Madison, January, 1999.
   F.   Design of Pressure Distribution Networks for Septic Tank-Soil
Absorption Systems, Small Scale Waste Management Project, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, January, 1981.
   G.   Design and Installation of Low-Pressure Pipe Waste Treatment Systems;
UNC Sea Grant College Publication UNC-56-82-03, May 1982.
   H.   General Design, Construction, and Operation Guidelines: Constructed
Wetlands Wastewater Treatment Systems for Small Users Including Individual
Residences, Second Edition, Water Management Resources Group Tennessee Valley
Authority, May 1993
   I.   Effluent Sewer Design Manual, Orenco Systems, Incorporated, March 2007.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013)
APPENDIX B: TABLES: SOIL RESOURCE GROUPS, MAXIMUM LOADING RATES, TREATMENT
CREDITS AND DISCHARGE EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS
   
Table B.1   Soil Resource Groups
   
Table B.2   Maximum Wastewater Loading Rates
   
Table B.3   Soil Treatment Credit
   
Table B.4   Discharge Effluent Limitations for Treated Domestic Sewage
Discharges to any Waters of the State, Lakes, Ponds or Impoundments
Table B.1 - Soil Resource Groups
Soil Resource Group A - The following soils formed in loamy to sandy material
overlying sandy or gravelly glacial outwash, have a moderately well or greater
drainage class, and a particle size class of coarse-loamy, sandy skeletal or
fine-loamy over sandy or sandy-skeletal. Udipsamments and Beach sand formed in
wind-worked beach sand and have a somewhat poor or greater drainage class.
Soil Series
93 Rodman - Typic Hapludoll
318 Lorenzo - Typic Argiudoll
323 Casco - Inceptic Hapludalf
325 Dresden - Mollic Hapludalf
327 Fox - Typic Hapludalf
367 Beach sand
570 Martinsville - Typic Hapludalf
706 Boyer - Typic Hapludalf
839 Udipsamments - Typic Udipsamment and Aquic Udipsamment
Soil Resource Group B - The following soils formed in silty material overlying
stratified glacial outwash, have a somewhat poor or greater drainage class, and
a particle size class of fine-silty.
Soil Series
134 Camden - Typic Hapludalf
365 Aptakisic - Aerie Endoaqualf
442 Mundelein - Aquic Argiudoll
443 Barrington - Qxyaquic Argiudoll
526 Grundelein - Aquic Argiudoll
557 Millstream - Aquollic Hapludalf
696 Zurich - Qxyaquic Hapludalf
697 Wauconda - Udollic Endoaqualf
698 Grays - Mollic Qxyaquic Hapludalf
791 Rush - Typic Hapludalf
792 Bowes - Mollic Hapludalf
Soil Resource Group C - The following soils formed in silty clay loam glacial
till, have a somewhat poor or greater drainage class, and a particle size class
of fine.
Soil Series
23 Blount - Aerie Epiaqualf
146 Elliott - Aquic Argiudoll
223 Varna - Qxyaquic Argiudoll
298 Beecher - Udollic Epiaqualf
530 Ozaukee - Qxyaquic Hapludalf
531 Markham - Mollic Qxyaquic Hapludalf
 
Soil Resource Group D - The following soils formed in silty clay loam
lacustrine sediments (Fine) and have a somewhat poor or greater drainage class.
Soil Series
189 Martinton - Aquic Argiudoll
192 Del Rey - Aerie Epiaqualf
370 Saylesville - Oxyaquic Hapludalf
 
Soil Resource Group E - The following soils formed in silty clay or clay
glacial till (Fine) and have a somewhat poor or greater drainage class.
Soil Series
228 Nappanee - Aerie Epiaqualf
320 Frankfort - Udollic Epiaqualf
Soil Resource Group F - the following soils have a seasonal high water table at
a depth of less than 12 inches from the ground surface.
Organic Soils
Soil Series
103, 1103, 3107, Houghton muck - Euic, Typic Haplosaprist
1210 Lena muck - Euic, Typic Haplosaprist
4777 Adrian muck - Sandy or sandy skeletal, Euic, Terric Haplosaprist
Mineral Soils
Soil Series
67 Harpster - Fine silty, Typic Calciaquoll
153 Pella - Fine silty, Typic Endoaquoll
219 Millbrook - Fine silty, Udollic Endoaqualf
232 Ashkum - Fine, Typic Endoaquoll
330, 1330 Peotone - Fine, Cumulic Vertic Endoaquoll
465 Montgomery - Fine, Vertic Endoaquoll
488 Hooppole - Fine loamy, Typic Endoaquoll
513 Granby - Sandy, Typic Endoaquoll
523 Dunham - Fine silty, Typic Endoaquoll
626 Kish - Fine loamy, Typic Endoaquoll
1107, 3107 Sawmill - Fine silty, Cumulic Endoaquoll
1082 Millington - Fine loamy, Cumulic Endoaquoll
1529 Selmass - Fine loamy, Typic Endoaquoll
Table B.2 - Maximum Wastewater Loading Rates
System types 1 and 2, and drip distribution systems shall use the most limiting
soil loading rate 18 inches below the wastewater application point to size the
soil absorption component. System Types 3, 4 & 5, and the Illinois Raised
Filter Bed, shall use the most limiting soil loading rate in the upper 12
inches of soil to size the soil absorption component.
 Till/ Lacustrine Outwash
                                                     Till/ Lacustrine Outwash
Gravelly coarse sand                                 0.00             0.00
Moderate or strong platy structure                   0.00             0.00
Sandy clay loam, silty clay loam, or finer, and weak 0.00             0.00
platy structure
Moist soil consistence stronger than firm or any     0.00             0.00
cemented class
Sandy clay, clay, or silty clay texture and weak or  0.00             0.00
massive structure
Sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, silt,   0.00             0.00
loam or silt loam texture and massive structure
Sandy clay, clay, or silty clay texture of low clay  0.20             0.20
content and moderate or strong structure
Sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam or silt  0.20             0.30
loam texture with weak structure
Clay loam, silty clay loam, or silt loam texture and 0.40             0.50
moderate or strong structure
Sandy loam or loam texture and weak structure        0.40             0.50
Sandy clay loam, sandy loam, or loam texture and     0.50             0.70
moderate or strong structure
Fine sand, very fine sand, loamy fine sand, or loamy 0.60             0.70
very fine sand
Loamy sand, sand, or coarse sand texture             0.80             0.80
 
Whenever a NSF ANSI Standard Number 40 pretreatment unit is proposed, the
wastewater loading rate may be increased
by a factor of 20% as follows:
0.20 —> 0.24
0.30 —> 0.36
0.40 —> 0.48
0.50 —> 0.60
0.60 —> 0.72
0.70 —> 0.84
0.80 —> 0.96
Whenever an NSF ANSI Standard Number 350 pretreatment unit is proposed, the
wastewater loading rate may be increased by a factor of 100% as follows:
0.20 —> 0.40
0.30 —> 0.60
0.40 —> 0.80
0.50 —> 1.0
0.60 —> 1.2
0.70 —> 1.4
0.80 —> 1.6
Table B.3 - Soil Treatment Credit
The relationship between the system type (wastewater application point) and the
depth to a limiting layer shall be as follows:
                  Septic Tank         Secondary Treated    NSF Standard 350
                  Effluent (greater   Effluent(less than   Effluent (less than
Depth to Limiting than 10,000 FC      10,000 FC organisms/ 240 E. coli MPN/100
Layer in inches   organisms/100 ml)   100 ml) Minimum      ml) Minimum Twelve
                  Minimum Twenty-four Sixteen inches (16") inches (12")
                  inches (24")        Separation Required  Separation Required
                  Separation Required
Less than 6       NA                  NA                   NA
                  Mound with          Drip in fill (b),    Drip in fill (b),
6 to <10          increased sand (a)  Mound (a)(c)         Mound (c), Modified
                                                           Mound
                  Mound (minimum 12"  Mound, Drip on       All the above, Drip
                  depth to limiting   grade/in fill (b),   on grade, Illinois
10 to <16         layer), Mound with  Modified Mound (a),  Raised Filter Bed,
                  increased sand (a)  Illinois Raised      At-grade
                                      Filter Bed
                                      All the above, Drip  All the above, in-
16 to <24         Mound, Modified     in ground/on grade,  ground trenches (h),
                  Mound (d)           In-ground trenches   (g)
                                      (h), At-grade
24 to <28         All the above, At-  All the above, In-   All the above
                  grade               ground trenches (g)
                  All the above, In-  All the above, In-
28 to 36          ground trenches (f) ground trenches (e)  All the above
                  (g)(h)              (g)
36 and above      All the above       All the above        All the above
Footnotes:
a. Maximum 4 gallon per day per linear foot loading rate, single bed or
separated un-stacked multiple beds, time dosing.
b. Acceptable fill is coarse sand (USDA texture 0.5mm to 1.0 mm). Proper depth
of fill needed for separation distance and cover over the drip piping must be
placed before installation of distribution system. A minimum of ten inches
(10") of soil cover, four (4) of which must be coarse sand fill, must be placed
over the drip piping for protective cover.
c. Drip distribution acceptable with sand footprint sized according to sand
loading rate and mound basal area sized according to least permeable (lowest
SLR) soil horizon in existing soil above the limiting layer.
d. Limiting layer must be at least eighteen inches (18").
e. Limiting layer must be at least twenty-eight inches (28") using a twelve
inch (12") standard gravel trench, less if using a state approved, less than
twelve inches (12") thick, low profile proprietary infiltration product.
f. Limiting layer must be at least thirty-six inches (36") using a twelve inch
(12") gravel trench, less if using a state approved, less than twelve inches
(12") thick, low profile proprietary infiltration product.
g. Protective topsoil cover needed when the top of the infiltration trench
gravel or infiltration product is zero inches (0") to less than six inches (6")
below original grade or top of sand fill. Depth of soil cover over a
proprietary infiltration product shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications.
h. When the sidewall of the infiltration trench will extend above existing
grade, the soil treatment area shall be plowed and filled in accordance with §
171.142 and §
171.143 and the minimum depth of sand fill shall be ten inches (10"). The ten
inch (10") depth sand fill material shall extend a minimum of ten feet (10')
beyond all seepage trenches before sloping. A minimum of one-half of the depth
of the infiltration trench shall be installed into existing grade.
 
 
Table B.4 - Discharge Effluent Limitations for Treated Domestic Sewage
Discharges to any Waters of the State, Lakes, Ponds or Impoundments
Discharge  Discharge Effluent Limitations           Monitoring
Monitoring                                          Requirements*
Parameter  Yearly Average Daily Maximum Sample Type Sampling Frequency
Discharge         Discharge Effluent Limitations                Monitoring
Monitoring                                                      Requirements*
Parameter         Yearly Average  Daily Maximum     Sample Type Sampling
                                                                Frequency
Biochemical       10mg/l          12mg/l            Grab
Oxygen Demand
Suspended Solids  12mg/l          24mg/l            Grab
Fecal Coliform    200 CFUs/100 ml 400 CFUs/100 ml   Grab        Biannually
Total Residual    Suggested Operating Range: 0.2 to Grab        Approximately
Chlorine (TRC)**  1.5 mg/1                                      every 6 months
Oil, Odor, Color, None Detectable in Discharge or   Onsite
Floating Debris   Caused by Discharge in the        Observation
                  Receiving Water
* Follow-up sampling is required within 30 to 60 days when any parameter fails
to meet its effluent limitation. Sampling must continue bi-monthly after that
until the relevant effluent limitation is met or until follow-up inspections
to adjust the chlorine delivery system to meet the benchmark range.
** TRC values indicate a non-regulatory benchmark range. Failure to meet
benchmark range values does not indicate a violation, but rather a need by the
owner of record to conduct Discharging Wastewater Treatment Systems from the
United States Environmental Protection Agency as incorporated in
Appendix A.
 
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017; Ord. 19-0775,
passed 5-14-2019; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
APPENDIX C: TABLES: DESIGN DAILY WASTEWATER FLOW AND SYSTEM COMPONENT SIZING
STANDARDS
   
Table C.1   Design Daily Wastewater Flow
   
Table C.2   Septic Tank and Aerobic Treatment Unit Sizing Standards
   
Table C.3   Residential Lift Station Sizing Standards
Table C.1 - Design Daily Wastewater Flow
Wastewater Source Unit Gallons Per Day Per Unit
Wastewater Source              Unit                  Gallons Per Day Per Unit
Apartment buildings. Multi-    Bedroom               150
family residence
Assembly halls (no food        Person                2
preparation)
Bars and cocktail lounges with
restaurant (in addition to     Seating space         9
restaurant seating space)
Bars and cocktail lounges. Low Seating space         9
risk food facility
Beauty salons                  Station               140
Bowling centers with or
without bar and low risk food  Lane                  125
facility
Bowling centers with bar and
food preparation, medium or    Lane                  225
high risk food facility
Campground sanitary dump       Camp space            20
stations
Campground with central bath   Space                 35
and toilet facilities
Camp, day use only, no food    Person                10
preparation
Camp, day use only, food
preparation (cafeteria/        Person                25
kitchen)
Camps, day and night toilet
and shower facilities and food Person                50
preparation (cafeteria/
kitchen)
Churches - no kitchen          Person                3
Churches - with kitchen        Person                6
Dance hall (10 ft per person)  Person                2
Day care facility (no meal     Child                 12
preparation)
Day care facility (with meal   Child                 16
preparation)
Dining hall (toilet and
kitchen waste without          Meal served           5
dishwasher)
Dining hall (toilet and        Meal served           7
kitchen waste with dishwasher)
Drive-in restaurants - all     Car space             15
paper service
Drive-in restaurants - all     Car space and seating
paper service, with inside     space                 15
seating
Drive-in theater (toilet and   Vehicle space         3
kitchen/cafeteria)
Employees (day workers)        Employee per shift    15
Gas station and convenience    Patron
store (low risk food facility)
Health club, indoor sports     Person                5
facility
Health club, indoor sports     Person                15
facility - with showers
Hotels or motels and tourist   Room                  100
rooming houses
Laundromat                     Customer              100
Long term care facility        Bed                   125
Medical office buildings,
clinics and dental offices
   Doctors, nurses, medical Person                75
staff
   Office personnel         Person                15
   Patients                 Person                10
Mobile home park community     Site                  300
Mobile home (individual)       Bedroom               150
Outdoor sports facilities      Person                5
(toilet waste only)
Parks with toilet facilities   Person                5
(75 persons per acre)
Restaurant, 24 hour (with
dishwasher and/or food waste   Seating space         44
grinder)
Restaurant, 24 hour (without
dishwasher and/or food waste   Seating space         40
grinder)
Restaurant (with dishwasher    Seating space         22
and/or food waste grinder)
Restaurant (without dishwasher Seating space         20
and/or food waste grinder)
Retail stores with customer
restrooms, dispensaries, vape  Customer              1.5
lounge
Schools                        Classroom/Student     450/18
Schools with meals served      Classroom/Student     600/24
Schools with meals served and  Classroom/Student     750/30
showers provided
Swimming pool bathhouses       Person                10
Outdoor entertainment or
celebratory event venue or     Person                5
facility
 
Residential Sizing Criteria
 
# of Bedrooms Total Gallons per Day
2             300
3             450
4             600
5             700
 
Minimum 300 total gallons/day
100 gallons/day for each additional bedroom above 4
Table C.2 - Septic Tank and Aerobic Treatment Unit Sizing Standards
Residential
 
Number of Bedrooms Septic Tank(s) (Gallons) Aerobic Units (Gallons Per Day)
2 or Fewer         1,250                    400
3                  1,500                    500
4                  2,000                    600
5                  2,200                    750
6                  2,600                    900
7                  3,000                    1,050
 
Other than Residential
 
Projected Wastewater Septic Tank(s) (Gallons) Aerobic Units (Gallons Per Day)
Concentrations
<300 ppm BOD5        1.5 x design flow        1.0 x design flow
≥ 300 ppm BOD5     § 171.109 - Atypical Flow
 
Table C.3 - Residential Lift Station Sizing Standards
 
Number of Bedrooms Minimum Liquid Capacity (Gallons)
2 or fewer         750
3-4                1,000
5 or more          1,500
 
Non-Residential Lift Station Sizing Standards – For design flows less than
1,500 gallons per day, the minimum liquid capacity shall be 1.5 x design flow.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017; Ord. 24-1005,
passed 8-13-2024)
APPENDIX D: MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCES
Minimum Separation Distances of Components of OWTS to Site Features
             Component Part of System
             Building Sewer,
             Force Main, or  Septic Tank,      Primary and
             effluent        Holding Tank,     Reserve Soil
Distance (in conveyance pipe Aerobic Treatment treatment Area    Large Capacity
feet) From:  from            Unit, Media       (basal area,      Septic System5
             pretreatment    Filter, Lift      mantle, edge of
             tanks to soil   Station, Grease   in-ground trench/
             absorption      Interceptor       bed, drip tubing)
             component
                Component Part of System
                Building Sewer, Septic Tank,    Primary and
                Force Main, or  Holding Tank,   Reserve Soil
                effluent        Aerobic         treatment Area
Distance (in    conveyance pipe Treatment Unit, (basal area,     Large Capacity
feet) From:     from            Media Filter,   mantle, edge of  Septic System5
                pretreatment    Lift Station,   in-ground
                tanks to soil   Grease          trench/bed, drip
                absorption      Interceptor     tubing)
                component
Wells1 or       502,6           506             756              200
Suction Lines
Water Supply
Line Under
Pressure, In-   10              10              25               25
ground swimming
(water edge)
Above Ground
Swimming Pool,  5               5               10               10
hot tub, lined
decorative pond
Surface Waters,
Retention
Facility        25              25              25               25
(ordinary high
water mark)
Wetlands        10              25              25               25
Detention
Facility High   10              10              25               25
Water Line
Building with
Foundation      NA              10              203              10
Footing Drain
Building
Without         NA              5               107              10
Foundation
Footing Drain
Property Line,
Fence Posts,    3               3               5                5
Structure
Support Posts
Driveways,
Patios,
Sidewalks,
Retaining       NA              5               104              104
Walls, Paved or
Gravel Parking
Area
Agricultural
Drain Tile,     10              10              10               10
Perforated Pipe
Drainage
Easement,
Shoulder of
Open Ditches,   5               5               5                10
Road Cuts,
Storm Sewer
Pipe
Utility         3               3               3                5
Easements
Sealed Well     5               10              25               25
Upslope or
Sideslope of
Soil Treatment
Area for System
Types III, IV   NA              5               NA               NA
and V, Soil
Treatment Area
for All Other
System Types
Clearwater
Conveyance Pipe
(i.e., gutter   NA              5               10               10
downspouts,
clearwater sump
discharge pipe)
Downslope of
Soil Treatment
Area for System NA              10              NA               NA
Types III, IV
and V
Footnotes:
1- For separation distances to closed loop wells see 77 111. Adm. Code 920.180
2- A building sewer may be located to within 10 feet of a well or suction line
from the pump to the well when cast iron pipe with mechanical joints or
Schedule 40 PVC pipe with watertight joints is used for the building sewer. A
force main may be located to within 10 feet of a well or suction line from the
pump to the well when Schedule 40 PVC pipe with watertight joints is used.
3- The distance to the upslope edge of the basal area of a Type 3, 4 and 5
system can be reduced by 50% on sites where the soil treatment area is on a
slope of 2% or greater.
4- This distance can be reduced by 50% if the soil treatment area is the edge
of a trench/bed (System Type 1 or 2), drip tubing, or upslope or sideslope side
of a soil treatment area.
5- Large Capacity Septic Systems, which are classified as Class V Injection
Wells, are described and defined in the Illinois Pollution Control Board rules.
They are typically a shallow well used to place fluids below the land surface.
See 35111. Adm. Code 704.105, 704.106 and 704.280.
6- This distance can be reduced to 25 feet with NSF/ANSI Standard Number 350
effluent for the OWTS owner’s private well.
7- This distance can be reduced 50% when the building is not a habitable
structure.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017; Ord. 19-0775,
passed 5-14-2019; Ord. 24-1005, passed 8-13-2024)
APPENDIX E: TABLES: PERFORATION DISCHARGE RATES, FRICTION LOSS, ILLUSTRATIONS:
DEFLECTION, SYSTEM DESIGN ILLUSTRATIONS BY SYSTEM TYPE
   
Table E.1   Perforation Discharge Rates
   
Table E.2   Friction Loss in Schedule 40 Plastic Pipe/100 ft. of Pipe
   
Illustration E.3   Deflection (of a Concave Soil Treatment Component)
   
Illustration E.4   Type 3-Modified Mound System: Single Bed, Level Site
   
Illustration E.5   Type 3-Modified Mound System: Single Bed, Sloping Site
   
Illustration E.6   Type 3-Modified Mound System: Multiple Bed, Level Site
   
Illustration E.7   Type 3-Modified Mound System: Multiple Bed, Sloping Site
   
Illustration E.8   Type 4-At-Grade System: Single Bed, Level Site
   
Illustration E.9   Type 4-At-Grade System: Single Bed, Sloping Site
   
Illustration E.10   Type 4-At-Grade System: Multiple Bed, Level Site
   
Illustration E.11   Type 4-At-Grade System: Multiple Bed, Sloping Site
   
Illustration E.12   Type 5-Mound System: Single Bed, Level Site
   
Illustration E.13   Type 5-Mound System: Single Bed, Sloping Site
   
Illustration E.14   Type 5-Mound System: Multiple Bed, Level Site
   
Illustration E.15   Type 5-Mound System: Multiple Bed, Sloping Site
Table E.1 - Perforation Discharge Rates (in Gallons per Minute Versus
Perforation Diameter and In-Line Pressure)
                      Perforation Diameter (in)
In-Line Pressure (ft) 3/16" 1/4" 5/16" 3/8" 7/16" 1/2"
                      ------------------------------------------gpm -----------
                      ---------------------------
                      Perforation Diameter (in)
In-Line Pressure (ft) 3/16" 1/4" 5/16" 3/8" 7/16" 1/2"
                      ------------------------------------------gpm -----------
                      ---------------------------
1.0'                  0.42  0.74 1.15  1.66 2.26  2.95
1.5'                  0.50  0.90 1.41  2.03 2.76  3.61
2.0'                  0.59  1.04 1.63  2.34 3.19  4.17
2.5'                  0.66  1.17 1.82  2.62 3.57  4.66
3.0'                  0.72  1.28 1.99  2.87 3.91  5.10
3.5'                  0.77  1.38 2.15  3.10 4.22  5.51
4.0'                  0.83  1.47 2.30  3.31 4.51  5.89
4.5'                  0.89  1.56 2.44  3.52 4.79  6.25
5.0'                  0.94  1.65 2.57  3.71 5.04  6.59
 
Table E.2 - Friction Loss in Schedule 40 Plastic Pipe/100 ft. of Pipe
Flow (gpm) Pipe Diameter (inches)
           1-1/4 1-1/2 2 3 4
Flow (gpm) Pipe Diameter (inches)
           1-1/4 1-1/2 2                                            3    4
10         1.46  0.70  0.21
11         1.77  0.84  0.25
12         2.09  1.01  0.30
13         2.42  1.17  0.35
14         2.74  1.33  0.39
15         3.06  1.45  0.44                                         0.07
16         3.49  1.65  0.50                                         0.08
17         3.93  1.86  0.56                                         0.09
18         4.37  2.07  0.62                                         0.10
19         4.81  2.28  0.68                                         0.11
20         5.23  2.46  0.74                                         0.12
25               3.75  1.10                                         0.16
30               5.22  1.54                                         0.23
35                     2.05                                         0.30 0.07
40                     2.62                                         0.39 0.09
45                     3.27                                         0.48 0.12
50                     3.98                                         0.58 0.16
60                                                                  0.81 0.21
70         Velocities in this area become too great for the various 1.08 0.28
80         flow rates and pipe diameters                            1.38 0.37
90                                                                  1.73 0.46
100                                                                 2.09 0.55
125                                                                      0.85
150                                                                      1017
175                                                                      1056
 
Illustration E.3: Deflection (of a Concave Soil Treatment Component)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3152.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.3 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.3
Illustration E.4: Type 3 - Modified Mound System: Single Bed, Level Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3154.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.4 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.4
Illustration E.5: Type 3 - Modified Mound System: Single Bed, Sloping Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3156.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.5 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.5
Illustration E.6: Type 3 - Modified Mound System: Multiple Bed, Level Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3158.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.6 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.6
Illustration E.7: Type 3 - Modified Mound System: Multiple Bed, Sloping Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3160.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.7 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.7
Illustration E.8: Type 4 - At-Grade System: Single Bed, Level Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3162.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.8 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.8
Illustration E.9: Type 4 - At-Grade System: Single Bed, Sloping Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3164.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.9 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.9
Illustration E.10: Type 4 - At-Grade System: Multiple Bed, Level Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3166.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.10 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.10
Illustration E.11: Type 4 - At-Grade System: Multiple Bed, Sloping Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3168.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.11 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.11
Illustration E.12: Type 5 - Mound System: Single Bed, Level Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3170.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.12 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.12
Illustration E.13: Type 5 - Mound System: Single Bed, Sloping Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3172.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.13 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.13
Illustration E.14: Type 5 - Mound System: Multiple Bed, Level Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3843.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.14 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.14
Illustration E.15: Type 5 - Mound System: Multiple Bed, Sloping Site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/59f84a7affb7a0cb3f11d2ab81de12073463b7ad/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3176.jpg]
Note: Illustration E.15 may also be viewed and printed in a PDF format. Click
ILLUSTRATION_E.15
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. V], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. V], passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 17-0605, passed 6-13-2017)
CHAPTER 172: ANIMALS
Section
   
172.01   Administration
   
172.02   Definitions
   
172.03   Education on animal care and control
   
172.04   Bite reporting and investigation
   
172.05   Confinement and observation of biting animals
   
172.06   Rabies vaccination and companion animal registration
   
172.07   Dogs, cats, and other animals running at large
   
172.08   Impoundment of dogs, cats, and other animals
   
172.09   Redemption of impounded dogs, cats, and other animals
   
172.10   Disposal of unclaimed animals
   
172.11   Dogs and cats in heat
   
172.12   Dangerous, vicious and animal-aggressive dogs
   
172.13   Owner’s duties and cruelty to animals
   
172.14   Barking or howling dogs
   
172.15   Limits on number of dogs and cats per residence
   
172.16   Violations
   
172.17   Interpretation and conflict
 
   
172.99   Penalty
§ 172.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Animal Care and Control
Ordinance of the County of Lake," hereinafter referred to as "this chapter."
   (B)   Intent.
      (1)   This chapter is enacted in order to define procedures for:
         (a)   The prevention and control of human and animal rabies;
         (b)   Reporting and investigating animal bites;
         (c)   Confining and/or impounding biting animals, and for referring
bitten persons to appropriate health entities;
         (d)   Requiring the rabies vaccination of dogs and cats, the provision
of vaccination certificates and rabies tags, and the registration of dogs and
cats with the Lake County Board of Health;
         (e)   Prohibiting the running at large of domestic animals and
livestock;
         (f)   Persons who cruelly treat or neglect animals;
         (g)   The control of barking or howling dogs;
         (h)   The control of dangerous, animal-aggressive and vicious dogs;
         (i)   Providing assistance to municipalities through contractual
arrangements;
         (j)   Contracts with Attorneys; requiring veterinarians to provide dog
and cat registrations and tag sales;
         (k)   Control of domestic animals;
         (l)   Limiting the number of dogs and cats per residence; and
         (m)   Providing for enforcement and assigning penalties for violation
of this chapter.
      (2)   The County of Lake recognizes the great hazard of rabies and
therefore, in order to protect the health and safety of the people of Lake
County and of the general public, the Lake County Board of Health is authorized
and directed to promulgate this chapter as approved by the County Board as may
enable it to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Scope/referenced materials. This chapter adopts by reference the
Illinois Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.), the Illinois Humane Care
for Animals Act (510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.), the Illinois Animal Welfare Act (225
ILCS 605/1 et seq.), and the Illinois Domestic Animals Running at Large Act
(510 ILCS 55/1 et seq.), three copies of which are on file with the Lake County
Clerk and at all Lake County Health Department locations. All matters
pertaining to the health and/or safety of the animals and human residents of
the County of Lake shall be administered and enforced in accordance with these
referenced Acts, this chapter, and the Lake County Animal Care and Control
Program Administrative Procedures and Policies.
   (D)   Authority to enter properties. For the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Health Officer, after providing identification
to any person(s) present on the property, and subject to constitutional
limitations, shall have the authority to enter any property where animals are
kept or harbored at any reasonable time, and shall also have the authority to
ascertain by observation and/or inquiry of the vaccination and/or registration
status of a dog or cat.
   (E)   Administrator of the Animal Care and Control Program.  The Lake County
Health Department, acting under the direction of the Lake County Board of
Health and the County Board and its Chair shall appoint an Administrator of the
Animal Care and Control Program in accordance with the requirements of the
Illinois Animal Control Act. The Administrator shall enforce and abide by all
sections of this chapter. Such appointments shall be made as necessary to keep
this position filled at all times. For the purposes of the enforcement of this
chapter, the term ADMINISTRATOR shall mean the "Administrator or their
designee."
   (F)   Credentials. The Health Officer and authorized representatives shall
carry proper credentials of their respective office in the performance of
duties under this chapter.
   (G)   Exemption from liability. The Health Officer, or other persons
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, shall not be held liable
for the injury, death or disease which may occur to any dog, cat or other
animal as a consequence of the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 22-0673, passed 5-10-2022; Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Where terms are not defined by this section, such terms shall have the
meanings as ascribed in the Acts referenced in this chapter; undefined terms
shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
   ANIMAL. A non-human living creature that may be affected by rabies. For the
purposes of the enforcement of this chapter, ANIMAL also includes livestock and
domestic pets that may not be affected by rabies.
   ANIMAL-AGGRESSIVE DOG. A dog that, without justification, causes serious
physical injury or death to another owned companion animal.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The Lake County Board of Health or its authorized
representative.
   COMPANION ANIMAL. An owned domestic dog or cat.
   CONTROL.
      (1)   Securing an animal by a leash or lead;
      (2)   Confining an animal on the premises of its owner or on the premises
of a person allowing the animal's presence; or
      (3)   Confining an animal in an enclosure, i.e. a crate, cage, or other
confined space, including a vehicle.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department,
or their designee.
   LIVESTOCK. An animal including, but not limited to, bison, burro, cattle,
donkey, emu, fowl, geese, goats, horse, llama, mule, ostrich, pony, sheep, or
swine.
   PREMISES. A piece of land and the buildings on it.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. Any circumstance in which an animal is not under control
as established in this chapter.
   STRAY. An animal found running at large that does not have an owner.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.03 EDUCATION ON RABIES AND ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL.
   The Animal Care and Control Program shall provide education on animal and
rabies control including a minimum of three distinct annual programs involving
youth education, education of the general public, education of public
officials, and education of health officials.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.04 BITE REPORTING AND INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Initial bite report. A person having knowledge that a person has been
bitten by an animal shall notify the Health Officer immediately by telephone,
fax, email, in person, or other form of immediate communication.
   (B)   Bite report confirmation. Bite reports shall be confirmed in writing
to the Health Officer on forms provided by the Health Officer.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.05 CONFINEMENT AND OBSERVATION OF BITING ANIMALS.
   (A)   Confinement and observation requirements. Upon receipt of a bite
report the Health Officer shall notify an owner of the requirement for
confinement and observation of the biting animal, and the place of confinement.
      (1)   Hospital confinement and observation. It shall be the duty of an
owner of a biting animal, upon receiving notice from the Health Officer, to
deliver the animal within 24 hours to a licensed veterinarian for confinement
and rabies observation. The confinement and observation shall be for a period
of not less than ten days from the date the bite occurred, and shall continue
until the animal has been examined and released from confinement by a licensed
veterinarian. A licensed veterinarian confining and observing the biting animal
shall report to the Health Officer that the animal has been presented for
confinement and observation immediately by telephone, fax, email, in person, or
other means of immediate communication. Within 24 hours after the end of
confinement and observation period, the licensed veterinarian shall report to
the Health Officer the disposition of the animal on forms provided by the
Health Officer. An owner of a biting animal is responsible for all costs
associated with its confinement and observation.
       (2)   Home confinement and observation. The Health Officer may allow
confinement of a biting animal on the premises of its owner (home confinement)
when the animal's rabies vaccination status is current, when the Deputy
Administrator approves home confinement, or in accordance with other provisions
in this chapter. The confinement and observation shall be for a period of not
less than ten days from the date the bite occurred, and shall continue until
the animal has been examined and released from confinement by a licensed
veterinarian. Within 24 hours after the end of confinement and observation
period, the licensed veterinarian shall report to the Health Officer the
disposition of the animal on forms provided by the Health Officer. If the
biting animal escapes from home confinement during the ten-day confinement
period, the owner shall immediately apprehend it and deliver it to a licensed
veterinarian for hospital confinement and observation, at the expense of the
owner, for the remainder of the confinement and observation period. An owner of
a biting animal is responsible for all costs associated with its confinement
and observation.
      (3)   Unowned dogs and cats. A biting dog or cat that is not owned shall
be subject to the confinement and observation requirements of this chapter,
with the exception of the provisions of §
172.05(C). Applicable fees may be assessed in accordance with the current fee
schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01 and the Lake County Animal Care and Control Program Administrative
Procedures and Policies.
   (B)   Vaccination prior to release from confinement. At the expense of the
owner, a biting dog or cat four months or older not currently vaccinated
against rabies, as provided elsewhere in this chapter shall be vaccinated
against rabies prior to being released from confinement.
   (C)   Microchipping after release from confinement. At the expense of the
owner, if not already implanted, a biting dog or cat shall be microchipped
within 30 days after being released from confinement, and the owner shall
provide written verification of the procedure to the Health Officer.
   (D)   Specimen submission in lieu of confinement. When a biting animal
cannot be confined for observation for any reason, the biting animal shall be
humanely euthanized and the animal's brain shall be submitted to a recognized
laboratory for rabies testing. If a biting animal dies during the period of
confinement and observation, the animal's brain shall be submitted to a
recognized laboratory for rabies testing.
   (E)   Animal to animal bites.
      (1)   Companion animal to companion animal bites. When a companion animal
bites another companion animal, the biting animal shall be confined and
observed in accordance with subsection (A)(2) above.
      (2)   Companion animal to livestock bites. When a companion animal bites
livestock, the biting animal may be confined and observed in accordance with
subsection (A)(2) above in accordance with the written recommendations of the
Deputy Administrator.
      (3)   Companion animal to wildlife bites. When a companion animal bites
wildlife, the biting animal may be confined and observed in accordance with
subsection (A)(1) or (A)(2) above in accordance with the written
recommendations of the Deputy Administrator.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.06 RABIES VACCINATION AND COMPANION ANIMAL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Vaccination. Every owner of a dog or cat four months or more of age
shall have the dog or cat that is not medically exempt vaccinated against
rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Every dog or cat shall have a second rabies
vaccination within one year of the first. Terms of subsequent vaccine
administration and duration of immunity must be in compliance with USDA
licenses of vaccines used. If a licensed veterinarian establishes in writing
that a rabies inoculation would compromise a dog or cat's health, then the dog
or cat shall be exempt from the rabies inoculation requirement.
   (B)   Vaccination certification, registration. A licensed veterinarian who
vaccinates the dog or cat of a Lake County resident against rabies shall
provide documentation of the vaccination on a certificate form approved by the
Health Officer. The licensed veterinarian shall issue a numbered registration
tag, procured from the Health Officer, with each vaccination certificate. Only
one dog or cat shall be included on each certificate. The licensed veterinarian
shall submit records of all rabies vaccinations to the Health Officer monthly.
      (1)   Registration tag not issued at time of vaccination. If a
registration tag is not issued at the time a dog or cat is vaccinated against
rabies (e.g., if the owner refuses to obtain the tag from the veterinarian, or
if the veterinarian is located outside the County of Lake), the owner must
register the dog or cat within 30 days after the vaccination. The owner must
present an approved, properly completed vaccination certificate issued by the
veterinarian who administered the vaccination. In accordance with this chapter,
the Health Officer shall furnish the owner with a registration tag, the
duration of which shall coincide with the period of vaccination.
      (2)   Medical exemption. When a licensed veterinarian provides written
documentation that a rabies vaccination would compromise a dog or a cat's
health, the Health Officer shall determine the dog or cat to be exempt from the
rabies vaccination requirement. The owner must register the dog or cat as
medically exempt within 30 days after the determination. The Health Officer
shall furnish the owner with a medically exempt registration tag, which shall
be valid for a period of one year.
   (C)   Registration tag fees. The fee for a registration tag shall be
assessed in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the County
Board as codified in §
178.01. A veterinarian may charge pet owners a service fee, not to exceed $2,
for each registration tag issued. All registration tag fees collected by a
veterinarian shall be submitted to the Health Officer monthly.
   (D)   Registration requirements for new county residents. The Health Officer
shall honor a registration tag and vaccination certificate issued by another
county in Illinois for a dog or cat owner that has established residence in
Lake County during the duration of the vaccination period. New residents to
Lake County from outside Illinois who own a dog or cat, four months of age or
older, shall register the dog or cat with the Health Officer within 30 days
after establishing residence in Lake County.
   (E)   Evidence of registration. An owner of a dog or cat that is four months
of age or older shall assure that the dog or cat wears a registration tag on a
collar or harness at all times, except when the dog or cat is on the owner's
premises.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.07 DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   An owner or harborer of a dog, cat, or other animal shall control the animal
when it is not on their premises. A dog, cat, or other animal found running at
large contrary to provisions of this chapter may be apprehended and impounded.
A dog or cat found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter
a second or subsequent time must be sterilized within 30 days after being
reclaimed, unless already sterilized, and the owner shall provide written
verification of the procedure to the Health Officer. A dog that is actively
engaged in a legal hunting activity, including training, is not considered to
be running at large when the dog is on land that is open to hunting, or on land
on which the person has obtained permission to hunt or to train a dog. A dog
that is in a dog-friendly area or dog park is not considered to be running at
large if the dog is monitored or supervised by a person.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.08 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   Dogs, cats, and other animals shall be impounded as required by, and in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the Acts adopted by
reference.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.09 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   The owner of a dog, cat, or other animal that has been impounded shall be
responsible for complying with the redemption requirements of this chapter and
the Act adopted by reference in this chapter. Prior to redeeming the animal,
the owner is responsible for paying all applicable fees assessed as a result of
the impoundment, and for any other outstanding medical fees or costs associated
with the animal. When an unowned dog or cat has been impounded, applicable fees
may be assessed in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the
County Board as codified in §
178.01 and the Lake County Animal Care and Control Program Administrative
Procedures and Policies.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.10 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.
   At the discretion of the Administrator, an unclaimed animal may be humanely
dispatched or otherwise disposed as provided for in the Humane Euthanasia in
Animal Shelters Act (510 ILCS 72/1 et seq.). An "unclaimed animal" is as
provided for in this chapter, under Animal Care and Control adopted Policies
and Procedures, or the Animal Control Act. A fee may be established and
assessed to the owner for such services by the current fee schedule adopted by
the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.11 DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT.
   When a dog or cat in heat is not kept inside its owner's residence, the
owner shall confine the dog or cat in a secure manner, such as in a physically
fenced yard or run, during the entire period the dog or cat is in heat, except
that it shall be lawful for a dog or cat in heat to be walked if the dog or cat
remains on a leash.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.12 DANGEROUS, VICIOUS AND ANIMAL-AGGRESSIVE DOGS.
   (A)   Dangerous and/or vicious dog determinations and requirements. The
determination that a dog is vicious or dangerous shall be made in accordance
with the requirements of the Illinois Animal Control Act and this chapter. Any
associated enforcement shall proceed in accordance with the requirements of the
Illinois Animal Control Act, this chapter and the current fee schedule adopted
by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
   (B)   Animal-aggressive dog determinations and requirements. The
determination that a dog is animal-aggressive, and any associated enforcement,
shall proceed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   Initiation and conduct of animal-aggressive dog investigations.
When the Health Officer has received evidence that a dog has behaved in a
manner that may meet the standards established in this chapter for an animal-
aggressive determination, the Health Officer shall initiate an investigation
into the matter. The investigation shall include: (a) sending, within three
business days of the Health Officer becoming aware of the alleged infraction,
notification to the owner of the alleged infractions, the fact that an
investigation has been initiated, and affording the owner an opportunity to
meet with the Health Officer; (b) gathering medical and/or veterinary evidence;
(c) interviewing witnesses or receiving witness statements; and (d) making a
detailed written report. After the investigation has been completed, the Health
Officer may deem a dog to be animal-aggressive, as set forth in subsection (B)
(3) below.
      (2)   Animal-aggressive dog impoundments. When an investigation into an
animal-aggressive determination has begun, if the dog that is the subject of
the investigation is not already in hospital confinement for rabies
observation, the dog shall be immediately impounded and confined by the Health
Officer during the pendency of the determination and its disposition by the
Health Officer, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Depending on the
severity and nature of the attack that caused the initiation of the animal-
aggressive dog investigation, the Health Officer may require the immediate
impoundment of the dog.
      (3)   Animal-aggressive dog determinations and notification.
         (a)   The Health Officer shall determine a dog to be animal-aggressive
when the dog is shown by clear and convincing evidence to have caused serious
physical injury or death to a companion animal, without justification. A dog
shall not be declared animal-aggressive if the Health Officer determines the
conduct of the dog was justified because the seriously injured or killed animal
was attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring, the dog was
responding to pain or injury, or the dog was protecting itself, its owner,
custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring. The Health
Officer may seek, or the owner may provide information from a certified applied
animal behaviorist or other recognized animal behavior expert in making the
determination of whether the dog's behavior was justified pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
         (b)   When a dog is determined to be animal-aggressive, the owner
shall be served written notification of the determination by the Health Officer
within 24 hours. The notification shall include the determination of the
finding and the disposition requirements as established by the Health Officer.
The notification shall also include a description of the steps the owner is
required to take based on the determination, as well as the process to seek
review of the disposition or appeal the determination.
      (4)   Animal-aggressive dog dispositions. In the provision of an animal-
aggressive determination notification pursuant to subsection (B)(3) above, the
Health Officer shall, based upon the evidence of the severity of the attack
and/or previous history of other similar attack(s), determine the disposition
of the dog, which may include any one or a combination of the following
requirements:
         (a)   Enforcement of any or all of the requirements of a dangerous dog
determination pursuant to subsection (A) above, with the exception of the
public safety fine;
         (b)   Requiring that the dog be kept in an enclosure approved by the
Health Officer, and only allowed out of the enclosure to obtain veterinary
care, in case of emergency where the dog's life is threatened, or to comply
with an order of the court;
         (c)   Requiring that the dog be kept in an enclosure approved by the
Health Officer whenever the dog is on the owner's premises, but outside the
owner's residence;
         (d)   Requiring that the dog be kept in a fenced yard approved by the
Health Officer whenever the dog is on the owner's premises, but outside the
owner's residence;
         (e)   Requiring the dog to be muzzled whenever it is outside the
owner's residence in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person or
animal, but that shall not injure the dog or interfere with its vision or
respiration;
         (f)   Requiring the dog to be under control by leash or lead whenever
it is outside the owner's residence;
         (g)   Humanely euthanizing the dog;
         (h)   Payment of the annual registration fee established in accordance
with the current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
      (5)   Animal-aggressive dog disposition review. The owner of a dog
determined to be animal-aggressive may request a review of the disposition of
the dog by contacting the Health Officer, within three business days from the
date of the notification of the determination and disposition. The Health
Officer shall hold a review hearing within seven business days after receiving
the request to review the disposition. The Health Officer shall not sell, offer
for adoption, or dispose of the dog until a final decision is rendered and all
of the appeal processes have expired. If a hearing is requested by an owner of
an animal-aggressive dog, the Health Officer shall, after hearing the testimony
of all interested parties, render a decision within five business days
regarding the disposition of the dog, and shall notify the owner in writing
within 24 hours of the determined disposition. In no event shall this review
process extend the time to file an appeal of the determination as set forth in
subsection (B)(6) below.
      (6)   Animal-aggressive dog appeals. The owner of a dog determined to be
animal-aggressive may seek review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law.
If, however, the owner of the dog informs the Health Officer in writing that
they are waiving all rights to appeal such that no appeal will be filed, the
disposition set forth in the notice pursuant to subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4)
above may be carried out. Until such time, the Health Officer shall not sell,
offer for adoption, or dispose of the dog until a final decision is rendered
and the appeal process has expired. The owner is responsible for all
impoundment fees/costs as set forth in subsection (B)(7) below during this
timeframe.
      (7)   Animal-aggressive impoundment fees/ costs. The owner of a dog that
has been impounded as the result of the initiation of an animal-aggressive
determination investigation shall be responsible for all costs associated with
boarding and caring for the dog during the entirety of the investigation,
determination, disposition and appeal process.
      (8)   Applicability of animal- aggressive dispositions to a new owner. No
owner of a dog determined to be animal-aggressive may sell, offer for adoption,
or give away the dog without approval from the Health Officer. The Health
Officer shall grant approval for the transfer of the dog after the prospective
new owner has been issued a revised disposition that names the new owner as the
person responsible for meeting the requirements of the original disposition.
      (9)   Animal-aggressive disposition notification. If an owner of a dog
that is determined to be animal-aggressive relocates to another jurisdiction,
they shall notify the Health Officer, and shall also notify the Administrator
of Animal Control in the jurisdiction to which they are relocating.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Res. passed 2-10-2015; Ord. 19-1208, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-
10-2025)
§ 172.13 OWNER’S DUTIES AND CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; IMPOUNDMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements. The requirements pertaining to owner's duties and the
humane care and treatment of animals shall be as set forth in the Illinois
Humane Care for Animals Act and this chapter.
      (1)   Impoundments. When the conditions for impoundment pertaining to
owner's duties and the humane care and treatment of animals established in the
Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act are met, the Health Officer is authorized
to impound an animal in accordance with this chapter and with the applicable
impoundment provisions of the Act.
      (2)   Fees. The fees associated with impoundments shall be assessed in
accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as
codified in §
178.01, and shall also include the cost of required medical services provided.
   (B)   Impoundment appeals and hearings. A person alleged to have violated
the Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act regarding owner's duties and/or the
humane care and treatment of animals may request a hearing with the Board of
Health Hearings Committee in accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17 to appeal an impoundment that results from the enforcement of this
section. Any person desiring a hearing shall submit a request for a hearing to
the Health Officer within seven business days from the date of the impoundment,
and the Board of Health Hearings Committee shall hold an appeal hearing within
ten business days after receiving the request to appeal the impoundment. Until
all of the appeal processes have expired, the Health Officer shall not sell,
offer for adoption, or dispose of the animal(s) If a hearing is requested by an
owner of an impounded animal, the Board of Health Hearings Committee shall,
after hearing the testimony of all interested parties, render a decision within
ten business days regarding the disposition of the impounded animal. This
decision by the Board of Health Hearings Committee shall have no effect on the
criminal charges that may be filed with the appropriate authorities. When an
owner requests a hearing to appeal an impoundment of an animal by the Health
Officer, the owner shall not be responsible for boarding fees for the animal
from the date the Health Officer receives the request until the date of
disposition of the animal.
      (1)   Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted before the Board
of Health Hearings Committee. The animal owner and/or their attorney may
present and submit evidence in defense, and any other persons, including the
Health Officer, may submit evidence to sustain the grounds for the impoundment.
Within ten business days after the close of the hearing, the Board of Health
Hearings Committee, having considered the record made at the hearing, shall
render a decision in writing, setting forth the reasons for the decision. The
action taken by the Board of Health Hearings Committee shall be final and shall
be subject to judicial review. A court reporter shall be present to create a
record and transcript of the hearing.
      (2)   Fees. A fee for a hearing request shall be in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01 and shall be submitted by the animal owner with the request.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.14 BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   No owner shall allow a dog to bark or howl in a manner that a reasonable
person would consider to be a disturbance of the peace or quiet. Conditions or
actions that may constitute a disturbance of the peace or quiet include, but
are not limited to, a dog barking or howling in an excessive or habitual
manner.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, habitual shall refer to barking or
howling that repeatedly occurs on multiple days.
   (B)   The term excessive shall have the ordinarily accepted meaning, applied
in the context of time and place.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.15 LIMITS ON THE NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS PER RESIDENCE.
   (A)   Dogs, cats: maximum number allowed. A maximum of four dogs and four
cats of an age greater than six months may be owned, kept, or harbored in an
individual residence. For the purposes of this section, an individual residence
includes both single family dwellings and each individual dwelling unit within
multi-unit housing structures. Owners and/or landlords of multi-unit housing
structures, condominium associations, or other such authorities, however, may
further limit the number of animals in those structures and/or units.
      (1)   Disallowance of age exemption for dogs or cats due to improper care
of treatment. When an owner of dogs or cats is maintaining and/or treating any
of those animals in a manner that results in a citation or citations for
violating §
172.13(A), dogs and cats aged six months or younger shall not be exempted from
being counted toward the maximum number allowed as stipulated in division (A)
above. In these cases, dogs and cats of all ages owned, kept or harbored shall
be counted for the purposes of enforcing this chapter.
      (2)   Penalties for violations of the maximum number of dogs and cats
allowed. When a notice of ordinance violation ticket is issued for the
violation of the maximum number of dogs or cats allowed in accordance with
division (A)(1) above, the penalty fee established in the current fee schedule
adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01 shall apply to each of the dogs or cats aged six months or younger.
   (B)   Multiple Pet Permits. On properties larger than one and one-half
acres, and subject to zoning and/or use restrictions on the property, the
Health Officer may approve a Multiple Pet Permit, allowing the holder of the
permit to own, keep, or harbor five or more dogs and five or more cats of an
age greater than six months in any individual residence on the property,
providing the owning, keeping or harboring of these animals does not meet the
requirements for a license in accordance with the Illinois Animal Welfare Act.
      (1)   Applications.
Applications by individuals for Multiple Pet Permits shall be made to the
Health Officer on forms provided by the Health Officer, and shall be
accompanied by the required fee as set by the current fee schedule adopted by
the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
      (2)   Application Conditions. The application for a Multiple Pet Permit
shall contain information that indicates the following:
         (a)   A minimum distance of 150 feet is maintained from pet related
dwellings, structures or enclosures (homes, sheds, dog houses, dog runs, barns,
lean-tos) to dwellings other than those of the applicant.
         (b)   The number of dogs and/or cats proposed to be covered under the
Multiple Pet Permit, along with the name and a description of each dog and/or
cat.
         (c)   Proof of current rabies vaccination and registration for each
dog and/or cat four months of age or older.
      (3)   Inspections. The Health Officer shall inspect the premises annually
where the multiple dogs and/or cats are kept or harbored to determine the
number of permitted pets, and for sanitary conditions, proper ventilation,
adequate nutrition, humane care and treatment, including required rabies
vaccinations and registrations for all the dogs and/or cats.
      (4)   Term of permit. Each Multiple Pet Permit shall be valid for one
calendar year, and shall expire on December 31 of each year. When a permit is
issued during a calendar year, the permit shall be valid for the duration of
that calendar year.
      (5)   Conditions to revoke, refuse to issue or renew a permit. The Health
Officer may revoke, refuse to issue or renew a Multiple Pet Permit when the
applicant or permit holder:
         (a)   Makes a material misstatement in the application for a new
permit or in the application for a renewal permit;
         (b)   Does not abide by the conditions of the permit, including
exceeding the number of permitted dogs and/or cats, violating other provisions
of this chapter or any other applicable Lake County ordinance or regulation, or
having a prior history of violation of this chapter;
         (c)   Willfully aids or abets another in the violation of this
chapter;
         (d)   Allows the permit to be used by another person;
         (e)   Refuses to allow the Health Officer to conduct the required
annual inspection.
      (6)   Exemptions. Operations licensed in accordance with the Illinois
Animal Welfare Act are exempt from this section.
      (7)   Revocation of a Multiple Pet Permit. When the holder of a Multiple
Pet Permit violates conditions specified in subsection (B) of this section, the
Health Officer may issue notice of intent to revoke the Multiple Pet Permit.
         (a)   Revocation notice. The notice of intent to revoke the Multiple
Pet Permit shall be in writing and shall be hand-delivered or mailed to the
permit holder by certified or registered mail. The notice shall contain
information as follows:
            1.   A statement that the permit will be revoked, and that the pet
owner will no longer exempted from the requirements of §
172.15(A) in ten calendar days if the pet owner does not request a hearing with
the Board of Health Hearings Committee.
            2.   An explanation of the reason for the revocation of approval.
            3.   An outline of action required to reinstate the approval, if
the revocation becomes final.
            4.   An explanation of rights and procedures for a hearing to be
conducted in accordance with the Board of Health Hearings Committee in
accordance with Lake County Code of Ordinances Chapter 176, §§
176.15 through
176.17.
         (b)   Hearing request. A person who has received notice of the intent
to revoke their Multiple Pet Permit may request a hearing with the Board of
Health Hearings Committee, provided that the request is submitted in writing
within ten days from receipt of the notice.
            1.   Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted before the
Board of Health Hearings Committee. The Multiple Pet Permit holder and/or their
attorney may present and submit evidence in defense, and any other persons,
including the Health Officer, may submit evidence to sustain the grounds for
the impoundment. Within ten business days after the close of the hearing, the
Board of Health Hearings Committee, having considered the record made at the
hearing, shall render a decision in writing, setting forth the reasons for the
decision. The action taken by the Board of Health Hearings Committee shall be
final and shall be subject to judicial review. A court reporter shall be
present to create a record and transcript of the hearing.
            2.   Fees. A fee for a hearing request shall be in accordance with
the current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01 and shall be submitted with the request.
         (c)   Failure to request hearing. Unless the Health Officer receives a
timely request for a hearing, the revocation of the Multiple Pet Permit shall
be considered final.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Res. 18-0398, passed 4-10-2018; Am. Ord. 19-1208, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 25-
0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.16 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notices of apparent violation; warnings of ordinance violation.
Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the
Health Officer shall give notice or warning of the alleged violation to the
owner and/or the person who is alleged to have committed this violation. The
notice or warning shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for the issuance of the notice;
      (3)   Allow reasonable time as determined by the Health Officer for the
performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the alleged violator; provided that the notice or
order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon the alleged violator
when a copy thereof has been sent by United States mail to their last known
address as furnished to the Health Officer; or, when they have been served with
such notice by any other method authorized by the laws of the State of
Illinois; and
      (5)   Contain an outline of the remedial action that is required to
affect compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of ordinance violation tickets. As an alternative remedy to any
other remedy that may be available in this chapter, the Health Officer may,
when an owner violates the provisions of this chapter, issue a Notice of
Ordinance Violation ticket in accordance with the provisions of the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.66). The ticket shall identify the violation for which it is being issued,
the corresponding fine/fee amount as established by the current Animal Care and
Control fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01, and require the alleged violator to appear before the county's
administrative hearing officer or provide the alleged violator the option to
admit liability and pay the established fine/fee in lieu of appearing before
the county's administrative hearing officer. An additional late fee, as
established by the current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified
in §
178.01 or the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.66) may be assessed for Notice of Ordinance Violation tickets not paid
within the time frame established in the applicable ordinance. Violations that
are subject to the issuance of a Notice of Ordinance Violation ticket are:
      (1)   Failure to confine a biting animal within 24 hours after receiving
notification that confinement and observation is required;
      (2)   Failure to perform owner's duties, or cruelty to animals;
      (3)   Failure to have a dog or cat vaccinated against rabies in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
      (4)   Animal(s) running at large;
      (5)   Barking or howling dog(s);
      (6)   Dog or cat in heat not under control;
      (7)   Failure to register a dog or cat in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter;
      (8)   Failure to have a dog or cat wear evidence of rabies vaccination in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
      (9)   Failure to sterilize a dog or cat or to provide written
verification of a sterilization procedure as specified in §
172.07(A);
      (10)   Violation of the maximum number of cats and/or dogs allowed in a
residence;
      (11)   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of a dangerous dog,
animal-aggressive dog, or vicious dog determination and/or disposition;
      (12)   Failure to microchip a biting dog or cat released from rabies
confinement and observation as specified in §
172.05(C); and
      (13)   Violation of, or failure to comply with any other provision of
this chapter.
   (C)   Witnessed-based Notice of Ordinance Violation tickets. If a
complainant alleges a violation of (B)(2), (B)(4), or (B)(5) of this section,
the Health Officer may issue a witness-based Notice of Ordinance Violation
ticket when the complainant:
      (1)   Establishes and provides sufficient evidence and documentation of
the alleged violation;
      (2)   Signs witness-based Notice of Ordinance Violation ticket specifying
the date(s) and time(s) of the alleged violation; and
      (3)   Agrees to appear to testify at the appointed Administrative
Adjudication Hearing date and time.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Res. 18-0398, passed 4-10-2018; Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.17 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and
general welfare. Whenever a provision of this chapter or any other applicable
provisions of law, whether set forth in this chapter or any other applicable
provisions of law imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations or contains
restrictions covering similar subject matter, the provision which imposes
higher standards or requirements for the promotion of public health and safety
of the people of Lake County shall prevail.
   (B)   Compliance. Compliance with this chapter does not release persons from
compliance with applicable State of Illinois or local ordinances or regulations
governing animals and/or the control of rabies.
   (C)   Partial validity, savings clause. If any provision of this chapter or
the application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such validity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter, which can be
given effect without the invalid portion or application and, to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. Should any section,
clause or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be
invalid.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 172.99 PENALTY.
   Except as where a fine is specifically provided for by law, a person who
violates any section or provision of this chapter, or who violates any
determination or order of the Health Officer under this chapter shall be
subject to a fine up to $1,000 per violation or occurrence. Each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. The Lake County State's
Attorney or the Attorney General shall bring such action in the name of the
County of Lake or the People of Illinois, or may, in addition to other remedies
provided in this chapter, bring action for an injunction to restrain such
violation.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-9-1976; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 4-10-1979; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 10-9-1984;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 12-20-1984; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 6-11-1990; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-10-1995;
Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 11-12-1996; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. X], passed 3-15-2011; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. X], passed 1-15-2013;
Ord. 25-0716, passed 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 173: FOOD SERVICE REGULATIONS
Section
Food Service Facilities
   
173.01   General regulations
   
173.02   Rules and regulations
   
173.03   Definitions
   
173.04   Permits
   
173.05   Inspections
   
173.06   Examination and condemnation of food
   
173.07   Review of plans
   
173.08   Procedure when infection is suspected
   
173.09   Remedies
   
173.10   Education, generally
   
173.11   Enactment provisions
Food and Beverage Vending Machines
   
173.20   Rules and regulations
   173.21   [Reserved]
   173.22   [Reserved]
   173.23   [Reserved]
   173.24   [Reserved]
   
173.25   Purpose
   
173.26   Definitions
   
173.27   Food supplies and food protection
   
173.28   [Reserved]
   
173.29   [Reserved]
   
173.30   Employee health
   
173.31   Equipment and utensils; sanitary facilities and controls
   
173.32   Compliance procedures
   
173.33   Inspections
 
   
173.99   Penalty
FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES
§ 173.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to enhance public protection by
targeting for education and enforcement those issues which are most commonly
associated with the occurrence of foodborne illness. Those issues are time-
temperature control, handwashing, and cross-contamination prevention. Time-
temperature control is the most important prevention technique for reducing the
occurrence of foodborne illness. This subchapter codifies an ordinance defining
food, time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food, food service facility,
mobile food unit, pushcart, temporary food service facility, Health Officer,
utensils, equipment, and the like; providing for the sale of only sound, safe,
and properly labeled food; regulating the sources of food; establishing
sanitation standards for food, food protection, food service operations, food
service personnel, food service equipment and utensils, sanitary facilities and
controls, and other facilities; requiring permits for the operation of food
service facilities; regulating the inspection of the facilities; providing for
the examination and condemnation of food; providing for incorporation by
reference the Illinois Food Code”, as amended from time to time, which is on
file with the Secretary of State, and the chapter entitled “Compliance and
Enforcement” of the current and subsequent edition of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration model food code, as amended from time to time and promulgated by
the U.S, Food and Drug Administration; and providing for the enforcement of
this subchapter, and the fixing of penalties.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The current and subsequent edition of the Illinois Food Code, as amended
from time to time and promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health,
is hereby adopted by reference. Additionally, the chapter entitled “Compliance
and Enforcement” of the current and subsequent edition of the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration model food code, as amended from time to time and
promulgated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is hereby adopted by
reference. Three certified copies of the Illinois Food Code shall be on file at
the office of the Lake County Clerk.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in the rules and regulations
referenced in §
173.02, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this subchapter.
   CATEGORIES OF FACILITIES.
      (1)   Category 1 facility means a food establishment that presents a high
relative risk of causing food-borne illness, based on the large number of food
handling operations typically implicated in food-borne outbreaks and/or the
type of population served by the facility. Category 1 facilities include those
where the following operations occur:
         (a)   Potentially hazardous foods are cooled, as part of the food
handling operation at the facility;
         (b)   Potentially hazardous foods are prepared hot or cold and held
hot or cold for more than 12 hours before serving;
         (c)   Potentially hazardous cooked and cooled foods must be reheated;
         (d)   Complex preparation of foods or extensive handling of raw
ingredients with hand contact for ready-to-eat foods occurs as part of the food
handling operations at the facility;
         (e)   Vacuum packaging, other forms of reduced oxygen packaging, or
other special processes that require an HACCP plan; or
         (f)    Immunocompromised individuals, such as the elderly, young
children under age four and pregnant women are served, in a facility in which
these individuals compose the majority of the consuming population.
      (2)   Category 2 facility means a food establishment that presents a
medium relative risk of causing food-borne illness, based upon few food
handling operations typically implicated in food-borne illness outbreaks.
Category 2 facilities include those where the following operations occur:
         (a)   Hot or cold foods are held at required temperatures for no more
than 12 hours and are restricted to same-day services;
         (b)   Foods are prepared from raw ingredients, using only minimal
assembly; and
         (c)   Foods that require complex preparation (whether canned, frozen
or fresh prepared) are obtained from approved food-processing plants, high-risk
food service establishments or retail food stores.
      (3)   Category 3 facility means a food establishment that presents a low
relative risk of causing food-borne illness, based upon few or no food handling
operations typically implicated in food-borne illness outbreaks. Category 3
facilities include those where the following operations occur:
         (a)   Only potentially hazardous foods commercially pre-packaged in an
approved processing plant are available or served at the facility;
         (b)   Only limited preparation of non-potentially hazardous foods and
beverages, such as snack foods and carbonated beverages, occurs at the
facility; or
         (c)   Only beverages (alcoholic and non-alcoholic) are served at the
facility.
   FOOD SERVICE FACILITY. A food establishment.
   FOOD SERVICE FACILITY PERMIT. A permit issued by the Health Officer to the
owner or operator of a food service facility to operate the food service
facility, including the following permit types:
      (1)   PERMANENT FOOD SERVICE FACILITY PERMIT: allows a food service
facility to operate at a fixed location on a calendar year annual basis, from
January 1 to December 31;
      (2)   SEASONAL PERMANENT FOOD SERVICE FACILITY PERMIT: allows a food
service facility to operate at a fixed location for a period of six months or
less during a calendar year;
      (3)   SINGLE EVENT TEMPORARY PERMIT: allows a food service facility to
operate at a single location for a period of time of not more than 14
consecutive days in conjunction with a single public event, celebration,
festival, and/or farmers market;
      (4)   MULTI-EVENT TEMPORARY PERMIT: allows a food service facility to
operate at a single or multiple locations at public events, celebrations,
festivals and/or farmers’ markets for a period that does not exceed six months
and which is not tied to a calendar year.
      (5)   FARMERS’ MARKET SALES PERMIT: allows a farmer (as defined in the
Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act [410 ILCS 625/3.3]) to operate at
farmers’ markets, subject to the restrictions and requirements of 410 ILCS 625,
for a period that does not exceed one year, which is not tied to a calendar
year, and includes egg sales and full sales permits.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Lake County Health Department and Community Health
Center.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department
and Community Health Center or his or her authorized representative.
   INSPECTION. A site visit to evaluate all appropriate sections of the
Illinois Food Code. In addition, the term includes other activities: evaluation
of the food handling practice, recommendations on how to improve it, educating
the food workers on food-borne illness prevention topics, and the like.
   NEXT ROUTINE INSPECTION (NRI). A designation used on a food service facility
inspection report to indicate that a core violation must be corrected by the
next routine inspection.
   PERMANENT FOOD SERVICE FACILITY. A food service facility that is permitted
to operate at a fixed location:
      (1)   On a calendar year annual basis from January 1 to December 31; or
      (2)   On a seasonal basis if the facility operates for a period of six
months or less during a calendar year.
   RECORDS. Any employee information, purchasing document, source information,
bill, charge account receipt, temperature logs, inspection sheet, or
time card. For the purposes of this subchapter, information pertaining to
revenue or the financial status or condition of the facility shall not be
considered a RECORD.
   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE FACILITY. A food service facility that is permitted
to operate:
      (1)   At a single location for a period of time of not more than 14
consecutive days in conjunction with a single public event, celebration,
festival, and/or farmers market;
      (2)   At a single or multiple locations at public events, celebrations,
festivals and/or farmers’ markets for a period that does not exceed six months
and which is not tied to a calendar year; or
      (3)   At a single, or multiple locations at farmers’ markets for a period
that does not exceed one year, and which is not tied to a calendar year
(farmers only).
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018; Ord. 22-1608, passed 11-15-2022)
§ 173.04 PERMITS.
   (A)   General. No person shall operate a food service facility without a
valid permit issued to that person by the Health Officer. The permit is not
transferrable. A valid permit shall be posted in every food service facility.
      (1)   Application. Any person desiring to operate a food service facility
shall make written application for a permit to operate the food service
facility on forms provided by the Health Officer. The application shall include
the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed
food service facility, and any other information deemed necessary by the Health
Officer.
      (2)   Fees. Fees to operate a food service facility shall be paid to the
Health Officer prior to the issuance of a permit. Fees shall be assessed in
accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as
codified in §
178.01.
         (a)   Exemption. Non-governmental not-for-profit organizations that do
not charge for food services are exempt from the fee schedule.
      (3)   Inspections. As deemed appropriate, before issuing a permit to
operate a food service facility, the Health Officer shall inspect the proposed
food service facility to determine compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Permanent food service facility permits. A permit to operate a
permanent food service facility, with the exception of a seasonal facility,
shall be valid for one year from January 1 through December 31, and shall be
renewed annually. Facilities that operate for six months or less during a
calendar year may obtain a seasonal permit that is valid for 6 months during
that calendar year.
      (1)   Suspension of permit.
         (a)   Cause. The Health Officer may, upon written notice, without
prior warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food service
facility, when the Health Officer determines that the operation of the food
service facility constitutes an imminent hazard to the public health. When the
permit is suspended because of an imminent hazard, food service operations
shall cease immediately.
         (b)   Written notice. Whenever a permit to operate a food service
facility is suspended, the holder of the permit to operate the food service
facility, or the person in charge, shall be notified in writing that the permit
to operate the food service facility is, upon service of the notice,
immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if
a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Officer by the holder
of the permit within ten days. If a written request is filed within ten days,
an opportunity for a hearing with the Health Officer shall be afforded within
35 days of receipt of the request. The Health Officer shall end the suspension
if the reasons for the suspension no longer exist.
      (2)   Revocation of permit.
         (a)   Cause. The Health Officer may, after providing opportunity for a
hearing, revoke a permit for:
            (i)   Repeated violations of the time-temperature control,
handwashing, or cross contamination requirements of this subchapter;
            (ii)   Interference with the Health Officer in the performance of
its duty; or
            (iii)   Failure to correct an imminent hazard.
         (b)   Notification. Before revocation, the Health Officer shall notify
the holder of the permit to operate the food service facility or the person in
charge, in writing, of the reasons for which the permit is subject to
revocation. The permit to operate the food service facility shall be revoked at
the end of the ten days following service of the notice unless a written
request for a hearing is filed with the Health Officer by the holder of the
permit within the ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the
ten-day period, the revocation of the permit to operate the food service
facility becomes final.
         (c)   Service of notice. A notice provided for in this subchapter is
properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit to operate the
food service facility or to the person in charge, or when it is sent by
registered, certified mail, or email to the last known address of the holder of
the permit to operate a food service facility. A copy of the notice shall be
filed in the records of the Health Officer.
         (d)   Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit
to operate a food service facility has become final, the holder of the revoked
permit may make written application for a new permit to operate a food service
facility as provided in §
173.04(A).
   (C)   Temporary food service facility permits. A permit to operate a
temporary food service facility shall be valid for a period of time as
specified by the defined permit type and as issued by the Health Officer.
      (1)   Suspension of permit.
         (a)   Cause. The Health Officer may, upon written notice, without
prior warning, notice, or hearing, suspend a permit to operate a temporary food
service facility, when:
            1.   The Health Officer determines that the operation of the
temporary food service facility constitutes an imminent hazard to the public
health; or
            2.   The Health Officer determines that the operator of the
temporary food service facility submitted false, inaccurate or invalid
information on the application regarding the food source or origin, the storage
of the food, the commissary used, or any other information that, if it had
accurately been submitted, would have resulted in the Health Officer refusing
to issue the permit.
         (b)   Written notice. When a temporary food service facility permit is
suspended, the holder of the permit to operate the temporary food facility food
service facility, or the person in charge, shall be notified in writing that
the permit to operate the temporary food service facility is, upon service of
the notice, immediately suspended.
         (c)   Resumption of operations. When a temporary food service facility
permit is suspended, food service operations shall cease immediately and may
not resume until the conditions that were the cause of the suspension have been
corrected and verified by the Health Officer.
   (D)   Hearings. The hearings provided for in this subchapter shall be
conducted in accordance with
Chapter 176, §§
176.15 through
176.17.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018; Ord. 22-1608, passed 11-15-2022)
§ 173.05 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Frequency. Inspections of a permanent food service facility shall be
performed by the Health Officer as indicated in the table below. Inspections at
temporary food facilities shall be conducted in accordance with the
requirements of the Lake County Health Department Food Program Administrative
Procedures and Policies, approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health,
April 17, 1995, and as amended from time to time by the Lake County Board of
Health.
 
Category 1 - three times annually
Category 2 - two times annually
Category 3 - one time annually
 
   (B)   Additional services. Additional inspections or consultations shall be
performed as often as determined necessary by the Health Officer for the
efficient and effective protection of public health.
   (C)   Access. The Health Officer, after proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter a food service facility at any reasonable time for the
purpose of conducting inspections to determine compliance with this subchapter.
The Health Officer shall be permitted to examine records maintained in the food
service facility (or other location), to obtain information pertaining to the
source of food and supplies in the facility, when deemed necessary for the
enforcement of this subchapter.
   (D)   Report of inspections. Whenever an inspection is conducted at a food
service facility, the Health Officer shall record the findings on a paper or
electronic report. A copy of the completed report shall be provided to the
person in charge of the facility after the inspection has been completed. The
completed report shall constitute an official notice of findings. It is a
public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any
person who requests it according to law.
      (1)   Cause for re-inspection. The report shall identify if a re-
inspection is required at the food service facility based on the outcome of the
inspection. Re-inspections shall be required in accordance with the chapter
entitled “Compliance and Enforcement” of the current and subsequent edition of
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration model food code, as amended from time to
time and promulgated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and with the Lake
County Health Department Food Program Administrative Procedures and Policies,
approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health, April 17, 1995, and as
amended from time to time by the Lake County Board of Health.
         (a)   The Health Officer shall require a re-inspection when he or she
determines that a potential for a foodborne illness exists at the time of the
inspection. Conditions that may create the potential for a food-borne illness
include:
            1.   An imminent health hazard, as defined in this subchapter;
            2.   Repeated or serious violations of time-temperature control of
TCS food, cross-contamination, employee hygiene/handwashing; or
            3.   Other deficiencies outlined in the Lake County Health
Department Food Program Administrative Procedures and Policies, approved by the
Illinois Department of Public Health, April 17, 1995, and as amended from time
to time by the Lake County Board of Health.
         (b)   The Health Officer may also conduct further actions in
accordance with the Lake County Health Department Food Program Administrative
Procedures and Policies, approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health,
April 17, 1995, and as amended from time to time by the Lake County Board of
Health.
   (E)   Correction of violations.
      (1)   Time frame. The completed report shall specify the required period
of time for the correction of the violations found during the inspection.
Correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified
in the chapter entitled “Compliance and Enforcement” of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration model food code and in the Lake County Health Department Food
Program Administrative Procedures and Policies, approved by the Illinois
Department of Public Health, April 17, 1995, and as amended from time to time
by the Lake County Board of Health.
         (a)   Imminent health hazard. If an imminent health hazard exists, the
facility shall immediately cease the affected food service facility operations.
The operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the Health Officer.
         (b)   Time-temperature. All time-temperature control violations shall
be corrected immediately in a manner acceptable to the Health Officer. The
Health Officer may require a temperature log to verify compliance. Failure to
correct a time-temperature control violation within the specified time shall
result in an office compliance hearing.
         (c)   Temporary food service facility. In the case of temporary food
service facilities, all violations shall be corrected prior to operation.
      (2)   Failure to comply. Failure to comply with any of subsection (E)(1)
above may result in revocation of the permit to operate the food service
facility.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.06 EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.
   (A)   Examination of food. Food may be examined or sampled by the Health
Officer for the purpose of determining compliance with this subchapter. The
Health Officer may place a hold order on any food which it has reason to
believe is in violation of any section of this subchapter and which may pose a
health hazard to the public, provided:
      (1)   Written notice. A written notice is issued to the holder of the
permit to operate the food service facility, or to the person in charge; and
      (2)   Hold order. A hold order is issued that specifies in detail the
reason(s) for the hold order. The Health Officer shall tag, label, or otherwise
identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order
shall be used, sold, moved from the food service facility, or destroyed without
permission from the Health Officer.
   (B)   Storage. The Health Officer shall permit storage of food under
conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without
risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered
and accomplished.
   (C)   Hearing request. The hold order shall state that a written request for
hearing may be filed with the Health Officer in accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17, and that if no hearing is requested, the food shall be destroyed. If a
request for a hearing is received, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with §§
176.15 through
176.17. A fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the County
Board as codified in §
178.01 shall be submitted with the hearing request. On the basis of evidence
produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated or the holder of the
permit to operate the food service facility, or the person in charge, may be
directed by written order to denature or destroy the food or to bring it into
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. If food is to be denatured
or destroyed, that action shall be taken under the supervision of the Health
Officer.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.07 REVIEW OF PLANS.
   (A)   Submission of plans. Submission and review of plans is required for
each new and extensively remodeled food service facility. The specific building
and sanitation requirements for each food service facility shall be based on
the category of the facility as established in compliance with the requirements
of this subchapter.
   (B)   Equipment. New or replacement equipment, which includes equipment new
to the food service facility, shall meet the Standards of the National
Sanitation Foundation or equivalent applicable standard as to construction and
installation. The equipment shall only be used as prescribed in the National
Sanitation Foundation Standard or equivalent applicable standard.
   (C)   Preoperational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are
required by division (A) of this section, the Health Officer shall inspect the
food service facility prior to the start of operations to determine compliance
with the approved plans and specifications, and with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.08 PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.
   (A)   General. When the Health Officer has reasonable cause to suspect
possible disease transmission from a food service facility employee, the Health
Officer may obtain a health history of the suspected employee, make any other
necessary investigation, and take appropriate action.
   (B)   Remedies. The Health Officer may require any or all of the following
measures in this division.
      (1)   Employee. The Health Officer may require the immediate exclusion of
the employee from the food service facility.
      (2)   Suspension of permit. The Health Officer may require the immediate
suspension of the food service facility permit until the Health Officer has
determined that the risk of disease transmission no longer exists.
      (3)   Employee restriction. The Health Officer may require the
restriction of the employee’s duties in the food service facility such that
there will be no potential for transmitting disease.
      (4)   Medical examination. The Health Officer may require the medical and
laboratory examination of the employee, of other employees, as determined to be
necessary.
      (5)   Education. The Health Officer may require additional foodborne
illness prevention education for the food service facility staff.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.09 REMEDIES.
   (A)   Injunctions. The Health Officer may seek to enjoin any violation of
this subchapter.
   (B)   Fines. Violation of any provision of this subchapter shall be
punishable by a fine as set forth in §
173.99.
   (C)   Notice of ordinance violation tickets. As an alternative remedy to any
other remedy that may be available to the Health Department in this chapter,
the Health Officer may, when a food establishment operator violates the
provisions of this chapter, issue a notice of ordinance violation ticket in
accordance with the provisions of the Lake County Administrative Adjudication
Ordinance. The ticket shall identify the violation for which it is being
issued, the corresponding fine amount as established in the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66) and shall require the alleged violator to appear before the county's
administrative hearing officer, provide the alleged violator the option to
appear before the county's administrative hearing officer, or pay the
established fine.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Res.
passed 2-10- 2015; Ord. 18-0950, passed 9-11-2018) Penalty, see §
173.99
§ 173.10 EDUCATION, GENERALLY.
   (A)   Certified Manager. Every Category 1 and Category 2 food service
facility shall be under the operational supervision of a certified food
protection manager as specified in the rules and regulations referenced in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Facility staff education. The Health Officer shall provide education
and training for food service facility staff in accordance with the Lake County
Health Department Food Program Administrative Procedures and Policies, approved
by the Illinois Department of Public Health, April 17, 1995, and as amended
from time to time by the Lake County Board of Health.
   (C)   Contact hours. The Lake County Health Department staff shall obtain a
minimum of five contact hours in food protection training, or such other
standard as set forth in the Illinois Department of Public Health Local Health
Protection Grant Code.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.11 ENACTMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Captions. Sections and other captions are part of this subchapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. 
      (1)   Existing facilities. Food service facilities and equipment in use
before the effective date of this subchapter, that do not meet the design and
fabrication requirements of this subchapter, shall be acceptable if they are in
good repair, capable of being maintained in sanitary condition, and if the
food-contact surfaces (if any) are in compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Effective date. This subchapter is effective after January 11, 1960.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES
§ 173.20 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The current and subsequent edition of the Illinois Food Code, as
amended from time to time and promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public
Health, is hereby adopted by reference. Additionally, the chapter entitled
“Compliance and Enforcement” of the current and subsequent edition of the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration model food code, as amended from time to time and
promulgated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is hereby adopted by
reference. Three certified copies of the Illinois Food Code shall be on file at
the office of the Lake County Clerk.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§§ 173.21 - 173.24 [RESERVED.]
§ 173.25 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter establishes requirements for regulating the sale of food and
beverages through vending machines; defining vending machine, operator, Health
Officer, and other terms; requiring permits for the installation and operation
of vending machines; prohibiting the sale of, or possession with intent to sell
through vending machines, unsound food or drink; regulating the operation of
vending machines; authorizing the inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith and providing for the enforcement of this subchapter; and
the assessment of penalties.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-16) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI] passed 6-8-1987; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.26 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in the rules and regulations
referenced in §
173.20, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this subchapter.
   EMPLOYEE. The permit holder, individual having supervisory or management
duties, and any other person who handles any food to be dispensed through
vending machines, or who comes into contact with food-contact surfaces of
containers, equipment, utensils, or packaging materials, used in connection
with vending machine operations, or who otherwise services or maintains one or
more such machines.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Lake County Health Department and Community Health
Center.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department
and Community Health Center or his or her authorized representatives.
   OPERATOR. Any person, who by contract, agreement, or ownership, takes
responsibility for  furnishing, installing, servicing, operating, or
maintaining one or more vending machines.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
other legal entity.
   VENDING MACHINE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Health Officer to the owner
or operator of a food or beverage vending machine to operate the vending
machine.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-16) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI] passed 6-8-1987; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.27 FOOD SUPPLIES AND FOOD PROTECTION.
   Food sold through vending machines shall be from sources, and shall be
protected as specified in the rules and regulations referenced in this
subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-16) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI] passed 6-8-1987; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.28 [RESERVED.]
§ 173.29 [RESERVED.]
§ 173.30 EMPLOYEE HEALTH.
   In the enforcement of this subchapter, the Health Officer shall apply the
employee health requirements specified in the FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES
subchapter of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-16) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI] passed 6-8-1987; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.31 EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS; SANITARY FACILITIES AND CONTROLS.
   (A)   Equipment and utensils construction and maintenance. Equipment and
utensils shall be constructed and maintained as specified in the rules and
regulations referenced in this subchapter.
   (B)   Equipment location. Vending machines, ovens, and other equipment shall
be located as specified in the rules and regulations referenced in this
subchapter.
   (C)   Water supply.
      (1)   All water used in vending machines shall be of a safe and sanitary
quality and from a source constructed and operated according to law. Water used
as a food ingredient shall be piped to the vending machine under pressure.
      (2)   All plumbing, plumbing connections and plumbing fittings shall be
installed and maintained according to law.
   (D)   Waste disposal. All trash and other solid or liquid waste shall be
removed from the machine location as specified in the rules and regulations
referenced in this subchapter.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-16) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI] passed 6-8-1987; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.32 COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Permits generally.
      (1)   No person shall operate a vending machine without a valid permit
issued by the Health Officer. Permits are not transferable.
      (2)   The operator’s company name and service telephone number shall be
displayed on each vending machine or conspicuously adjacent to the vending
machine bank.
      (3)   All operators of vending machines shall:
         (a)   Comply with the requirements of this subchapter;
         (b)   Maintain at the operator’s headquarters or at some other
designated location within the jurisdiction of the Health Officer a list of all
vending machines operated by the operator within the jurisdiction, and the
complete address of each machine location and of all commissaries or other
establishments from which his or her machines are serviced. This information
shall be available to the Health Officer upon request, and shall be kept
current;
         (c)   Notify the Health Officer of each new vending machine location
at which time-temperature control for safety (TCS) food, or hot or cold cup
beverage vending machines have been placed in operation; and
         (d)   Notify the Health Officer of any change in operations involving
new types of vending machines or conversions of existing machines to dispense
products other than those for which the machines were built.
   (B)   Issuance of permits.
      (1)   Any person desiring to operate a vending machine shall make written
application for a permit on forms provided by the Health Officer.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the application, the Health Officer shall make an
inspection of the commissary if the commissary is in the Health Officer’s
jurisdiction, supply storage, servicing, cleaning, and sanitizing facilities,
and transport facilities, and representative equipment and machine locations to
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A permit shall be
issued to the applicant by the Health Officer after compliance by the operator
with the applicable provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Suspension of permits. The Health Officer may suspend a vending
machine permit in accordance with the requirements of §
173.04(B)(1).
   (D)   Revocation. The Health Officer may revoke a vending machine permit in
accordance with the requirements of §
173.04(B)(2).
   (E)   Hearings.
      (1)   The hearings provided for in this subchapter shall be conducted in
accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17.
      (2)   A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the
permit holder by the Health Officer within ten days.
   (F)   Fees. Fees shall be charged according to a current fee schedule
adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-16) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI] passed 6-8-1987; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.33 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Frequency. The Health Officer shall select vending locations for
inspection each year by a method which assures the inspection of representative
machines and locations serviced by each operator. The frequency of inspection
and selection of locations shall assure the widest coverage of each operator’s
locations over a time span determined by the Health Officer. Commissaries in
the Health Officer’s jurisdiction shall be inspected in accordance with §
173.05 of this chapter.
   (B)   Access for inspection. The Health Officer, after proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time, upon any
private or public property where vending machines or commissaries are operated,
or from which the machines are otherwise serviced, for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The operator shall
assure that the Health Officer has access to the interior of food vending
machines.
   (C)   Notification of inspection findings. Whenever an inspection is
conducted, the Health Officer shall record the findings on a paper or
electronic report. A copy of the completed report shall be provided to the
person in charge of the vending operation after the inspection has been
completed. The completed report shall constitute an official notice of
findings. It is a public document that shall be made available for public
disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
   (D)   Examination and condemnation of food. Food may be examined or sampled,
and a hold order may be placed on food by the Health Officer in accordance with
the requirements of §
173.06.
   (E)   Procedure when infection is suspected. When infection is suspected,
the Health Officer shall enforce the requirements of §
173.08.
   (F)   Commissaries outside jurisdiction of the Health Officer. Food from
commissaries outside the jurisdiction of the Health Officer may be sold within
the jurisdiction if the commissaries conform to substantially equivalent food
service sanitation standards. To determine the extent of compliance with these
provisions, the Health Officer may accept reports from the responsible
authorities in the jurisdictions where the commissaries are located.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-16) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI] passed 6-8-1987; Ord.
18-0950, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 173.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Fines. Violation of any provision of §§
173.01 through
173.11 shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500. Each day upon which
the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-3)
   (C)   Additional fines. Any employee or operator who violates this chapter
except §§
173.01 through
173.11, or fails to perform any duty imposed by this chapter, shall upon
conviction be fined not more than $500 at the discretion of the court. In
addition thereto, the persons may be enjoined from continuing the violations.
Each day upon which the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-16)
   (D)   Notice of ordinance violation tickets. As an alternative remedy to any
other remedy that may be available to the Health Department in this chapter,
the Health Officer may, when a vending machine operator violates the provisions
of this chapter, issue a notice of ordinance violation ticket in accordance
with the provisions of the Lake County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance
(§§
94.50 -
94.66). The ticket shall identify the violation for which it is being issued,
the corresponding fine amount as established in the Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66) and shall require the alleged violator to appear before the county's
administrative hearing officer, provide the alleged violator the option to
appear before the county's administrative hearing officer, or pay the
established fine.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI] passed 6-8-1987; Ord. [Bd of Health Ord.,
Art. III] passed 6-13-1995; Res. passed 2-10-2015; Ord. 18-0950, passed 9-11-
2018)
CHAPTER 174: SWIMMING FACILITY REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
174.001   Title
   
174.002   Intent
   
174.003   Scope
   
174.004   Referenced materials
   
174.005   Definitions
   
174.006   Authority
   
174.007   Certification requirements
   
174.008   Relief from personal responsibility
   
174.009   Minimum requirements
   
174.010   Compliance
   
174.011   Partial validity, savings clause
Duties and Powers of the Health Officer
   
174.025   General
   
174.026   Authority to enter properties
   
174.027   Licenses and inspections
   
174.028   Credentials
   
174.029   Official records
Existing Facilities
   
174.040   Continued facility use
   
174.041   Facility maintenance
Licenses
   
174.055   License
   
174.056   Display of license
   
174.057   Transferability
   
174.058   License validity
   
174.059   Application
   
174.060   Conditions; exception
   
174.061   License renewal
   
174.062   Denial of license
   
174.063   License fees
   
174.064   Suspension of license
   
174.065   Revocation of license
   
174.066   Hearing requests
   
174.067   Fees
   
174.068   Other remedies
Inspections
   
174.080   Frequency
   
174.081   Initial inspections
   
174.082   Construction inspections
   
174.083   Additional services
   
174.084   Report
   
174.085   Inspection results
   
174.086   Correction of violations
Public Bathing Beaches
   
174.100   Water samples
   
174.101   Water quality standards
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 174.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Swimming Facility Ordinance of the County
of Lake, hereinafter referred to as “this ordinance” or “this chapter”.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.002 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to assure the proper operation,
maintenance, and monitoring of all swimming facilities so as to protect the
health and safety of the public within the County of Lake.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.003 SCOPE.
   The provisions of these regulations cover all matters relating to swimming
facilities, including, but not limited to, swimming pools, spas, and public
bathing beaches as set forth by this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.004 REFERENCED MATERIALS.
   This chapter adopts by reference the Illinois Swimming Facility Pool and
Bathing Beach Code, the Illinois Swimming Facility Act and the Illinois
Swimming Pool Safety Act. All matters pertaining to the health and/or safety of
the public of the County of Lake in regard to swimming facilities shall be
administered and enforced in accordance with these referenced Acts, this
chapter and the Lake County Swimming Facilities Administrative Procedures and
Policies as amended from time to time by the Lake County Board of Health.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.005 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings indicated in this chapter.
      (2)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this chapter or
in materials adopted by reference in this chapter, the terms shall have
ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
   (B)   Definitions.
      ANNUAL FACILITY. Any swimming facility that is in operation for more than
six months during the license year.
      BOARD OF HEALTH. The Lake County Board of Health or its authorized
representative.
      HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health
Department or an appropriate designated agent.
      IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. Any hazard to public health when the evidence is
sufficient to show that a condition or practice, posing or contributing to a
significant threat of danger to health or safety, creates or may create a
public health situation:
         (a)   That should be corrected immediately to prevent injury or
illness; and
         (b)   That should not be permitted to continue while a hearing or
other formal proceeding is being held (e.g., the presence of E. coli or fecal
coliform bacteria in excess of the allowable standard, failure to maintain
appropriate water quality within 20% of the allowable standard, failure to
comply with suction entrapment/entanglement standards or requirements,
suspected disease transmission from employee(s), or operating without a
license).
      LICENSE. A license issued by the Health Officer to operate a swimming
facility to the specifications and the requirements of this chapter.
      LICENSE YEAR. The period between May 1 and April 30.
      PUBLIC BATHING BEACH. Any body of water, except as defined herein, or
that portion thereof used for the purpose of public swimming or recreational
bathing, and includes beaches at: apartments, condominiums, subdivisions, and
other groups or associations having five or more living units, clubs, churches,
camps, schools, institutions, parks, recreational areas, motels, hotels, and
other commercial establishments. It includes shores, equipments, buildings, and
appurtenances pertaining to such areas. It does not include bathing beaches at
private residences intended only for the use of the owner and guests.
      SEASONAL FACILITY. Any swimming facility that operates for 6 months or
less during the license year.
      SWIMMING FACILITY. A swimming pool, spa, public bathing beach, or aquatic
feature and its appurtenances, singular or aggregated together, that exists for
the purpose of providing recreation or therapeutic services to the public. It
does not include isolation or flotation tanks.
      SWIMMING POOL. Any artificial basin of water which is modified, improved,
constructed, or installed for the purpose of public swimming, wading, floating,
or diving, and includes: pools for community use, pools at apartments,
condominiums, and other groups or associations having five or more living
units, clubs, churches, camps, schools, institutions, Y.M.C.A.s, Y.W.C.A.s,
parks, recreational areas, motels, hotels, health clubs, golf and country
clubs, and other commercial establishments. It does not include pools at
private single-family residences intended only for the use of the owner and
guests.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.006 AUTHORITY.
   The Health Officer, in order to protect and promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public of Lake County, Illinois, and other affected
communities, is authorized and directed to develop procedures, practices and
policies and to interpret and enforce these rules and regulations establishing
minimum standards operation, maintenance, and monitoring of swimming
facilities.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.007 CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   A Health Officer conducting inspections of swimming facilities shall be
certified by the State of Illinois as a swimming pool operator.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.008 RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The Health Officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while
acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be liable personally, and is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or
employee because of an act performed by the Health Officer in the lawful
discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended
by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of
the proceeding, except as may be otherwise required by statute. The Health
Officer shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit, or proceedings that
may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter; any officer
of the Lake County Health Department shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in
the performance of official duties in connection therewith, except as may be
otherwise required by statute.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.009 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever a
provision of this chapter or any other applicable provisions of law, whether
set forth in this chapter or any other applicable provisions of law imposes
overlapping or contradictory regulations or contains restrictions covering
similar subject matter, the provision which imposes higher standards or
requirements for the promotion of public health and safety of the people of
Lake County shall prevail, but are not in conflict with the requirements of the
Illinois Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach Code.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.010 COMPLIANCE.
   Compliance with this chapter does not release persons from compliance with
applicable State of Illinois or local ordinances or regulations governing the
control of swimming facilities.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.011 PARTIAL VALIDITY, SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such validity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of this chapter, which can be given effect without the invalid
portion or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable. Should any section, clause, or provision of this
chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE HEALTH OFFICER
§ 174.025 GENERAL.
   The Health Officer shall enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and
shall act on any question relative to the operation and maintenance of swimming
facilities.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.026 AUTHORITY TO ENTER PROPERTIES.
   (A)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the
Health Officer, after providing identification to any person(s) present on the
property and subject to constitutional limitations, shall have the authority to
enter the property of a swimming facility at any reasonable time to inspect for
health, safety, and sanitation purposes, and for compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Health Officer may also make any necessary tests,
including testing the water quality standards at any facility, to determine
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Health Officer is authorized to engage expert opinion as deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.027 LICENSES AND INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Officer shall issue licenses to swimming facilities on an annual
basis, and inspect the facilities for which licenses have been issued to
enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.028 CREDENTIALS.
   The Health Officer and authorized representatives shall carry proper
credentials of their respective office in the performance of duties under this
chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.029 OFFICIAL RECORDS.
   The Health Officer shall keep official records of applications received,
licenses and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections and
notices, and/or orders issued. These records shall be retained in the official
records so long as the facility to which they relate remains in existence
unless otherwise provided for.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
EXISTING FACILITIES
§ 174.040 CONTINUED FACILITY USE.
   The legal use and occupancy of any swimming facility that had been
heretofore approved, shall be permitted to be continued without change, except
as specified in §§
174.055 through
174.067.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.041 FACILITY MAINTENANCE.
   All swimming facilities shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition. All service equipment, devices, and safeguards that are required by
this chapter shall be maintained in working order as when installed or
repaired.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
LICENSES
§ 174.055 LICENSE.
   No person shall operate a swimming facility without a valid license issued
by the Health Officer. Operation of a swimming facility without a valid license
shall be considered an imminent health hazard, and enforcement activities, as
established in this chapter, shall be conducted by the Health Officer.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.056 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Licenses must be displayed in a conspicuous place for public view, within or
on the premises of each swimming facility, with the exception that public
bathing beaches are exempt from this requirement.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.057 TRANSFERABILITY.
   A license is not transferrable to a new owner of a swimming facility.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.058 LICENSE VALIDITY.
   A license for an annual facility shall be valid for one year, from May 1
through April 30. A license for a seasonal facility shall be valid from May 1
through November 1.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.059 APPLICATION.
   A person desiring to operate a swimming facility shall make written
application for a license to the Health Officer on forms provided by the Health
Officer. The application shall include the name and address of each applicant,
the location and type of the proposed swimming facility and/or swimming
features, the signature of each applicant, and any other information deemed
necessary by the Health Officer.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.060 CONDITIONS; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   The Health Officer shall refuse to issue a license for a new swimming
facility or a swimming facility that has undergone a major alteration prior to
the Illinois Department of Public Health conducting an initial inspection.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall conduct an inspection at a new public bathing
beach that has not undergone construction or major alteration, to determine
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Illinois Swimming Facility
Act and the Illinois Department of Public Health Swimming Pool and Bathing
Beach Code prior to the Health Officer issuing a license.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.061 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   A license for an existing swimming facility must be renewed by May 1
of each year.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall issue the renewed license if the facility is
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.062 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   If a facility is not in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, the Health Officer shall refuse to issue a renewed license.
   (B)   When the Health Officer refuses to issue a renewed license, the Health
Officer shall notify the applicant whose application is denied, providing the
reason(s) preventing the approval and any technical or administrative solution
remaining.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.063 LICENSE FEES.
   Fees for licenses shall be assessed in accordance with the current fee
schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.064 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Cause. The Health Officer may, upon written notice, with or without
prior warning, notice or hearing, suspend a license for a swimming facility
when the Health Officer determines that the operation of the swimming facility
constitutes an imminent health hazard. Violations that create an imminent
health hazard are listed in the Lake County Health Department Swimming Facility
Administrative Procedures and Policies, but are not limited to those
violations.
   (B)   Written notice. When a license for a swimming facility is suspended,
the holder of the license, or the person in charge, shall be notified in
writing that the license for the swimming facility is, upon service of the
notice, immediately suspended. The inspection report shall serve as the written
notice, shall contain the reason(s) for the suspension and instructions for
requesting a hearing to appeal the suspension in accordance with §
174.066.
   (C)   Required actions. When a license for a swimming facility is suspended,
use of the swimming facility shall cease immediately and shall not resume until
the violation(s) that caused the suspension have been corrected and the Health
Officer has been notified of the correction(s). The Health Officer, however,
depending upon the nature and severity of the violation, or as described in the
Lake County Health Department Swimming Facility Administrative Procedures and
Policies, may require a re-inspection of the facility to assure the violation
(s) have been corrected prior to lifting the suspension.
   (D)   Failure to comply. Failure to comply with the provisions of subsection
(C) above may result in revocation of the license for the swimming facility in
accordance with the provisions of §
174.065.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.065 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Cause. The Health Officer may, after providing opportunity for a
hearing, revoke a license for:
      (1)   Repeated violations of the water quality standard requirements
referenced in this chapter;
      (2)   Failure to immediately cease use of a swimming facility for which
the license has been suspended;
      (3)   Interference with the Health Officer in the performance of his or
her duty; or
      (4)   Failure to correct an imminent health hazard.
   (B)   Written notice. Prior to a license for a swimming facility being
revoked, the holder of the license shall be notified in writing of the Health
Officer’s intent to revoke the license and the reasons for which the license is
subject to revocation. The written notice shall also contain instructions for
requesting a hearing to appeal the suspension in accordance with §
174.066. The license for the swimming facility shall be revoked ten days
following service of the notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed
with the Health Officer by the holder of the license. If no request for a
hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the license for
the swimming facility becomes final.
   (C)   Application after revocation. When a revocation of a license for a
swimming facility has become final, the holder of the revoked license may make
a written application for a new license for the swimming facility as provided
in §§
174.058 through
174.063.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.066 HEARING REQUESTS.
   (A)   Whenever approval for a license is denied by the Health Officer, when
a license is suspended, or when a holder of a license receives written notice
of intent to revoke a license, that holder of the license make a written
request to the Health Officer for a hearing.
   (B)   If a written request is filed, a hearing, in accordance with §§
176.15  through
176.17 , shall be conducted.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.067 FEES.
   A fee for a hearing shall be assessed in accordance with the current fee
schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.068 OTHER REMEDIES.
   As an alternative remedy to any other remedy that may be available to the
Health Department in this chapter, the Health Officer may, when a swimming
facility operator violates the provisions of this chapter, issue a notice of
ordinance violation ticket in accordance with the provisions of the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66). The ticket shall identify the violation for which it is being issued,
the corresponding fine amount as established in the Lake County Administrative
Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 -
94.66) and shall require the alleged violator to appear before the county's
administrative hearing officer, provide the alleged violator the option to
appear before the county's administrative hearing officer, or pay the
established fine.
(Res. passed 2-10-2015)
INSPECTIONS
§ 174.080 FREQUENCY.
   (A)   Annual facility. The Health Officer shall conduct a minimum of two
inspections per license year at each annual facility.
   (B)   Seasonal facility. The Health Officer shall conduct a minimum of one
inspection per license year at each seasonal facility.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.081 INITIAL INSPECTIONS.
   All Initial Inspections shall be conducted by the Illinois Department of
Public Health for all swimming facilities with the exception of new public
bathing beaches that have not undergone construction or major alteration.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.082 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS.
   All construction inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of
the Illinois Swimming Facility Act and the Illinois Department of Public Health
Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach Code shall be conducted by the Illinois
Department of Public Health for all swimming facilities.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.083 ADDITIONAL SERVICES.
   Additional inspections, re-inspections, investigations, or consultations
shall be performed by the Health Officer or the Illinois Department of Public
Health as needed in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.084 REPORT.
   (A)   The Health Officer shall complete a report of all swimming facility
inspections.
   (B)   A copy of the completed inspection report form shall be provided to
the person in charge of the swimming facility after the inspection and report
have been completed.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.085 INSPECTION RESULTS.
   The inspection report form shall identify any violation(s) present at the
time of the inspection and shall indicate whether the swimming facility has
passed or failed the inspection including the reason(s) for the results.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.086 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of
time for the correction of the violation(s) found as specified in the Swimming
Facility Program Administrative Procedures and Policies.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
PUBLIC BATHING BEACHES
§ 174.100 WATER SAMPLES.
   The Health Officer shall collect water samples at public bathing beaches in
accordance with the Illinois Department of Public Health Swimming Pool and
Bathing Beach Code.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
§ 174.101 WATER QUALITY STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. A public bathing beach must meet the water quality standards
established in the Illinois Swimming Facility Act and the Illinois Department
of Public Health Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach Code, and are listed in the
Lake County Health Department Swimming Facility Administrative Procedures and
Policies.
   (B)   Failure to meet standards. When the Health Officer determines that the
water quality standards as required in this section are exceeded at a public
bathing beach, the Health Officer shall suspend the license for the public
bathing beach. All recreational swimming shall cease immediately and shall not
resume until permitted by the Health Officer.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX] passed 1-15-2013)
CHAPTER 175: SEWAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL FROM BOATS
Section
   
175.01   Unlawful discharge
   
175.02   Enforcement; stopping and boarding boats
   
175.03   Certificates or decals
   
175.04   Education program
   
175.05   Severability
   
175.06   Effective date
 
   
175.99   Penalty
§ 175.01 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any boat containing toilet
facilities to be on the waters of any stream, river, or lake in Lake County,
Illinois, unless such toilet facilities shall be closed and sealed to prevent
the use thereof or the discharge therefrom, so that no sewage shall enter into
any such waters. The method of sealing such toilet facilities shall be subject
to the approval of the Lake County Health Department.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw overboard, dump, or
otherwise dispose of or discharge, or cause, permit or suffer to be discharged,
any garbage, refuse, rubbish, waste, or sewage from any boat into or upon the
waters of any stream, river, lake, or other body of water within the boundaries
of the County of Lake, State of Illinois.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VII] passed - -1993)
§ 175.02 ENFORCEMENT; STOPPING AND BOARDING BOATS.
   For the purpose of enforcing §
175.01(A), any person or officer authorized by the Lake County Health
Department may stop and board any boat on the said waters and examine the
toilet facilities on such boats to see that such facilities are properly closed
and sealed.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VII] passed - -1993)
§ 175.03 CERTIFICATES OR DECALS.
   The Health Department of Lake County, Illinois, may issue certificates or
decals indicating that a boat is in compliance with §
175.01(A), and such certificate or decal shall be affixed on the windshield of
the boat for which issued. If such boat has no windshield, then the certificate
or decal shall be affixed to any other part of such boat as directed by the
person or officer issuing same.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VII] passed - -1993)
§ 175.04 EDUCATION PROGRAM.
   The Lake County Health Department shall carry on a comprehensive education
program designed to educate the public to the requirements of this chapter.
Such program shall include the preparation and dissemination of information to
the public, and such Department shall cooperate with organizations working in
the field of boating whereby interested persons may receive instructions in the
proper operation of boats in Lake County, Illinois.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VII] passed - -1993)
§ 175.05 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section, clause, or provision of this chapter be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the
part so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VII] passed - -1993)
§ 175.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective on and after March 10, 1960.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VII] passed 3-10-1993)
§ 175.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, any
person who shall own, or have control or custody of any boat containing toilet
facilities who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be liable for a fine not to exceed $200.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VII] passed - -1993)
CHAPTER 176: HEARINGS; BOARD OF HEALTH
Section
General Provisions
   
176.01   Reserved
Hearings, Board of Health
   
176.15   General provisions
   
176.16   Definitions
   
176.17   Hearings before the Hearings Committee
Cross-reference:
   Administrative Adjudication, see §§
94.50 through
94.66
   Nuisances and Environment; Sanitation, see
Ch. 94
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 176.01 RESERVED.
HEARINGS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 176.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter provides for hearings before a Hearings Committee of the
Lake County Board of Health.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VI] passed 7-13-1993)
§ 176.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The Lake County Board of Health.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department.
The HEALTH OFFICER shall perform the function of secretary to and for the
Hearings Committee.
   HEARINGS COMMITTEE. A committee composed of three Lake County Board of
Health members, duly appointed by the President of the Lake County Board of
Health, to conduct and decide hearings as may arise under §
176.17.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, club, corporation, association, partnership,
company, organization, or political subdivision.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VI] passed 7-13-1993)
§ 176.17 HEARINGS BEFORE THE HEARINGS COMMITTEE.
   Any person affected by any order, or notice issued by the Lake County Health
Department or the Health Officer in connection with the enforcement of any
provision of County Health Ordinances, or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, may file in the office of the Health Officer a written
request for a hearing by the Hearings Committee. The Hearings Committee shall
hold a hearing at a time and place designated by it within 35 days of the date
on which the written request was filed. The person requesting the hearing shall
be notified of the time and place of the hearing not less than five days prior
to the date on which the hearing is to be held. If, as a result of the hearing,
the Hearings Committee finds that strict compliance with the order or notice
would cause undue hardship on the person, and that the public health would be
adequately protected and substantial justice done by varying or withdrawing the
order or notice, the Hearings Committee may modify or withdraw the order or
notice and, as a condition for that action may, where it deems necessary, make
requirements which are additional to those prescribed in the County Health
Ordinances or any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, all for the
purpose of properly protecting the public health. The Hearings Committee shall
render a decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing, which shall be
reduced to writing and placed on file in the offices of the Lake County Health
Department as a matter of public record.
(Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. VI] passed 7-13-1993)
CHAPTER 177: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
   
177.01    Recitals
   
177.02    Short title
   
177.03    Definitions
   
177.04    Tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine
products and persons under 21 years of age
   
177.05    Licensing of tobacco product, electronic cigarette, and alternative
nicotine product retailers
   
177.06    Enforcement
   
177.07    License suspension or revocation
   
177.08    Effective date
 
   
177.99    Penalty
§ 177.01 RECITALS.
   The recitals attached to the ordinance establishing this chapter are
incorporated into this chapter as the findings of the County Board of Lake
County, Illinois.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000)
§ 177.02 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the “Lake County
Tobacco Ordinance” or “this chapter”.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000)
§ 177.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words
shall have the meanings given to them in this section. All terms, phrases, and
words used in this chapter but not specifically defined in this section shall
have the ordinary meaning commonly ascribed to those terms, phrases, or words.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
      (1)   A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that
provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing,
smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other
means.
      (2)   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT does not include: cigarettes as
defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined
in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and
electronic cigarette as defined in this section; or any product approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE.
      (1)   (a)   Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to heat
a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for inhalation;
         (b)   Any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended
to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or
         (c)   Any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine
intended for use in the device.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE includes, but is not limited to, any
electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and
any components or parts that can be used to build the product or device.
      (3)   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE does not include: cigarettes as defined in
Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in Section
10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and alternative
nicotine product as defined in this section; any product approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as
a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler
prescribed by a physician for that condition and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic product approved for use
under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any device that may be used to deliver
aerosolized or vaporized nicotine to the person inhaling from the device,
including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen or e-
hookah. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes any component, part, or accessory of
such a device, whether or not sold separately, and includes any substance
intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the use of the device.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE does not include drugs, devices, or combination
products authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those
terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Lake County Health Department
or an appropriate designated agent.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, or other legal
entity.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. 
      (1)   Any product containing or made from tobacco that is intended for
human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco,
snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product which contains tobacco
that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and intended to be placed in the
oral cavity.
      (2)   TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, whether or not sold separately.
      (3)   TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include: an electronic cigarette and
alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; or any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or any other forms of payment,
dispenses tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine
products.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000;
Ord. 17-0891, passed 9-12-2017; Ord. 20-0312, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 177.04 TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS AND PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   Sale by persons under 18 years of age. It shall be unlawful for
persons under 18 years of age to sell, give, dispense, furnish, or otherwise
distribute any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine
product to any person within the unincorporated areas of the county unless the
cash register electronically prompts the cashier to input the purchaser's date
of birth.
   (B)   Sale to persons under 21 years of age. It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell, give, dispense, furnish, or otherwise distribute or make
available any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine
product to persons under 21 years of age within the unincorporated areas of
this county.
   (C)   Notice required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale or
distribution of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative
nicotine products within the unincorporated areas of Lake County, unless the
person prominently displays as part of every display of tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products offered for sale the
following notice:
   THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 21 IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
      (2)   The notice shall be displayed in red letters at least one inch in
height on a white background.
   (D)   Vending machines-locking devices.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, or offer for sale,
give away, distribute, or deliver any tobacco products, electronic cigarettes,
or alternative nicotine products by or through a vending machine, unless the
vending machine is equipped with a locking device controlled by the licensee so
as to prevent its operation by persons under 21 years of age.
      (2)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of 21 years is
prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not permitted and
where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of businesses
located at the premises, shall be exempt from the vending machine locking
device requirements of this section.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000;
Ord. 17-0891, passed 9-12-2017; Ord. 20-0312, passed 3-10-2020) Penalty, see §
177.99
§ 177.05 LICENSING OF TOBACCO PRODUCT, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE, AND ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCT RETAILERS.
   (A)   License requirement. No person shall engage in the retail sale or
distribution of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative
nicotine products, including the operation of vending machines that dispense
tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products, in
unincorporated Lake County unless the person is authorized to do so by a
current and valid license issued pursuant to this chapter, or is an employee or
agent of a person who has been issued a license pursuant to this chapter. A
separate license must be obtained for each establishment maintained by the
retailer. The license to sell or distribute tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products shall be displayed prominently at
each establishment for which it is issued.
   (B)   License administration. The Lake County Health Department and
Community Health Center shall administer the licensing of retailers of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products and the
Health Officer shall have authority to approve or deny all applications for
licenses and to suspend or revoke existing licenses in accordance with §
177.07. A retailer whose license application is denied shall have the right to
make a written request to the Health Officer for a hearing before the Board of
Health Hearings Committee pursuant to §§
176.15 through
176.17.
   (C)   License application. An application for a tobacco retailer’s license
shall be filed in writing with the Lake County Health Department and Community
Health Center on a form provided by the Health Officer. Each application for a
license shall contain the full name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant, the owner, and the business, firm, limited liability company,
corporation, or other legal entity engaged in the retail sale of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products; the name and
address of the proposed point of sale; the name, address, and telephone number
of the person authorized to receive notices issued pursuant to this chapter;
and any other information as may be reasonably required by the Health Officer.
   (D)   License term. Every retailer’s license shall be operative and valid,
unless first terminated, suspended, or revoked, for a term of one year
commencing on June 1 and terminating on May 31 of the following year.
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration of
the then-current license term.
   (E)   License fee. The annual license fee for a retailer shall be $100 per
license. If a licensee operates vending machines, for vending machines in the
same building, the licensee shall pay the annual license fee of $100 for the
first vending machine license and $25 for each additional vending machine
license. A 100% late fee will be charged to retailers who do not pay their
annual permit fees before the expiration of the then-current license term.
   (F)   License transfer prohibited. The transfer of any license issued
hereunder from one person to another or from one location to another is
prohibited. Any such purported transfer is void and shall cause the then-
current license to automatically expire and terminate.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000;
Ord. 17-0891, passed 9-12-2017; Ord. 20-0312, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 177.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Duties of the Lake County Sheriff. The Lake County Sheriff or his or
her designee(s) shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. They
shall conduct random, unannounced inspections at locations where tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products are sold,
including vending machines, within the unincorporated areas of Lake County to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Responsibility for agent or employee. Any act constituting a violation
of this chapter by an agent or employee of any person shall be deemed and held
to be the act of the person, and that person shall be punishable in the same
manner as if the act had been done personally by that person.
   (C)   The Lake County Sheriff, at his or her discretion, may cite violations
of this chapter either through a notice to appear before the 19th Judicial
Circuit Court or through administrative adjudication pursuant to the Lake
County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance (§§
94.50 through
94.66).
   (D)   Injunctive relief. In addition to or in lieu of any other remedies
provided in this chapter, the county may commence an action to enjoin, remove,
or abate any violation of this chapter in the manner provided by law and to
restrain or enjoin any person from operating in violation of this chapter.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000;
Ord. 15-0493, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. 17-0891, passed 9-12- 2017; Ord. 20-0312,
passed 3-10-2020)
§ 177.07 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   License suspension. A license issued under this chapter is subject to
suspension for 30 days should the licensee, directly or indirectly through its
employee or agent, permit the sale of a tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
or alternative nicotine product to persons under 21 years of age, or permit the
display for sale of any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative
nicotine product contrary to the provisions of this chapter. Upon determining
that one or more grounds for suspension exist, Health Office shall provide
written notice to the licensee at the address set forth in the licensee’s
application, specifying the ordinance violation(s) with which the licensee is
charged, and stating the intent to suspend the license for 30 days. If the
licensee does not request a hearing before the Board of Health Hearings
Committee in accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17 and this section within ten business days of the date of the notice, the
suspension will be considered final and the Health Office shall provide written
instructions to the licensee for complying with the suspension.
   (B)   License revocation. A license is subject to revocation by receiving
more than one suspension for violating this chapter within a two-year period.
Upon determining that grounds for revocation exist, the Health Officer shall
provide written notice to the licensee at the address set forth in the
licensee’s application, specifying the ordinance violation(s) with which the
licensee is charged and stating the reasons for the revocation and the intent
to revoke the license. If the licensee does not request a hearing before the
Board of Health Hearings Committee in accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17 and this section within ten business days of the date of the notice, the
revocation will be considered final and the Health Officer shall provide
written instructions to the licensee for complying with the revocation. Any
licensee who is subject of a revocation shall be ineligible to apply for or
obtain a tobacco retailer’s license for a period of one year from the date of
license revocation.
   (C)   Board of Health hearing request. When a licensee receives notice from
the Health Officer of the intent to suspend or revoke their license, that
licensee may make a written request to the Health Officer for a hearing before
the Board of Health Hearings Committee. The request for a hearing shall be made
in accordance with §§
176.15 through
176.17.
      (1)   Conduct or hearing. The hearing shall be conducted before the Board
of Health Hearings Committee. Evidence to support the grounds for suspension or
revocation may be presented or submitted by the Lake County Sheriff’s Office or
any person with knowledge of facts relating to the identified ordinance
violation(s). The licensee or their attorney shall be provided the opportunity
to present or submit evidence in their defense. Within 15 business days after
the close of the hearing, the Board of Health Hearings Committee, having
considered the record made at the hearing, shall render a decision in writing,
setting forth the reasons for the decision. The action taken by the Board of
Health Hearings Committee shall be final and shall be subject to judicial
review. A court reporter shall be present to create a record and transcript of
the hearing.
      (2)   Fees. A fee for a hearing request shall be in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified in §
178.01, and shall be submitted by the licensee with the hearing for hearing. If
a judicial review is sought, licensee shall pay for the cost of the transcript.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000;
Res. passed 2-10-2015; Ord. 17-0891, passed 9-12-2017; Ord. 20-0312, passed 3-
10-2020; Ord. 24-1004, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 177.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after November 14,
2000, the date of the passage and approval of the Lake County Tobacco Ordinance
by the County Board; provided, however, that any person engaged in the retail
sale of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine
products or operating a facility containing a vending machine that dispenses
tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products in
unincorporated Lake County as of the effective date of this chapter shall
submit an application for a tobacco retailer’s license when notified by the
Health Officer and shall either obtain a license or cease the sale of any
tobacco products and the operation of all vending machines that dispense
tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products by
July 1, 2001.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000;
Ord. 20-0312, passed 3-10-2020)
§ 177.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalty. Any person, including a licensee, who violates any provision
of this chapter shall be subject to fines as set forth below:
      (1)   Lake County Sheriff’s Office Citation filed in Circuit Court. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement before the 19th Judicial
Circuit, the fine amount shall be an amount not to exceed $250 for a first
offense, and $500 for a second offense or subsequent offense.
      (2)   Lake County Administrative Adjudication Citation of Violation. If
the ordinance violation is cited for enforcement through the Lake County
Administrative Adjudication Process, the minimum fine amount shall be $115 for
each violation.
   (B)   Separate offenses. Each instance in which this chapter is violated
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(1977 Code, § 2:1-18) (Ord. [Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII] passed 11-14-2000;
Ord. 15-0493, passed 5-12-2015)
CHAPTER 178: HEALTH DEPARTMENT FEE SCHEDULES
Section
   
178.01    Fees established and amended
§ 178.01 FEES ESTABLISHED AND AMENDED.
   All Health Department fees and charges required under Title XVII, Health, (
Chapters 170 through
177) shall be established and amended from time to time by the Lake County
Board of Health and by a separate resolution of the County Board.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   BONDS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
IV.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
V.   SPECIAL SERVICE AREAS
TABLE I: BONDS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Section Description
Ord./Res.  Date   1977
No.        Passed Code    Description
                  Section
1964.10.01 10-13- —     Providing terms and conditions for issuance of water and sewer revenue
           1964           bonds
1967.10.01 10-10- —     Authorizing the issuance of water and sewer revenue bonds for purchase
           1967           of the Lake County Water Corporation
1971.07.01 7-13-  —     Authorizing the issuance of water and sewer revenue bonds for purchase
           1971           of the Grandwood Park utility Corporation
1982.04.02 4-27-  4:2-14B Authorizing the issuance of tax bonds of Lake County Special Service
           1982           Area No. Three to provide sanitary sewer service
1983.07.42 10-21- 4:2-16C Authorizing the issuance of tax bonds of Lake County Special Service
           1983           Area No. Five to provide sanitary sewer service
54         8-8-   4:2-19B Authorizing the issuance of unlimited ad valorem tax bonds of Lake
           1989           County Special Service Area No. Six
-          1-8-   4:2-16H Abating a portion of the bond tax levy for Lake County Special Service
           1991           Area No. Five
-          2-11-  4:2-14C Abating a portion of the bond tax levy for Lake County Special Service
           1992           Area No. Three
           4-11-          Authorizing the issuance of emergency telephone system gross revenue
-          1995   3:6-7A  bonds, series 1995, for the purpose of improving the emergency telephone
                          system
-          11-17- 1:5-4   Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds, series 1995A, to
           1995           defray the cost of a juvenile justice facility
-          2-11-  1:5-4B  Abating the tax levied for the year 1996 to pay debt service on certain
           1997           general obligation bonds
1997.02.23 2-11-  —     Authorizing the issuance of tax bonds of Lake County Special Service
           1997           Area No. Ten to provide sanitary sewer service
1997.05.57 5-13-  —     Authorizing the issuance of water and sewer system subordinate revenue
           1997           bonds, series 1997S
1997.09.27 9-9-   4:2-26  Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue
           1997           funding bonds, series A of 1997
1997.11.32 11-11- —     Acknowledging receipt of bond order connected with series A of 1997
           1997           revenue refunding bonds
1998.10.48 10-13- —     Authorizing the issuance of series A of 1998 water and sewer system
           1998           revenue refunding bonds
11         5-11-  1:5-5   Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds for trunked radio
           1999           system
-          1-11-  1:5-4A  Abating the tax levied for the year 1999 to pay debt service on certain
           2000           general obligation bonds
-          1-11-  1:5-5A  Abating the tax levied for 1999 to pay debt service on certain general
           2000           obligation bonds, series 1999
-          10-9-  1:5-4E  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation refunding bonds, series
           2001           2001, for the purpose of refunding certain outstanding alternate bonds
2002.10.41 10-8-  —     Authorizing sale and execution of water and sewer system bond warrant
           2002           agreement, series A of 2003
2002.11.38 11-12- —     Authorizing early redemption of Lake County Special Service Area No.
           2002           Seven tax refunding bonds
2003.08.57 8-12-  4:2-26A Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue
           2003           bonds, series B of 2003 and series C of 2003
-          2-10-  1:5-4H  Abating the tax levied for 2003 to pay debt service on certain general
           2004           obligation refunding bonds
-          2-10-  1:5-5B  Abating the tax levied for 2003 to pay debt service on certain general
           2004           obligation refunding bonds, series 1999
-          2-8-   1:5-4I  Abating the tax levied for 2004 to pay debt service on certain general
           2005           obligation refunding bonds
-          2-8-   1:5-5C  Abating the tax levied for 2004 to pay debt service on general bonds,
           2005           series 1999
-          3-8-   1:5-5D  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation refunding bonds, series
           2005           2005, for the purpose of refunding certain outstanding alternate bonds
2005.07.42 7-12-  4:2-26B Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer subordinate revenue
           2005           bonds, series 2005S
-          2-14-  1:5-4F  Abating the tax levied for 2005 to pay debt service on certain general
           2006           obligation refunding bonds, series 2001
-          2-14-  1:5-5E  Abating the tax levied for 2005 to pay debt service on certain general
           2006           obligation refunding bonds, series 2005
-          3-14-  1:5-4G  Abating the tax levied for 2005 and 2006 to pay debt service on certain
           2006           general obligation bonds, series 1999
-          10-10- 1:5-7   Authorizing the issuance of certain collateralized single family
           2006           mortgage revenue bonds
2006.10.53 10--   4:2-26C Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue
           102006         refunding bonds, series 2006
-          1-16-  1:5-4J  Abating the tax levied for 2006 to pay debt service on certain general
           2007           obligation refunding bonds, series 2001
-          1-16-  1:5-5F  Abating the tax levied for 2006 to pay debt service on certain general
           2007           obligation refunding bonds, series 2005
57/08-0468 8-12-  1:5-4K  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds, series 2008A, to
           2008           provide for certain new county buildings
09-1135    1-20-  1:5-5G  Abating the tax levied for 2008 to pay debt service on certain general
           2009           obligation refunding bonds, series 2008
09-1137    1-20-  1:5-5H  Abating the tax levied for 2008 to pay debt service on certain general
           2009           obligation refunding bonds, series 2005
09-1138    1-20-  1:5-5I  Abating the tax levied for 2008 to pay debt service on certain general
           2009           obligation refunding bonds, series 2001
           5-12-          Authorizing the issuance of subordinated water and sewer system revenue
09-1545    2009   4:2-26D bonds for the purpose of constructing improvements to the existing
                          system
09-1567    5-12-  4:4     Authorizing the issuance of subordinated sewer system revenue bonds for
           2009           the purpose of constructing improvements to the existing system
09-1568    5-12-  4:5     Authorizing the issuance of subordinated water system revenue bonds for
           2009           the purpose of constructing improvements to the existing system
09-2047    10-13- —     Authorizing the issuance of water and sewer revenue bonds, series 2009,
           2009           in connection with the Hawthorne Woods-Glennshire Water System
09-2240    12-8-  1:4-12  Authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds for the funding of residential
           2009           housing for low and moderate income persons
10-0687    8-10-  1:5-5J  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds for the purpose of
           2010           defraying the cost of road improvements
10-0700    8-10-  —     Authorizing issuance of water and sewer system revenue bonds, series
           2010           2010A, in connection with the Build American bond program
10-0837    9-14-  —     Reducing the Hawthorne Woods-Glennshire water capital rate surcharge
           2010           based on favorable sale of series 2009 revenue bonds
10-0907    10-12- 1:5-5K  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds, series 2010A
           2010
10-1068    11-16- —     Amending issuance and and sale of water and sewer system revenue bonds,
           2010           series 2010A
11-0026    2-8-   1:5-5L  Abating the tax levied for 2010 to pay principal and interest on certain
           2011           general obligation refunding bonds, series 2010A
11-0027    2-8-   1:5-5M  Abating the tax levied for 2010 to pay debt service on certain general
           2011           obligation refunding bonds, series 2005
11-0028    2-8-   1:5-5N  Abating the tax levied for 2010 to pay debt service on certain general
           2011           obligation refunding bonds, series 2001
11-0179    3-15-  1:5-4L  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds to defray the costs
           2011           of road improvements
11-0394    5-10-  1:5-5O  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds, series 2011A
           2011
12-0196    3-13-  —     Abating the tax levied for Special Service Area No. Ten bonds
           2012
12-0197    3-13-  —     Abating the tax levied for 2005 general obligation bonds
           2012
12-0203    3-13-  —     Abating the tax levied for 2010A general obligation bonds
           2012
12-0204    3-13-  —     Abating the tax levied for 2011A general obligation bonds
           2012
13-0006    1-15-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2008
           2013
13-0009    1-15-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2010A
           2013
13-0010    1-15-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2011A
           2013
13-1053    10-8-  —     General obligation bonds, Series 2013
           2013
13-1331    12-10- —     Authorizing the issuance of tax bonds of Lake County Special Service
           2014           Area No. 16 to provide Lake Michigan water service
13-1471    1-14-  —     Authorizing emergency 2014 budget appropriate for Special Service Area
           2014           No. 16 bond fund
14-0072    2-11-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2011A
           2014
14-0074    2-11-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2010A
           2014
14-0075    2-11-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2008
           2014
14-0395    5-14-  —     Authorizing the issuance of water and sewer system revenue bonds in
           2014           connection with the Northwest Regional Excess Flow Project
                          Providing for the issuance of Special Service Area Number Thirteen
15-1323    - -    —     Special Tax Refunding Bonds, Series 2016 (Spencer’s Highlands/Elmcrest
                          Subdivisions).
16-0119    2-9-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2008A
           2016
16-0120    2-9-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2010A
           2016
16-0121    2-9-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2011A
           2016
16-0122    2-9-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2013
           2016
16-0123    2-9-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2015A
           2016
16-0842    9-13-  —     Authorizing the issuance and sale of Water and Sewer System Revenue
           2016           Refunding Bonds, Series 2016, in an amount not to exceed $13,000,000
17-0122    2-8-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2008A
           2017
17-0125    2-8-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2010A
           2017
17-0129    2-8-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2011A
           2017
17-0131    2-8-   —     Abating tax levied for Series 2013
           2017
17-0133    2-8-   —     Abating tax levied for the year 2016, Series 2015A
           2017
18-0143    3-15-  —     Authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series
           2018           2018, in an amount not to exceed $24,5000,000
18-0145    2-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2008A
           2018
18-0146    2-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2010A
           2018
18-0147    2-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2011A
           2018
18-0148    2-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2013
           2018
18-0149    2-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2015A
           2018
18-0150    2-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Special Service Area Number (SSA #) 16 tax levy.
           2018
22-1070    8-9-   —     Authorizing the issuance and sale of General Obligation Bonds (Sales Tax
           2022           Alternative Revenue Source), in an amount not to exceed $31,000,000
23-0218    2-21-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2018
           2023
23-0219    2-21-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2019
           2023
23-0220    2-21-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2013
           2023
23-0221    2-21-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2015A
           2023
23-0222    2-21-  —     Reducing the tax levied for Series 2016
           2023
23-0223    2-21-  —     Abating the tax levied for Series 2022
           2023
24-0153    2-20-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2019
           2024
24-0154    2-20-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2013
           2024
24-0155    2-20-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2015A
           2024
24-0156    2-20-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2018
           2024
24-0166    2-20-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2022
           2024
24-0167    2-20-  —     Abating tax levied for Special Service Area Number (SSA #) 16 tax levy
           2024
25-0062    1-14-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2022
           2025
25-0063    1-14-  —     Abating tax levies for Series 2019
           2025
25-0065    1-14-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2015A
           2025
25-0067    1-14-  —     Abating tax levied for Special Service Area Number (SSA #) 16 tax levy
           2025
25-0073    1-14-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2018
           2025
26-0044    1-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2022
           2026
26-0045    1-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2019
           2026
26-0046    1-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2018
           2026
26-0047    1-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Series 2015A
           2026
26-0048    1-13-  —     Abating tax levied for Special Service Area Number (SSA #) 16
           2026
                        
 
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Section Description
Res. 31-A     2-9-1962    —               Adopting Illinois Bell Telephone
                                            Company franchise (Ord. 31)
                                            Authorizing Commonwealth Edison
                                            Company to construct, operate, and
-             9-13-1977   1:6-1             maintain an electric light and
                                            power transmission distribution
                                            system for a period of 50 years
                                            Authorizing North Shore Gas Company
                                            to construct, operate, and maintain
-             4-11-1978   1:6-2             facilities for the production,
                                            transmission, distribution, and
                                            sale of gas for a period of 50
                                            years
                                            Authorizing Northern Illinois Gas
                                            Company to construct, operate, and
-             2-13-1979   1:6-3             maintain facilities for the
                                            production, transmission,
                                            distribution, and sale of gas for a
                                            period of 50 years
                                            Granting a cable television
-             7-14-1998   1:7               franchise to unnamed franchisee for
                                            an initial term of no longer than
                                            12 years
                                          
 
TABLE III: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Section Description
Ord./Res.   Date   1977
No.         Passed Code    Description
                   Section
Res.        4-16-  7:1     Authorizing application for a nursing home license for the
            1956           Lake County Home
                           Authorizing Public Works Department to accept on behalf of
Res.        7-14-  —     the county the waterworks facilities currently owned by Henry
1964.07.01  1964           Boyson, Jr., in Arthur T. McIntosh & Company’s Forest Lake
                           Subdivision
Res.        4-30-  —     Providing for the purchase of the water works facilities of
1965.01.04  1965           Pekara Water Works Inc.
Res.        10-10-         Negotiating and selling revenue bonds for the acquisition of
1967.01.01  1967   —     water facilities serving Wildwood on Gages Lake and Arbor
                           Vista, and Chesney Shores and Fox Lake Hills
Res. -      5-14-  —     Authorizing option for purchase of the Fox Lake Hills Water
            1968           Service Area
                           Authorizing and directing to exercise the option contained in
Res.        11-12-         the agreement between the Private Water Supply, Inc. and the
1968.11.01  1968   —     county; hereby authorizing and directing to give to the
                           Private Water Supply, Inc. the notice of election required to
                           be given in paragraph 1 of said option agreement
                           Agreement for use of the Tuberculosis Sanitarium for the care
Res.        11-12- 7:1     and treatment of general medical/surgical patients, and
            1968           authorizing conversion of present General Hospital to a
                           sheltered care facility
                           Accepting the purchase option agreement entered into by The
                           County of Lake and the Grandwood Park Utility Corp. for the
Res.        7-13-  —     purchase of the water works system and the sewerage system
1971.07.01  1971           serving Grandwood Park, the execution of which was approved
                           on June 14, 1971; exercising the option to purchase for
                           $1,031,000 by the County of Lake
                           Authorizing and directing to execute on behalf of the County
Res.        10-12- —     of Lake the purchase option agreement providing the county
1971.10.59  1971           the option to purchase the waterworks system commonly known
                           as Clausen Water Service for the total sum of $12,000
Res.        1-11-  —     Agreement with the Village of Long Grove for sanitary sewage
1972.01.02  1972           disposal
Res.        4-18-  —     Agreement with the Village of Buffalo Grove for sanitary
1972.04.03  1972           sewage treatment
                           Authorizing and directing the Public Works Department to
                           accept on behalf of the county the waterworks facilities
Res.        7-10-  —     presently owned and operated by the First National Bank and
1973.07.01  1973           Trust Company of Evanston in the Glennshire Subdivision, Ela
                           Township, and to henceforth operate and maintain system for
                           said customers of Glennshire Subdivision
            7-10-          Execution of lease between the county and the Lake County
Res.        1973   7:1     Hospital and Tuberculosis Sanatorium for the Mobile Health
                           Clinic Unit
Res.        9-10-  7:1     Accepting a grant from the Illinois Law Enforcement
            1974           Commission for a youth service bureau
            7-8-           Agreement between the Lake County Board and the Lake County
Res.        1975   7:1     Forest Preserve Board for the lease of land and contract for
                           the establishment of a county museum
Res.        10-21-         Authorizing and directing to execute the attached agreement
1975.10.14  1975   —     between the Village of Hawthorn Woods and the County of Lake
                           for the acquisition of the Hawthorn Woods water system
                           Accepting the Arden Shore Estates Water System and dedication
Res.        5-11-          of Lot 10 in Block 5 of Arden Shore Estates and direct Robert
1976.05.18  1976   —     J. Degen, Director of Public Works, to sign the individual
                           agreements with the residents for the acceptance of said
                           water system
Res.        7-11-  —     Agreement with the Village of Green Oaks for sanitary sewage
1978.07.11  1978           disposal
Res.        9-12-  —     Agreement with the Village of Lincolnshire for sanitary
1978.09.40  1978           sewage disposal
Res.        4-10-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Green Oaks
1979.04.10  1979           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        11-11- —     Agreement with Harbor Ridge Utilities for sanitary sewer
1980.11.41  1980           service
Res.        4-14-  —     Second amendment to agreement with the Village of Green Oaks
1981.04.55  1981           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        4-9-   —     Agreement with the Village of Grayslake for retail sanitary
1985.04.34  1985           sewer and water supply services
1986.11.38  11-11- 4:2-18  Agreement to form the Central Lake County Joint Action Water
            1986           Agency (CLCJAWA)
1987.12.22  12-8-  4:2-18  Approving certain documents relating to the Central Lake
            1987           County Joint Action Water Agency
1987.12.23  12-8-  4:2-18A Establishing Vernon Hills Water Service Area
            1987
1987.12.23  12-8-  4:2-18A Establishing Knollwood-Bradley Water Service Area
            1987
1987.12.23  12-8-  4:2-18A Establishing Wildwood Water Service Area
            1987
Res.        9-13-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Long Grove
1988.09.40  1988           for sanitary sewage disposal
1989.03.32a 3-14-  4:2-18B Approving the Central Lake County Joint Action Water Agency
            1989           water purchase and sale contract
1989.04.35  4-11-  4:2-18C Approving the admission of the Village of Mundelein to the
            1989           Central Lake County Joint Action Water Agency
Res.        8-8-   —     Agreement with the Village of Lake Zurich for sanitary sewage
1989.08.61  1989           disposal
Res.        7-10-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Grayslake
1990.07.38  1990           for retail sanitary sewer and water supply services
Res.        7-10-  —     Agreement with the Village of Hawthorn Woods for retail
1990.07.42  1990           sanitary sewage disposal
-           2-12-  1:9-3   Abating real estate taxes on real estate owned by Baxter
            1991           Healthcare Corporation
Res.        4-9-   —     Agreement with the Village of Lake Villa for sanitary sewage
1991.04.22  1991           disposal
Res.        4-9-   —     Second amendment to agreement with the Village of Grayslake
1991.04.48  1991           for retail sanitary sewer and water supply services
Res.        7-9-   —     Agreement with the Village of Kildeer for sanitary sewage
1991.07.30  1991           disposal
            12-10-         Amending lease agreement and authorizing the issuance of
-           1991   1:5-3   certificates of participation for the retirement of Public
                           Building Revenue Bonds, series 1987
Res.        1-14-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Kildeer for
1992.01.27  1992           sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        3-10-  —     Third amendment to agreement with the Village of Grayslake
1992.03.20  1992           for retail sanitary sewer and water supply services
Res.        5-12-  —     Agreement with the City of Waukegan for sanitary sewage
1992.05.25  1992           disposal
Res.        7-14-  —     Agreement with the Village of Hainesville for sanitary sewage
1992.07.37  1992           disposal
            9-8-           Amending the intergovernmental agreement establishing the
-           1992   1:4-7   Solid Waste Agency of the county and consenting to the
                           Village of Tower Lakes as a member thereof
Res.        10-13- —     Second amendment to agreement with the Village of Kildeer for
1992.10.45  1992           sanitary sewage disposal
            11-10- 4:2-19B Approving a first amendment to the water purchase and sale
1992.11.19  1992   (1)     contract between the county and the Central Lake County Joint
                           Action Water Agency
Res.        2-9-   —     First amendment to agreement with the City of Waukegan for
1993.02.50  1993           sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        6-8-   —     Fourth amendment to agreement with the Village of Grayslake
1993.06.30  1993           for retail sanitary sewer and water supply services
Res.        3-8-   —     Agreement with the North Shore Sanitary District (NSSD) for
1994.03.33  1994           sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        9-13-  —     Agreement with the Village of Green Oaks for retail water
1994.09.33  1994           service
            11-10-         Approving a second amendment to the water purchase and sale
1994.11.46  1994   —     contract between the county and the Central Lake County Joint
                           Action Water Agency
Res.        7-11-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Hainesville
1995.07.14  1995           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        11-17- —     Agreement with the Village of Antioch for sanitary sewer
1995.11.59  1995           service
            2-13-  4:2-18B Approving a third amendment to the water purchase and sale
1996.02.35  1996   (2)     contract between the county and the Central Lake County Joint
                           Action Water Agency
Res.        5-14-  —     Agreement with the Village of Old Mill Creek for retail
1996.05.43  1996           sanitary sewer service
Res.        9-10-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Antioch for
1996.09.29  1996           sanitary sewer service
Res.        9-10-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Lake Villa
1996.09.28  1996           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        10-8-  —     Third amendment to agreement with the Village of Green Oaks
1996.10.49  1996           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        11-12- —     Second amendment to agreement with the Village of Hainesville
1996.11.41  1996           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        7-8-   —     First amendment (1997) to agreement with the North Shore
1997.04.41  1997           Sanitary District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
-           10-14- 1:4-8   Amending the intergovernmental agreement establishing the
            1997           Solid Waste Agency of the county
Res.        4-14-  —     Third amendment to agreement with the Village of Kildeer for
1998.04.48  1998           sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        5-12-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Hawthorn
1998.05.29  1998           Woods for retail sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        8-11-  —     Fourth amendment to agreement with the Village of Kildeer for
1998.08.22  1998           sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        11-10- —     First amendment (1998) to agreement with the North Shore
1998.11.42  1998           Sanitary District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        11-10- —     Agreement with the Village of Mettawa for retail sanitary
1998.11.45  1998           sewer and water supply services
Res.        4-16-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Mettawa for
1999.04.33  1999           retail sanitary sewer and water supply services
            7-13-          Enlarging the boundaries of the Knollwood-Bradley Road and
1999.07.38  1999   —     Vernon Hills water service areas as they relate to the
                           CLCJAWA Lake Michigan water supply distribution system
Res.        9-14-  —     Fifth amendment to agreement with the Village of Kildeer for
1999.09.20  1999           sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        3-14-  —     Second amendment to agreement with the North Shore Sanitary
2000.03.36  2000           District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        7-11-  —     Agreement with the Village of Indian Creek for retail
2000.07.32  2000           sanitary sewer and water supply services
Res.        2-13-  —     Second amendment to agreement with the Village of Lake Villa
2001.02.42  2001           for sanitary sewage disposal
2001.02.43  2-13-  4:2-18A Enlarging Knollwood-Bradley Water Service Area
            2001   (1)
Res.        12-11- —     Third amendment to agreement with the North Shore Sanitary
2001.12.40  2001           District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
            2-12-  4:2-18B Approving the fourth amendment to the water purchase and sale
2002.02.50  2002   (3)     contract between the county and the Central Lake County Joint
                           Action Water Agency
-           4-9-   1:5-6   Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental cooperation
            2002           agreement for the issuance of revenue bonds
Res.        10-8-  —     Second amendment to agreement with the Village of Long Grove
2002.10.40  2002           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        11-12- —     Fourth amendment to agreement with the North Shore Sanitary
2002.11.91  2002           District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        5-13-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Village of Indian Creek
2003.05.45  2003           for retail sanitary sewer and water supply services
Res.        7-8-   —     Fifth amendment to agreement with the North Shore Sanitary
2003.07.30  2003           District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        10-14- —     Sixth amendment to agreement with the Village of Kildeer for
2003.10.35  2003           sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        2-10-  —     Sixth amendment to agreement with the North Shore Sanitary
2004.02.39  2004           District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        2-10-  —     Fifth amendment to agreement with the Village of Grayslake
2004.02.38  2004           for retail sanitary sewer and water supply services
Res.        5-11-  —     First amendment to agreement with Harbor Ridge Utilities for
2004.05.42  2004           sanitary sewer service
Res.        10-8-  —     Seventh amendment to agreement with the Village of Kildeer
2004.08.32  2004           for sanitary sewage disposal
                           Consenting to the villages of Round Lake Heights and Island
2005-001    - -    1:4-8A  Lake as additional members of the Solid Waste Agency of the
                           county
Res.        3-8-   —     Restated and amended agreement with the Village of Grayslake
2005.03.56  2005           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        8-9-   —     Third amendment to agreement with the Village of Lake Villa
2005.08.23  2005           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        8-9-   —     First amendment to restated and amended agreement with the
2005.08.40  2005           Village of Grayslake for sanitary sewage disposal
2005.11.26  11-8-  4:2-18A Enlarging Knollwood-Bradley Water Service Area
            2005   (2)
Res.        4-11-  —     Agreement with the Village of Kildeer for retail sanitary
2006.04.37  2006           sewer and water supply services
Res.        4-10-  —     Second amendment to restated and amended agreement with the
2007.04.66  2007           Village of Grayslake for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        6-12-  —     Eighth amendment to agreement with the Village of Kildeer for
2007.06.34  2007           sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        9-11-  —     Third amendment to agreement with the Village of Long Grove
2007.09.29  2007           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        10-9-  —     Seventh amendment to agreement with the North Shore Sanitary
2007.10.43  2007           District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res.        1-15-  —     Second amendment to agreement with the Village of Antioch for
2008.01.48  2008           sanitary sewer service
Res.        2-12-  —     Restated and amended agreement with the Village of Gurnee for
2008.02.45  2008           sanitary sewage disposal and retail water service
Res.        6-10-  —     Second amendment to agreement with Harbor Ridge Utilities for
2008.06.23  2008           sanitary sewer service
Res.        8-12-  —     Restated and amended agreement with the Village of Riverwoods
2008.08.70  2008           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 08-    5-12-  —     Agreement with Aqua Illinois and the Village of Hawthorn
0688        2009           Woods for retail water service
Res. 09-    7-14-  —     Fourth amendment to agreement with the Village of Long Grove
1745        2009           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 09-    10-13- —     Agreement with the Village of Hawthorn Woods for wholesale
2058        2009           sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 09-    11-10- —     Third amendment to restated and amended agreement with the
2115        2009           Village of Grayslake for sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 10-    3-16-  —     Fifth amendment to agreement with the Village of Grayslake
0025        2010           for retail sanitary sewer and water supply services
10-0381     5-11-  —     Authorizing the Lake County Sheriff to enforce the Illinois
            2010           Vehicle Code within the Antioch Golf Course community
Res. 10-    6-8-   —     Fourth amendment to agreement with the Village of Lake Villa
0314        2010           for sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 10-    7-13-  —     Agreement with the Village of Fox Lake for sanitary sewage
0634        2010           disposal
Res. 10-    7-13-  —     Agreement with the Village of Round Lake Beach for sanitary
0621        2010           sewage disposal
Res. 10-    7-13-  —     Restated and amended agreement with the Lakes Region Sanitary
0624        2010           District (LRSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 10-    10-12- —     Agreement with the Village of Libertyville for sanitary
0780        2010           sewage disposal
Res. 10-    11-16- —     Agreement with the Round Lake Sanitary District (RLSD)
0905        2010           regarding regional inflow and infiltration (I/I) facilities
Res. 11-    4-12-  —     Second amendment to agreement with the City of Waukegan for
0307        2011           sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 11-    5-10-  —     Eighth amendment to agreement with the North Shore Sanitary
0410        2011           District (NSSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 10-    6-14-          Agreement with Aqua Illinois and the Village of Hawthorn
1359        2011   —     Woods for retail water service to the Forest Lake water
                           system
Res. 11-    6-14-  —     Agreement with the Village of Mundelein for retail sanitary
0544        2011           sewer service
Res. 12-    7-10-  —     Agreement with the Village of Round Lake Heights for sanitary
0620        2012           sewage disposal
Res. 12-    7-10-  —     Agreement with the Village of Round Lake Park for sanitary
0619        2012           sewage disposal
Res. 12-    7-10-  —     Agreement with the Village of Round Lake for sanitary sewage
0618        2012           disposal
Res. 12-    7-10-  —     First amendment to agreement with the Round Lake Sanitary
0617        2012           District (RLSD) regarding regional I/I facilities
Res. 12-    9-11-  —     Fourth amendment to restated and amended agreement with the
0963        2012           Village of Grayslake for sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 12-    9-11-  —     Third amendment to agreement with the Village of Antioch for
0962        2012           sanitary sewer service
Res. 12-    1-15-  —     Agreement with the Village of Third Lake for retail sanitary
1440        2013           sewer and water supply services
Res. 13-    5-14-  —     Amended agreement with the Lakes Region Sanitary District
0500        2013           (LRSD) for sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 13-    8-13-  —     Agreement with the Village of Bannockburn for sanitary sewer
0837        2013           service
            11-12-         Authorizing a first comprehensive amendment and restatement
13-1280     2013   —     to the water purchase and sale contract between the county
                           and the Central Lake County Joint Action Water Agency
            12-10-         Approving admissions agreement with the Central Lake County
13-1376     2013   —     Joint Action Water Agency to allow for two new water service
                           areas
Res. 14-    2-11-  —     Third amendment to agreement with the City of Waukegan for
0096        2014           sanitary sewage disposal
Res. 14-    8-12-  —     Second amendment to agreement with the Round Lake Sanitary
0746        2014           District (RLSD) regarding regional I/I facilities
15-1205     11-10- —     Effectuating an agreement with the LCFPD in connection with
            2015           the Russell Road multi-use trail improvement
            5-8-           Approving the conveyance of parcels of land for right-of-way,
18-0512     2018   —     permanent and temporary easements, and temporary licenses
                           from the Lake County Forest Preserve District to Lake County
                           Approving the conveyance of parcels of land for right-of-way
23-0734     6-13-  —     and easements from the Village of Fox Lake and authorizing an
            2023           agreement with the Village of Fox Lake for the Illinois Route
                           59 at Grand Avenue intersection improvement project
24-0425     4-9-   —     Consenting to the admission of an additional member, Lake
            2024           Zurich, to the Central Lake County Joint Action Water Agency
                           Authorizing the acceptance of a temporary easement and
            12-9-          authorizing a temporary easement agreement with the Lake
25-1552     2025   —     County Forest Preserve District necessary for the Deerfield
                           Road improvements, from Illinois Route 21/United States Route
                           45 to Saunders Road.
                         
 
TABLE IV: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Section Description
Ord./Res.  Date   1977
No.        Passed Code    Description
                  Section
Res.       6-6-   —     Authorizing purchase of real property for Fox Lake Hills sewage treatment
1967.06.01 1967           facilities
Res.       5-14-  —     Authorizing purchase of real property for Diamond-Sylvan Lake sewage
1968.05.01 1968           treatment plant facilities
Res.       6-24-  —     Authorizing purchase of real property for Des Plaines River sewage treatment
1968.06.02 1968           plant facilities
Res.       4-21-  —     Authorizing purchase of real property for temporary sewaget treatment
1970.07.88 1970           facilities serving the Kemper Insurance complex
                          Agreement between the Lake County Public Building Commission and the county
-          11-5-  7:2     for the lease of two parcels, Block 19 and part of Madison Street, and the
           1975           parking area, Lots 5, 6, 7, and 8 in Block 10, both in the Original Town of
                          Little Fort (now Waukegan)
           12-2-          Agreement between the county and the Lake County Forest Preserve District
-          1994   4:1-10  for the transfer of certain land known as Parcel C-105, for the purpose of
                          extending York House Road
Res.       3-10-  —     Agreements with Libertyville School District 128 and the Village of Vernon
1998.03.27 1998           Hills regarding federal Nike Base land transfers
           4-9-           Requesting the conveyance of the Lake Shore Drive Parcel from the Lake
-          2002   4:1-14A County Forest Preserve District to the county for the extension of the Chain
                          O’ Lakes bike path
           8-12-          Requesting the conveyance of land from the Board of Education of Mundelein
-          2003   4:1-12A Elementary School District No. 75, the Fremont Public Library District, and
                          the Mundelein Park District to the county for the Prairie Crossing bike path
           - -            Requesting the conveyance of certain real estate (nine parcels) and
-          2005   7:2-1   improvements thereon from the Lake County Public Building Commission to the
                          county
           5-9-           Agreement for the transfer of jurisdiction of a portion of Hutchins Road
-          2006   4:1-16  (two parcels) and requesting the conveyance of certain land from Warren
                          Township to the county
           11-16-         Authorizing the execution of an agreement for the sale and transfer of
10-0898    2010   1:8-3a  sanitary sewer forcemain by and between North Shore Sanitary District and
                          the county
12-0738    7-10-  —     Authorizing the execution of an amendment and an addendum to a land lease
           2012           agreement with the Grandwood Park Park District
Res. 12-   11-20- —     Agreement with the Lake County Forest Preserve for exchange and transfer of
1209       2012           property in the area of Lake Cook and Portwine Roads
Res. 13-   8-13-  —     Granting a permanent easement to the Illinois Department of Transportation
0825       2013           for county property at Route 59 and Petite Lake Road
           2-14-          Acquiring use of real estate owned by the Lake County Forest Preserve
17-0169    2017   —     District in connection with the Lake County Forest Preserve District’s dog
                          park
           3-14-          Acquiring use of real estate owned by the Village of Round Lake and the Lake
17-0277    2017   —     County Forest Preserve District in connection with the improvement of Cedar
                          Lake Road, from Illinois Route 120 to Nippersink Road
           1-16-          Acquiring use of real estate owned by the Village of Long Grove in
17-1338    2018   —     connection with the improvement of Old McHenry Road from Illinois Route 53
                          to Cuba Road
           1-17-          Acquiring use of real estate owned by the Villages of Long Grove and Buffalo
23-0005    2023   —     Grove in connection with the improvement of Aptakisic Road from Buffalo
                          Grove Road to Illinois Route 83
           12-12-         Acquiring use of real estate owned by the Village of Beach Park in
23-1737    2023   —     connection with the intersection improvements of Wadsworth Road with Lewis
                          Avenue
           8-13-          Acquiring use of real estate owned by the Round Lake Area Park District in
24-0920    2024   —     connection with the improvement of Hainesville Road, from Washington Street
                          to Rollins Road
           9-10-          Requesting the conveyance of land from the Village of Riverwoods to the
24-1097    2024   —     county in connection with the improvement of Deerfield Road between IL Route
                          21/U.S. Route 45 to Saunders Road
                        
 
TABLE V: SPECIAL SERVICE AREAS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Section Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed 1977 Code Section Description
1982.04.40    4-13-1982   4:2-14A           Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. Three
1982.06.55    6-14-1982   4:2-13A           Dissolution of Special Service Area
                                            No. Two
1982.06.57    6-14-1982   —               Proposing Special Service Area No.
                                            Four
1982.09.48    9-14-1982   —               Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. Four
1983.07.40    7-12-1983   4:2-16B           Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. Five
1988.07.41    7-12-1988   4:2-16E           Enlarging Special Service Area No.
                                            Five
1988.11.27    11-1-1988   4:2-16G           Enlarging Special Service Area No.
                                            Five
1989.04.36    4-11-1989   —               Enlarging Special Service Area No.
                                            Three
1989.07.22    7-11-1989   —               Enlarging Special Service Area No.
                                            Three
1989.08.53    8-8-1989    4:2-19A           Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. Six
1989.08.57    8-8-1989    —               Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. Seven
-             9-11-1990   2:4-2             Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. Eight
1991.04.51    4-9-1991    —               Enlarging Special Service Area No.
                                            Three
1991.12.41    12-10-1991  —               Enlarging Special Service Area No.
                                            Five
1994.12.45    11-10-1994  2:4-5             Establishing Northeast Lake FPA
                                            Special Service Area No. Nine
1994.12.05    12-16-1994  —               Tax levy for Northeast Lake FPA
                                            Special Service Area
1995.06.35    6-13-1995   4:2-16J           Enlarging Special Service Area No.
                                            Five
1997.02.22    2-11-1997   —               Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. 10
1997.08.13    8-12-1997   —               Tax levy abatement for Special
                                            Service Area No. Five
1998.11.39    11-10-1998  —               Tax levy for Northeast Lake Special
                                            Service Area No. Nine
-             4-16-1999   4:2-29            Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. 11
1999.09.21    9-14-1999   —               Enlarging Northeast Lake FPA
                                            Special Service Area
                                            Enlarging Northeast Lake FPA
2000.11.37    11-14-2000  —               Special Service Area; Route 132
                                            parcels
                                            Enlarging Northeast Lake FPA
2000.11.38    11-14-2000  —               Special Service Area; Route 45
                                            parcels
2003.08.62    8-12-2003   —               Enlarging Northeast Lake FPA
                                            Special Service Area
-             7-13-2004   4:2-30A           Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. 12
2006.11.77    11-14-2006  2:4-5             Enlarging Northeast Lake FPA
                                            Special Service Area
2007.08.03    7-10-2007   —               Enlarging Northeast Lake FPA
                                            Special Service Area
-             - -         24-4d             Tax levy
2007.11.76    11-13-2007  —               Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. 13
2008.05.74    5-13-2008   2:4-6             Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. 14
09-2109       11-10-2009  2:4-4c            Tax levy for Special Service Area
                                            No. 14
10-1147       11-16-2010  —               Tax levy for Special Service Area
                                            No. 13
13-1260       11-12-2013  —               Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. 16
15-1162       11-10-2015  —               Tax levy for Special Service Area
                                            No. 8
15-1164       11-10-2015  —               Tax levy for Special Service Area
                                            No. 12
15-1165       11-10-2015  —               Tax levy for Special Service Area
                                            No. 13
15-1170       11-10-2015  —               Tax levy for Special Service Area
                                            No. 14
                                            Appropriating funds and levying
15-1173       11-10-2015  —               taxes for the Northeast Lake FPA
                                            Special Service Area No. 9
                                            Authorizing the issuance of an
16-0662       7-12-2016   —               amount not to exceed $39,000,000 in
                                            Taxable Special Service Area No. 16
                                            unlimited ad valorem special tax
                                            Deleting certain properties from
16-0695       8-9-2016    —               proposed Special Service Area No.
                                            17.
16-0813       9-13-2016   —               Establishing Special Service Area
                                            No. 17
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
16-1132       11-8-2016   —               sufficient to produce $50,000 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 8
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
16-1133       11-8-2016   —               sufficient to produce $34,000 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 12
                                            Appropriating funds and providing
16-1134       11-8-2016   —               for the levy of a direct tax
                                            sufficient to produce $164,919.60
                                            for Special Service Area No. 9
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
16-1135       11-8-2016   —               sufficient to produce $260,000 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 13
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
16-1136       11-8-2016   —               sufficient to produce $13,925 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 14
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
16-1138       11-8-2016   —               sufficient to produce $56,640 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 17
17-0179       2-8-2017    —               Tax abatement for Special Service
                                            Area No. 16 tax levy
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
18-1379       11-13-2018  —               sufficient to produce $50,000 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 8
                                            Tax levy of a direct tax sufficient
18-1381       11-13-2018  —               to produce $164,919.60 for Special
                                            Service Area No. 9
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
18-1382       11-13-2018  —               sufficient to produce $34,400 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 12
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
18-1383       11-13-2018  —               sufficient to produce $260,000 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 13
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
18-1384       11-13-2018  —               sufficient to produce $13,925 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 14
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
18-1385       11-13-2018  —               sufficient to produce $56,640 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 17
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
23-1576       11-14-2023  —               sufficient to produce $14,160 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 17
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
23-1577       11-14-2023  —               sufficient to produce $50,000 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 8
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
23-1578       11-14-2023  —               sufficient to produce $34,400 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 12
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
23-1579       11-14-2023  —               sufficient to produce $226,058 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 13
                                            Appropriating funds and providing
23-1580       11-14-2023  —               for the levy of a direct tax
                                            sufficient to produce $164,892.32
                                            for Special Service Area No. 9
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
23-1581       11-14-2023  —               sufficient to produce $13,925 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 14
                                            Tax levy of a direct tax sufficient
25-1448       11-18-2025  —               to produce $164,892.32 for the
                                            Northeast Lake Facilities Planning
                                            Area Special Service Area No. 9
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
25-1449       11-18-2025  —               sufficient to produce $34,400 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 12
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
25-1450       11-18-2025  —               sufficient to produce $225,000 for
                                            Special Service area No. 13
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
25-1451       11-18-2025  —               sufficient to produce $13,925 for
                                            special Service Area No. 14
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
25-1452       11-18-2025  —               sufficient to produce $14,160 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 17
                                            Tax levy of a direct annual tax
25-1453       11-18-2025  —               sufficient to produce $50,000 for
                                            Special Service Area No. 8
                                          
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 1977 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cites Code Section
ILCS Cites                            Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01                        10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02                        10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03                        10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04                        10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09                        10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.10                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11                        10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29                        10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                           10.04
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.                  33.003,
                                      33.005
5 ILCS 315/1 et seq.                  37.061
5 ILCS 440/1 et seq.                  10.05
10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.                 30.01
20 ILCS 830                           151.146
20 ILCS 3305/10(b)                    32.01
20 ILCS 3305/20                       32.20
35 ILCS 145                           34.40
35 ILCS 145/6                         34.38
35 ILCS 200/21-90                     37.047,
                                      37.049
35 ILCS 200/21-95                     37.053
35 ILCS 200/21-100                    37.053
50 ILCS 20/4                          31.015
50 ILCS 510/1 et seq.                 33.050,
                                      33.082
50 ILCS 525/1 et seq.                 33.082
50 ILCS 530/1 et seq.                 33.036
50 ILCS 820                           151.113
55 ILCS 5                             52.01
55 ILCS 5/1-1001 et seq.              10.02
55 ILCS 5/2-3005                      30.08
55 ILCS 5/3-8001 et seq.              31.065
55 ILCS 5/4-4001                      35.18
55 ILCS 5/5-1005                      37.031
55 ILCS 5/5-1006.8                    34.55
55 ILCS 5/5-1015                      37.031
55 ILCS 5/5-1022                      33.036
55 ILCS 5/5-1030                      34.37,
                                      34.43
55 ILCS 5/5-1041                      151.002,
                                      151.030 
55 ILCS 5/5-1049                      37.031
55 ILCS 5/5-1058                      37.031
55 ILCS 5/5-1062 et seq.              90.006
55 ILCS 5/5-1062                      151.002
55 ILCS 5/5-1067                      96.01
55 ILCS 5/5-1083                      33.138
55 ILCS 5/5-1113                      10.99
55 ILCS 5/5-1130                      33.036
55 ILCS 5/5-6002                      170.17
55 ILCS 5/5-6002 through 5-6006       150.15
55 ILCS 5/5-9002                      110.02
55 ILCS 5/5-11004                     35.26
55 ILCS 5/5-12001                     151.002
55 ILCS 5/5-12001.1                   151.112,
                                      151.270
55 ILCS 5/5-12014(b)                  151.046,
                                      151.047
55 ILCS 5/5-12020                     151.260,
                                      151.261
55 ILCS 5/5-15001 et seq.             30.55,
                                      52.01
                                      51.22,
55 ILCS 5/5-15021                     53.01,
                                      54.01
55 ILCS 5/5-21010                     37.087
55 ILCS 5/5-29003                     10.01
55 ILCS 5/5-43005 et seq.             94.50
55 ILCS 5/5-43035                     51.22
55 ILCS 82/25                         37.130
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1                     35.15
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1(b)                  35.15
                                      151.145,
70 ILCS 405/22.02a                    151.146,
                                      151.271
210 ILCS 45/3-401                     37.087
225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.                171.292
225 ILCS 320/3(1)                     52.01
225 ILCS 605/1 et seq,                172.01
230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.              110.15
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.                 115.04
                                      111.002,
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.                111.036,
                                      111.040
235 ILCS 5/6-11                       111.051
235 ILCS 5/6-27                       111.040
410 ILCS 82                           151.112
410 ILCS 82/65                        95.01
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.                151.112,
                                      151.271
410 ILCS 535/1                        35.18
410 ILCS 625                          173.03
410 ILCS 625/3.3                      173.03
410 ILCS 625/4                        151.113
410 ILCS 705                          151.112,
                                      151.271
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.                  50.40
415 ILCS 5/3.160                      50.60
415 ILCS 5/3.535                      50.60
415 ILCS 5/22.16                      50.62
415 ILCS 5/22.16a                     50.62
415 ILCS 5/22.19a                     50.43
415 ILCS 5/22.30(d), (e)              53.01
415 ILCS 5/22.30(e)                   53.09
415 ILCS 5/39.2                       50.43
415 ILCS 5/39.2(b)                    50.51
415 ILCS 5/39.2(c)                    50.43
415 ILCS 10/2                         50.60
510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.                  172.01
510 ILCS 20/1 et seq.                 151.113
510 ILCS 55/1 et seq.                 172.01
510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.                 172.01
510 ILCS 72/1 et seq.                 172.10
520 ILCS 5/1.1 et seq.                132.02
                                      Ch. 151, Apps. S,
520 ILCS 10/11                        T ;
                                      151.145
                                      Ch. 151, Apps. S,
525 ILCS 30/17                        T ;
                                      151.145
525 ILCS 55/1                         Ch. 151, App. T
605 ILCS 5/5-101 et seq.              30.24
605 ILCS 5/5-101.7 et seq.            90.068
605 ILCS 5/5-102                      90.045
605 ILCS 5/5-301                      90.028
605 ILCS 5/5-413 et seq.              90.021
605 ILCS 5/5-414 et seq.              90.053,
                                      90.120
605 ILCS 5/5-414                      90.021
605 ILCS 5/6-325                      151.002,
                                      151.030
605 ILCS 5/8                          90.006,
                                      151.169
605 ILCS 5/8-101 et seq.              90.021,
                                      90.050
605 ILCS 5/8-102 et seq.              90.021,
                                      90.050
                                      90.006,
605 ILCS 5/9-113                      90.021,
                                      90.022,
                                      90.028
605 ILCS 5/9-115.1                    90.021
605 ILCS 30/0.01 et seq.              96.01
605 ILCS 120/1                        37.137
605 ILCS 120/1 et seq.                37.002 -
                                      37.004
605 ILCS 120/30                       37.017
605 ILCS 120/35                       37.015
605 ILCS 120/40                       37.016
615 ILCS 5/4.9 et seq.                151.002
615 ILCS 5/18g                        151.145
625 ILCS 5/1-188                      10.02
625 ILCS 5/1-217                      35.37
625 ILCS 5/4-201                      35.37
625 ILCS 5/4-201 through 5/4-215      71.09
625 ILCS 5/6-101                      35.37
625 ILCS 5/6-303                      35.37
625 ILCS 5/11-208                     96.01
625 ILCS 5/11-301                     90.006
625 ILCS 5/11-501                     35.37
625 ILCS 5/11-601 et seq.             70.02
625 ILCS 5/11-604                     70.02
625 ILCS 5/11-605.1                   70.02
625 ILCS 5/11-605.2                   70.02
625 ILCS 5/15-102(a)                  70.15
625 ILCS 5/15-102(e)                  70.15
625 ILCS 5/15-107(e)                  70.15
625 ILCS 5/15-107(f)                  70.15
625 ILCS 5/15-111(a),(b)              70.99
625 ILCS 5/15-111(f)                  70.15
625 ILCS 5/15-111(g)                  70.15
625 ILCS 5/15-112                     70.99
625 ILCS 5/15-113                     70.99
625 ILCS 5/15-116                     70.15
625 ILCS 5/15-301                     70.15
625 ILCS 5/15-316                     70.99
625 ILCS 40/1                         72.02
625 ILCS 45/3-2                       73.031,
                                      73.034
625 ILCS 45/5-4                       73.079
705 ILCS 105/27.1b                    35.15
705 ILCS 105/27.5 (Repealed)          35.01
705 ILCS 105/27.6 (Repealed)          35.01
705 ILCS 135/1-1 et seq.              35.15
705 ILCS 135/1-5 et seq.              35.15
720 ILCS 5/11-20                      37.064
720 ILCS 5/12C-30                     113.03
720 ILCS 5/16                         35.37
720 ILCS 5/16A (Repealed)             35.37
720 ILCS 5/24-1                       35.37
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5                     35.37
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1                     35.37
720 ILCS 5/26-4                       113.03
720 ILCS 5/28-2                       110.99
720 ILCS/33D-1                        113.03
720 ILCS 5/36-1                       35.37
720 ILCS 5/47-5                       131.15
720 ILCS 135/0.01 et seq.  (Repealed) 113.03
720 ILCS 150/0.01 et seq.             113.03
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.                94.04
720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.                151.112
720 ILCS 640/0.01 et seq.             113.03
720 ILCS 670/0.01 et seq.             113.03
730 ILCS 5/5-6-3(g)                   35.16,
                                      35.20
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.              73.085
735 ILCS 5/3-101                      35.37
735 ILCS 5/3-109                      35.37
755 ILCS 5/1 et seq.                  37.086
765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.             151.185
765 ILCS 205/1                        151.201,
                                      151.271
765 ILCS 205/2 et seq.                90.021
765 ILCS 205/2                        90.024,
                                      151.146
820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.                33.036
820 ILCS 185/1 et seq.                33.005
                                      
 
REFERENCES TO 1977 CODE
1977 Code 2014 Code
1977 Code  2014 Code
1:1        30.35 -
           30.41
1:1-2      30.20
1:3-1      30.58
1:3-12     31.050
           33.001 -
           33.006,
           33.035,
           33.036,
           33.050,
           33.051,
           33.065 -
           33.069,
           33.080 -
1:4-1      33.082,
           33.095 -
           33.099,
           33.115 -
           33.118,
           33.125,
           33.126,
           33.130 -
           33.137,
           33.157
           33.150 -
1:4-3      33.157;
           Ch. 33, App. B
           95.01 -
1:4-5A     95.11,
           95.99
1:4-8B     50.60 -
           50.66
           50.01 -
1:4-9      50.09,
           50.99
1:8-1      30.06 -
           30.09
1:8-2      30.05 -
           30.08
1:8-4      30.02
1:9-2      34.35 -
           34.43
           94.30 -
2:1-2      94.35,
           94.99
           173.01 -
2:1-3      173.11,
           173.20,
           173.99
           50.20 -
           50.27,
2:1-8      50.99;
           Ch. 50, App. A,
           B
           37.086,
2:2-1      37.087,
           37.089
2:2-2      37.088
           170.01 -
2:1-15     170.17,
           170.99
           173.25 -
           173.27,
2:1-16     173.30 -
           173.33,
           173.99
           177.01 -
2:1-18     177.08,
           177.99
           110.35 -
3:1        110.41,
           110.99
           92.15 -
3:1-2      92.18,
           92.99
3:1-3      110.01,
           110.99
           131.15 -
3:2-2      131.18,
           131.99
3:3-1      31.065
3:4-2      130.03,
           130.99
3:4-3      130.02,
           130.99
3:4-4      130.01,
           130.99
3:5-1      32.01 -
           32.20
3:5-1B     92.01 -
           92.05
           73.001,
           73.002,
           73.015 -
           73.018,
           73.030 -
           73.038,
3:5-2      73.050 -
           73.062,
           73.075 -
           73.096,
           73.110,
           73.111,
           73.999
3:5-4      110.02
           70.30 -
3:5-5      70.33,
           70.99
           93.01 -
3:6-3      93.12,
           93.99
3:6-4a     37.130 -
           37.137
3:6-6      34.15
3:6-8      35.20,
           35.50
3:6-10     35.01
3:6-12     35.36
3:6-13     110.15 -
           110.23
3:6-15     35.16
4:1        70.15
           71.01 -
4:1-4      71.10,
           71.99
4:1-8      70.02
           72.01,
           72.02,
           72.15 -
4:1-9      72.25,
           72.40 -
           72.55,
           72.70
           37.001 -
4:1-11     37.019,
           37.137
           96.01 -
4:1-12     96.07,
           96.99
           96.01 -
4:1-13     96.07,
           96.99
           96.01 -
4:1-14     96.07,
           96.99
           96.01 -
4:1-15     96.07,
           96.99
4:2-1      51.01 -
           51.03
           51.15 -
4:2-9      51.20,
           51.22 -
           51.24
4:2-9A[1]  51.25
4:2-9B[A2] 51.25
           51.15 -
4:2-9A3    51.20,
           51.22 -
           51.24
4:3-4      51.01 -
           51.03
5:1-1      30.01
5:1-2      30.03
5:2-1      34.16
5:2-2      34.01
5:2-3      34.17
5:2-5      35.18
           114.01 -
           114.10,
           114.20 -
6:1-14     114.24,
           114.35 -
           114.43,
           114.99
           113.01 -
           113.04,
           113.15 -
           113.20,
6:1-15     113.35 -
           113.39,
           113.50 -
           113.54,
           113.99
           31.031,
6:2-7      31.033 -
           31.037
6:2-8      31.038
6:2-9      31.032
           30.20 -
           30.22,
           30.55 -
           30.58,
7:1        31.015,
           31.065,
           35.21,
           35.50,
           37.100
           
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.   Date Passed Code Section
—        - -         35.50
—        1-14-1941   30.56
—        9-12-1950   35.21
—        10-29-1957  30.22
—        8-8-1958    30.21
—        2-9-1960    31.015
—        8-9-1960    30.20
—        10-9-1962   30.55
—        12-12-1972  30.20
—        2-11-1975   37.100
—        1-13-1976   31.100
—        7-6-1976    30.57
1978.11.44 11-14-1978  51.15
—        5-8-1979    30.20
—        12-8-1987   31.030
—        11-1-1988   70.20
—        11-14-1989  70.20
—        5-9-1995    35.18
—        5-10-1995   110.02
1997.05.57 5-13-1997   51.25
1997.09.27 9-9-1997    51.25
                       72.01,
                       72.02,
                       72.15 -
—        12-9-1997   72.25,
                       72.40 -
                       72.55,
                       72.70
                       96.01 -
—        1-12-1999   96.07,
                       96.99
                       96.01 -
—        2-9-1999    96.07,
                       96.99
                       96.01 -
—        6-8-1999    96.07,
                       96.99
—        10-12-1999  31.050
                       96.01 -
—        11-9-1999   96.07,
                       96.99
—        11-12-2002  70.15
—        1-14-2003   70.15
2004.08.34 8-10-2004   51.27
2005.04.05 5-5-2005    30.55
2005.07.42 7-12-2005   51.25
—        4-10-2007   32.01 -
                       32.20
2007.11.26 11-13-2007  51.27
—        11-13-2007  70.20
2008.03.63 3-11-2008   51.27
—        10-14-2008  35.15
2009.03.01 3-17-2009   51.27
09-1623    6-9-2009    35.35
10-1897    9-8-2009    51.27
10-0596    7-13-2010   50.60 -
                       50.66
12-0857    8-14-2012   51.27
13-1271    11-12-2013  51.27
14-0393    5-13-2014   51.27
                       30.24,
                       30.59,
                       33.036,
                       33.157,
—        2-10-2015   171.240,
                       172.12,
                       173.09,
                       173.99,
                       174.068,
                       177.07
15-0335    4-14-2015   51.27
—        9-8-2015    35.26
18-0398    4-10-2018   172.15,
                       172.16
                      
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Lake County Board Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section
                        151.003,
                        151.005,
                        151.009,
                        151.025,
                        151.046,
                        151.050,
                        151.051,
                        151.056,
                        151.111 -
                        151.114,
                        151.131,
                        151.145,
                        151.147,
                        151.165,
—         - -         151.170,
                        151.173,
                        151.188,
                        151.190,
                        151.191,
                        151.194,
                        151.197 -
                        151.200,
                        151.203,
                        151.230 -
                        151.232,
                        151.253,
                        151.270,
                        151.271,
                        Ch. 151, App. Q
—         4-25-1939   31.017
—         1-10-1961   70.03,
                        70.99
1964.10.01  10-13-1964  51.15
—         9-14-1965   31.065
—         1-11-1966   110.01,
                        110.99
—         5-8-1973    34.16
—         10-9-1973   30.58
—         12-11-1973  30.01
—         9-10-1974   34.01
                        92.15 -
—         4-13-1976   92.18,
                        92.99
                        130.02,
—         6-13-1977   130.03,
                        130.99
                        30.35 -
—         10-11-1977  30.41,
                        33.150 -
                        33.157
                        70.30 -
—         2-14-1978   70.33,
                        70.99
1979.04.43  4-10-1979   51.01 -
                        51.03
—         11-13-1979  31.065
—         4-12-1983   31.050
1984.10.43  10-9-1984   51.01 -
                        51.03
—         10-9-1984   94.99
                        71.01 -
—         11-19-1985  71.10,
                        71.99
—         1-14-1986   34.17
                        93.01 -
—         3-11-1986   93.12,
                        93.99
—         5-12-1987   94.99
1988.02.35  2-9-1988    51.01,
                        51.02
                        96.01 -
—         6-13-1988   96.07,
                        96.99
1989.05.66  5-9-1989    51.26
—         11-14-1989  34.15
—         1-9-1990    Ch. 31, App. A
—         5-8-1990    Ch. 31, App. A
—         6-11-1990   31.031 -
                        31.038
—         11-20-1990  35.20,
                        35.50
—         5-14-1991   30.06 -
                        30.09
                        96.01 -
—         7-9-1991    96.07,
                        96.99
—         11-12-1991  30.03
—         12-10-1991  35.01
                        73.001,
                        73.002,
                        73.015 -
                        73.018,
                        73.030 -
                        73.038,
—         8-11-1992   73.050 -
                        73.062,
                        73.075 -
                        73.096,
                        73.110,
                        73.111,
                        73.999
—         11-10-1992  35.36
—         12-22-1992  70.99
                        114.01 -
                        114.10,
                        114.20 -
—         9-13-1994   114.24,
                        114.35 -
                        114.43,
                        114.99
—         5-9-1995    35.18
—         10-8-1996   70.02
—         3-11-1997   37.115 -
                        37.118
                        96.01 -
—         5-13-1997   96.07,
                        96.99
1997.05.60  5-13-1997   51.25
                        72.01,
                        72.02,
—         12-9-1997   72.15 -
                        72.25,
                        72.40 -
                        72.55
                        110.35 -
—         5-12-1998   110.41,
                        110.99
                        96.01 -
—         1-12-1999   96.07,
                        96.99
                        96.01 -
—         2-9-1999    96.07,
                        96.99
                        96.01 -
—         6-8-1999    96.07,
                        96.99
—         11-9-1999   37.086 -
                        37.089
                        96.01 -
—         11-9-1999   96.07,
                        96.99
—         4-11-2000   130.01,
                        130.99
                        37.001 -
—         5-9-2000    37.019,
                        37.137
—         11-14-2000  35.20
—         4-10-2001   30.05 -
                        30.08
                        113.01 -
                        113.04,
                        113.15 -
                        113.20,
6:1-15      10-9-2001   113.35 -
                        113.39,
                        113.50 -
                        113.54,
                        113.99
—         11-13-2001  34.35 -
                        34.43
—         11-13-2001  110.15 -
                        110.23
                        96.01 -
—         7-9-2002    96.07,
                        96.99
—         11-12-2002  70.15
                        96.01 -
—         11-12-2002  96.07,
                        96.99
—         1-14-2003   70.15
—         5-13-2003   94.99
                        96.01 -
—         4-13-2004   96.07,
                        96.99
                        50.01 -
—         - -2005     50.09,
                        50.99
—         5-10-2005   35.24
—         6-14-2005   31.031,
                        31.032
                        111.001,
                        111.002,
                        111.015 -
                        111.020,
—         6-14-2005   111.035 -
                        111.052,
                        111.065 -
                        111.071,
                        111.999
—         7-12-2005   35.16
—         3-14-2006   92.01 -
                        92.05
                        96.01 -
—         9-12-2006   96.07,
                        96.99
—         4-10-2007   32.01 -
                        32.20
                        95.01 -
—         5-8-2007    95.11,
                        95.99
                        37.030 -
                        37.045,
—         10-9-2007   37.060 -
                        37.067,
                        37.069,
                        37.070
—         8-12-2008   111.042
                        96.01 -
—         2-10-2009   96.07,
                        96.99
09-1623     6-9-2009    35.35
—, § 1.1 10-13-2009  151.001
—, § 1.2 10-13-2009  151.002
—, § 1.3 10-13-2009  151.003
—, § 1.4 10-13-2009  151.004
—, § 1.5 10-13-2009  151.005
—, § 1.6 10-13-2009  151.006
—, § 1.7 10-13-2009  151.007
—, § 1.8 10-13-2009  151.008
—, § 1.9 10-13-2009  151.009
—, § 1.1010-13-2009  151.010
—, § 1.1110-13-2009  151.011
—, § 2.1 10-13-2009  151.025
—, § 2.3 10-13-2009  151.027
—, § 2.4 10-13-2009  151.028
—, § 2.5 10-13-2009  151.029
—, § 2.6 10-13-2009  151.030
—, § 2.7 10-13-2009  151.031
—, § 2.8 10-13-2009  151.032
—, § 3.1 10-13-2009  151.045
—, § 3.2 10-13-2009  151.046
—, § 3.3 10-13-2009  151.047
—, § 3.4 10-13-2009  151.048
—, § 3.5 10-13-2009  151.049
—, § 3.6 10-13-2009  151.050
—, § 3.7 10-13-2009  151.051
—, § 3.8 10-13-2009  151.052
—, § 3.9 10-13-2009  151.053
—, § 3.1010-13-2009  151.054
—, § 3.1110-13-2009  151.055
—, § 3.1210-13-2009  151.056
—, § 3.1310-13-2009  151.057
—, § 3.1410-13-2009  151.058
—, § 4.1 10-13-2009  151.070
—, § 4.2 10-13-2009  151.071
—, § 4.3 10-13-2009  151.072
—, § 5.1 10-13-2009  151.085
—, § 5.2 10-13-2009  151.086
—, § 5.3 10-13-2009  151.087
—, § 5.4 10-13-2009  151.088
—, § 5.5 10-13-2009  151.089
—, § 5.6 10-13-2009  151.090
—, § 5.7 10-13-2009  151.091
—, § 5.8 10-13-2009  151.092
—, § 5.9 10-13-2009  151.093
—, § 5.1010-13-2009  151.094
—, § 5.1110-13-2009  151.095
—, § 5.1210-13-2009  151.096
—, § 5.1310-13-2009  151.097
—, § 5.1410-13-2009  151.098
—, § 5.1510-13-2009  151.099
—, § 6.1 10-13-2009  151.110
—, § 6.2 10-13-2009  151.111
—, § 6.3 10-13-2009  151.112
—, § 6.4 10-13-2009  151.113
—, § 6.5 10-13-2009  151.114
—, § 7.1 10-13-2009  151.125
—, § 7.2 10-13-2009  151.126
—, § 7.3 10-13-2009  151.127
—, § 7.4 10-13-2009  151.128
—, § 7.5 10-13-2009  151.129
—, § 7.6 10-13-2009  151.130
—, § 7.7 10-13-2009  151.131
—, § 7.8 10-13-2009  151.132
—, § 8.1 10-13-2009  151.145
—, § 8.2 10-13-2009  151.146
—, § 8.3 10-13-2009  151.147
—, § 8.4 10-13-2009  151.148
—, § 8.5 10-13-2009  151.149
—, § 8.6 10-13-2009  151.150
—, § 8.7 10-13-2009  151.151
—, § 8.8 10-13-2009  151.152
—, § 8.9 10-13-2009  151.153
—, § 8.1010-13-2009  151.154
—, § 9.1 10-13-2009  151.165
—, § 9.2 10-13-2009  151.166
—, § 9.3 10-13-2009  151.167
—, § 9.4 10-13-2009  151.168
—, § 9.5 10-13-2009  151.169
—, § 9.6 10-13-2009  151.170
—, § 9.7 10-13-2009  151.171
—, § 9.8 10-13-2009  151.172
—, § 9.9 10-13-2009  151.173
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.185
—, § 10.210-13-2009  151.186
—, § 10.310-13-2009  151.187
—, § 10.410-13-2009  151.188
—, § 10.510-13-2009  151.189
—, § 10.610-13-2009  151.190
—, § 10.710-13-2009  151.191
—, § 10.810-13-2009  151.192
—, § 10.910-13-2009  151.193
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.194
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.195
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.196
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.197
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.198
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.199
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.200
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.201
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.202
—, § 10.110-13-2009  151.203
—, § 10.210-13-2009  151.204
—, § 11.110-13-2009  151.220
—, § 11.210-13-2009  151.221
—, § 12.110-13-2009  151.230
—, § 12.210-13-2009  151.231
—, § 12.310-13-2009  151.232
—, § 12.410-13-2009  151.233
—, § 12.510-13-2009  151.234
—, § 12.610-13-2009  151.235
—, § 12.710-13-2009  151.236
—, § 13.110-13-2009  151.250
—, § 13.210-13-2009  151.251
—, § 13.310-13-2009  151.252
—, § 13.410-13-2009  151.253
—, § 13.510-13-2009  151.254
—, § 13.610-13-2009  151.255
—, § 13.710-13-2009  151.256
—, § 13.810-13-2009  151.257
—, § 14.110-13-2009  151.270
—, § 14.210-13-2009  151.271
—, § 15.110-13-2009  151.285
—, App. A 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. A
—, App. B 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. B
—, App. C 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. C
—, App. D 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. D
—, App. E 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. E
—, App. F 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. F
—, App. G 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. G
—, App. H 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. H
—, App. K 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. K
—, App. I 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. I
—, App. J 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. J
—, App. L 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. L
—, App. M 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. M
—, App. N 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. N
—, App. O 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. O
—, App. P 10-13-2009  Ch. 151, App. P
09-2023     10-13-2009  110.99
09-2045     10-13-2009  51.25
—         12-8-2009   33.157
—, § 1-1012-8-2009   33.001
—, § 1-1012-8-2009   33.002
—, § 1-1012-8-2009   33.003
—, § 1-1012-8-2009   33.004
—, § 1-1012-8-2009   33.005
—, § 2-1012-8-2009   33.006
—, § 4-1012-8-2009   33.035
—, § 4-1012-8-2009   33.036
—, § 5-1012-8-2009   33.050
—, § 5-1012-8-2009   33.051
—, § 6-1012-8-2009   33.065
—, § 6-1012-8-2009   33.066
—, § 6-1012-8-2009   33.067
—, § 6-1012-8-2009   33.068
—, § 6-1012-8-2009   33.069
—, § 7-1012-8-2009   33.080
—, § 7-1012-8-2009   33.081
—, § 8-1012-8-2009   33.082
—, § 9-1012-8-2009   33.095 -
                        33.099
—, § 10-112-8-2009   33.115
—, § 10-112-8-2009   33.116
—, § 10-112-8-2009   33.117
—, § 10-112-8-2009   33.118
—, § 11-112-8-2009   33.125
—, § 11-112-8-2009   33.126
—, § 12-112-8-2009   33.130
—, § 12-112-8-2009   33.131
—, § 12-112-8-2009   33.132
—, § 12-112-8-2009   33.133
—, § 12-112-8-2009   33.134
—, § 12-112-8-2009   33.135
—, § 12-112-8-2009   33.136
—, § 12-112-8-2009   33.137
                        131.15 -
10-0238     4-13-2010   131.18,
                        131.99
10-0596     7-13-2010   50.60 -
                        50.66
10-0784     8-19-2010   51.15 -
                        51.24
10-0837     9-14-2010   51.25
—         4-11-2011   35.20
11-0388     5-10-2011   37.130 -
                        37.137
                        51.15 -
11-0425     5-10-2011   51.20,
                        51.22 -
                        51.24
11-0517     6-14-2011   30.05 -
                        30.08
—         7-12-2011   94.99
—         9-13-2011   94.99
11-0733     9-13-2011   30.04,
                        31.001
11-0997     10-11-2011  70.15,
                        70.99
12-0211     3-13-2012   31.031,
                        31.032
                        51.15 -
12-0232     3-13-2012   51.20,
                        51.22 -
                        51.24
                        94.01 -
12-0446     5-8-2012    94.09,
                        94.80 -
                        94.88
                        94.50 -
12-0447     5-8-2012    94.63,
                        94.65,
                        94.66
12-0706     6-12-2012   30.02
                        151.030,
                        151.045,
                        151.050,
                        151.056,
                        151.070 -
                        151.072,
                        151.112 -
                        151.114,
—         8-14-2012   151.125,
                        151.131,
                        151.167,
                        151.172,
                        151.173,
                        151.232,
                        151.233,
                        151.270,
                        151.271
                        51.15 -
12-0856     8-14-2012   51.19,
                        51.22 -
                        51.24
                        151.070,
                        151.112,
                        151.145 -
                        151.147,
                        151.149 -
—         10-9-2012   151.151,
                        151.153,
                        151.154,
                        151.271;
                        Ch. 151, Apps. N,
                        R,
                        S
13-0006     1-15-2013   T.S.O. I
13-0009     1-15-2013   T.S.O. I
13-0010     1-15-2013   T.S.O. I
13-0868     - -2013     115.01 -
                        115.07
                        33.001 -
                        33.006,
                        33.035,
                        33.036,
                        33.050,
                        33.051,
                        33.065 -
                        33.069,
                        33.080 -
—         2-12-2013   33.082,
                        33.095 -
                        33.099,
                        33.115 -
                        33.118,
                        33.125,
                        33.126,
                        33.130 -
                        33.137,
                        33.157
—         3-12-2013   70.15,
                        70.99
                        37.001 -
                        37.007,
—         4-9-2013    37.009 -
                        37.019;
                        Ch. 37, App. A
                        50.01 -
—         6-11-2013   50.10,
                        50.99
                        51.15 -
13-0738     7-9-2013    51.24,
                        94.50 -
                        94.66
                        51.15 -
13-0739     7-9-2013    51.24,
                        94.50 -
                        94.66
13-0740     7-9-2013    51.21
13-0850     8-13-2013   51.15 -
                        51.25
                        111.001,
                        111.002,
                        111.015 -
                        111.020,
—         8-13-2013   111.035 -
                        111.052,
                        111.065 -
                        111.071,
                        111.999
13-1053     10-8-2013   T.S.O. I
13-1260     11-12-2013  T.S.O. V
13-1277     11-12-2013  51.25
13-1271     12-10-2013  51.15 -
                        51.25
13-1331     12-10-2013  T.S.O. I
                        51.15 -
13-1341     12-10-2013  51.20,
                        51.22,
                        51.28
13-1471     1-14-2014   T.S.O. I
14-0072     2-11-2014   T.S.O. I
14-0074     2-11-2014   T.S.O. I
14-0075     2-11-2014   T.S.O. I
14-0261     4-8-2014    111.042
                        150.15 -
14-0316     4-8-2014    150.22,
                        150.99
14-0392     5-13-2014   51.15 -
                        51.25
14-0395     5-14-2014   T.S.O. I
14-0464     5-13-2014   70.15
14-0581     6-10-2014   51.15 -
                        51.24
                        111.035 -
                        111.037,
14-1198     8-13-2013   111.040,
                        111.041,
                        111.046
                        94.04,
                        94.05,
                        94.08,
                        94.81,
—         9-9-2014    94.82,
                        94.10,
                        94.11,
                        94.89,
                        94.99
—         1-13-2015   Adopting Ordinance
                        94.04,
—         2-10-2015   94.05,
                        94.12
15-0369     4-14-2015   96.05,
                        96.99
                        131.01 -
15-0370     4-14-2015   131.04,
                        131.99
                        132.01 -
15-0371     4-14-2015   132.03,
                        132.99
                        92.15,
                        92.16,
15-0372     4-14-2015   92.17,
                        92.19,
                        92.99
15-0373     4-14-2015   111.072,
                        111.999
15-0374     4-14-2015   94.13
15-0376     4-14-2015   95.08,
                        95.99
                        116.01 -
15-0377     4-14-2015   116.04,
                        116.99
                        131.30 -
15-0378     4-14-2015   131.32,
                        131.99
                        73.015,
15-0379     4-14-2015   73.110,
                        73.999
                        71.02,
15-0380     4-14-2015   71.07,
                        71.09,
                        71.99
15-0493     5-12-2015   177.06,
                        177.99
                        114.04,
                        114.05,
15-0539     5-12-2015   114.09,
                        114.10,
                        114.43
                        151.111,
15-0701     7-14-2015   151.112,
                        151.114,
                        151.271
15-0730     6-9-2015    111.043
                        51.15,
                        51.16,
                        51.17,
                        51.18,
                        51.19,
15-1005     10-13-2015  51.20,
                        51.23,
                        51.24,
                        51.25,
                        51.26,
                        51.27
15-1028     10-13-2015  Ch. 151, App. M
15-1162     11-10-2015  T.S.O. V
15-1164     11-10-2015  T.S.O. V
15-1165     11-10-2015  T.S.O. V
15-1170     11-10-2015  T.S.O. V
15-1173     11-10-2015  T.S.O. V
15-1205     11-10-2015  T.S.O. III
15-1241     12-8-2015   94.06
                        170.01 -
                        170.12,
15-1242     12-8-2015   170.14,
                        170.17,
                        170.99,
                        170.100
15-1323     - -         T.S.O. I
16-0119     2-9-2016    T.S.O. I
16-0120     2-9-2016    T.S.O. I
16-0121     2-9-2016    T.S.O. I
16-0122     2-9-2016    T.S.O. I
16-0123     2-9-2016    T.S.O. I
16-0314     4-12-2016   51.16,
                        51.20
16-0501     6-7-2016    94.81,
                        94.82
16-0652     6-23-2016   94.08,
                        94.14
16-0662     7-12-2016   T.S.O. V
16-0695     8-9-2016    T.S.O. V
16-0813     9-13-2016   T.S.O. V
16-0842     9-13-2016   T.S.O. I
                        94.02,
                        94.04,
16-0904     10-11-2016  94.13,
                        94.80,
                        94.81
16-0930     10-11-2016  134.02
                        51.16 -
                        51.20,
16-0944     10-11-2016  51.23,
                        51.24,
                        51.27
                        96.01,
16-1073     11-8-2016   96.04,
                        96.05,
                        96.99
16-1095     11-8-2016   Repeals 35.25
16-1096     11-8-2016   35.25
16-1132     11-8-2016   T.S.O. V
16-1133     11-8-2016   T.S.O. V
16-1134     11-8-2016   T.S.O. V
16-1135     11-8-2016   T.S.O. V
16-1136     11-8-2016   T.S.O. V
16-1138     11-8-2016   T.S.O. V
17-0122     2-8-2017    T.S.O. I
17-0125     2-8-2017    T.S.O. I
17-0129     2-8-2017    T.S.O. I
17-0131     2-8-2017    T.S.O. I
17-0133     2-8-2017    T.S.O. I
17-0169     2-14-2017   T.S.O. IV
17-0179     2-8-2017    T.S.O. V
17-0277     3-14-2017   T.S.O. IV
                        171.002,
                        171.004,
                        171.005,
                        171.021,
                        171.035,
                        171.050,
                        171.067,
                        171.068,
                        171.070,
                        171.072,
                        171.073,
                        171.100,
                        171.101,
                        171.103,
                        171.104,
                        171.105,
                        171.106,
                        171.110,
                        171.126,
                        171.127,
17-0605     6-13-2017   171.128,
                        171.141,
                        171.148,
                        171.149,
                        171.162,
                        171.165,
                        171.180,
                        171.203,
                        171.222,
                        171.223,
                        171.224,
                        171.238,
                        171.240,
                        171.241,
                        171.258,
                        171.259,
                        171.260,
                        Ch. 171, App. B,
                        Ch. 171, App. C,
                        Ch. 171, App. D,
                        Ch. 171, App. E
                        177.03,
                        177.04,
17-0891     9-12-2017   177.05,
                        177.06,
                        177.07
                        51.17,
17-1039     10-10-2017  51.19,
                        51.20
17-0900     11-14-2017  35.36
17-0901     11-14-2017  35.35
17-0902     11-14-2017  35.37
17-0903     11-14-2017  93.02,
                        93.07
17-1023     11-14-2017  35.23
17-1070     11-14-2017  35.22
17-1208     11-14-2017  50.03,
                        50.04
                        32.03,
                        32.04,
                        32.09,
17-1256     11-14-2017  32.12,
                        32.15,
                        32.16,
                        32.19,
                        32.20
17-1338     1-16-2018   T.S.O. IV
17-1380     1-16-2018   111.036,
                        111.043
18-0143     3-15-2018   T.S.O. I
18-0145     2-13-2018   T.S.O. I
18-0146     2-13-2018   T.S.O. I
18-0147     2-13-2018   T.S.O. I
18-0148     2-13-2018   T.S.O. I
18-0149     2-13-2018   T.S.O. I
18-0150     2-13-2018   T.S.O. I
                        37.030 -
                        37.045,
18-0466     5-8-2018    37.060 -
                        37.067,
                        37.069,
                        37.070
18-0512     5-8-2018    T.S.O. III
18-0757     7-10-2018   91.200 -
                        91.213
18-0871     8-14-2018   51.15 -
                        51.28
                        173.01 -
                        173.11,
                        173.20,
18-0950     9-11-2018   173.25 -
                        173.27,
                        173.30 -
                        173.33,
                        173.99
18-1102     10-9-2018   51.15 -
                        51.28
18-1362     11-13-2018  Ch. 31, App. A
18-1379     11-13-2018  T.S.O. V
18-1381     11-13-2018  T.S.O. V
18-1382     11-13-2018  T.S.O. V
18-1383     11-13-2018  T.S.O. V
18-1384     11-13-2018  T.S.O. V
18-1385     11-13-2018  T.S.O. V
19-0279     2-12-2019   111.043
19-0541     4-9-2019    51.27
                        171.021,
                        171.035,
                        171.068,
19-0775     5-14-2019   171.126,
                        171.258,
                        Ch. 171, Apps. B,
                        D
19-0936     6-11-2019   111.043
19-0948     6-11-2019   35.15
                        90.001 -
                        90.006,
                        90.020 -
                        90.035,
                        90.045 -
                        90.056,
19-1061     7-9-2019    90.064 -
                        90.083,
                        90.100 -
                        90.125,
                        90.140 -
                        90.151,
                        90.170 -
                        90.179
19-1111     7-9-2019    150.01,
                        150.99
19-1173     7-9-2019    111.043
19-1208     8-13-2019   172.12,
                        172.15
                        51.15 -
                        51.21,
19-1311     8-13-2019   51.22 -
                        51.25,
                        51.27
                        151.070,
                        151.071,
                        151.110,
                        151.111 -
                        151.114,
                        151.125,
                        151.131,
19-1378     9-10-2019   151.165 -
                        151.168,
                        151.231 -
                        151.233,
                        151.259,
                        151.270,
                        151.271, Ch. 151, Apps.
                        A,
                        T
19-1384     11-12-2019  33.05
                        52.01 -
                        52.09,
                        52.99;
                        53.01 -
19-1394     9-10-2019   53.10,
                        53.99;
                        54.01 -
                        54.06,
                        54.99
19-1525     10-8-2019   34.55 -
                        34.58
19-1613     10-8-2019   115.04
                        51.16,
                        51.17,
19-1743     11-12-2019  51.19,
                        51.23,
                        51.24,
                        51.27
20-0028     1-14-2020   51.23
20-0215     2-11-2020   51.17,
                        51.19
20-0312     3-10-2020   177.03 -
                        177.08
                        110.17,
20-0419     3-10-2020   110.38,
                        111.038,
                        111.050
20-0689     6-9-2020    51.17
20-0982     9-8-2020    35.15
                        51.16 -
20-1031     8-11-2020   51.20,
                        51.23,
                        51.27
20-1403     10-13-2020  111.042
                        51.17,
                        51.19,
21-0038     1-12-2021   51.23,
                        51.24,
                        51.27,
                        51.28
21-0266     2-9-2021    111.045
21-0420     3-9-2021    37.047 -
                        37.059
                        151.111,
21-0744     5-11-2021   151.112,
                        151.271
                        51.15 -
21-0832     6-8-2021    51.20,
                        51.23,
                        51.27
                        33.001 -
                        33.006,
                        33.035,
                        33.036,
                        33.051,
                        33.066 -
                        33.070,
21-0923     10-12-2021  33.080 -
                        33.082,
                        33.095 -
                        33.097,
                        33.115 -
                        33.117,
                        33.132,
                        33.133,
                        33.138
21-1471     10-12-2021  111.043
21-1876     12-14-2021  30.05,
                        30.06
21-1877     12-14-2021  30.07
22-0011     1-11-2022   94.04,
                        94.05
22-0673     5-10-2022   172.01
22-0754     8-9-2022    31.032
                        51.16 -
                        51.20,
22-0967     7-12-2022   51.23,
                        51.24,
                        51.27,
                        51.28
22-0970     7-12-2022   30.02
                        151.032,
                        151.145,
                        151.146,
                        151.271;
22-1060     8-9-2022    Ch. 151, Apps. J,
                        K,
                        L,
                        N,
                        S
22-1070     8-9-2022    T.S.O. I
22-1297     9-13-2022   115.03
                        151.111 -
22-1356     10-11-2022  151.114,
                        151.270,
                        151.271
22-1426     10-22-2022  111.040
22-1608     11-15-2022  173.03,
                        173.04
23-0005     1-17-2023   T.S.O. IV
23-0218     2-21-2023   T.S.O. I
23-0219     2-21-2023   T.S.O. I
23-0220     2-21-2023   T.S.O. I
23-0221     2-21-2023   T.S.O. I
23-0222     2-21-2023   T.S.O. I
23-0223     2-21-2023   T.S.O. I
                        151.050,
                        151.070,
                        151.111 -
                        151.113,
23-0675     5-9-2023    151.167,
                        151.258 -
                        151.261,
                        151.271;
                        Ch. 151, Apps. Q,
                        T
                        150.15 -
23-0785     6-13-2023   150.22,
                        150.99
23-0860     7-11-2023   35.15
23-0906     7-11-2023   51.15 -
                        51.28
                        151.145 -
                        151.147,
                        151.149,
                        151.150,
23-1056     8-8-2023    151.152 -
                        151.154,
                        151.271,
                        Ch. 151, Apps. K,
                        M,
                        S
                        95.01 -
23-1563     11-14-2023  95.05,
                        95.08,
                        95.99
23-1576     11-14-2023  T.S.O. V
23-1577     11-14-2023  T.S.O. V
23-1578     11-14-2023  T.S.O. V
23-1579     11-14-2023  T.S.O. V
23-1580     11-14-2023  T.S.O. V
23-1581     11-14-2023  T.S.O. V
23-1737     12-12-2023  T.S.O. IV
24-0018     1-16-2024   111.043
24-0153     2-20-2024   T.S.O. I
24-0154     2-20-2024   T.S.O. I
24-0155     2-20-2024   T.S.O. I
24-0156     2-20-2024   T.S.O. I
24-0166     2-20-2024   T.S.O. I
24-0167     2-20-2024   T.S.O. I
                        151.050,
                        151.111 -
                        151.114,
                        151.145,
                        151.146,
24-0207     3-12-2024   151.167,
                        151.260 -
                        151.262,
                        151.271,
                        Ch. 151, Apps. Q,
                        T,
                        U
24-0425     4-9-2024    T.S.O. III
24-0593     5-14-2024   50.40 -
                        50.53
24-0731     6-11-2024   150.16
24-0920     8-13-2024   T.S.O. IV
                        151.167,
24-0924     8-13-2024   151.271,
                        Ch. 151, App. A
24-0926     8-13-2024   51.24
24-1000     8-13-2024   177.07
                        171.005,
                        171.021,
                        171.035,
                        171.067,
                        171.072,
                        171.100,
                        171.103,
                        171.105,
                        171.141,
                        171.161,
24-1005     8-13-2024   171.180,
                        171.184,
                        171.186,
                        171.220 -
                        171.224,
                        171.238 -
                        171.240,
                        171.259, Ch. 171, Apps.
                        B,
                        C,
                        D
24-1097     9-10-2024   T.S.O. IV
24-1571     11-12-2024  111.043
25-0062     1-14-2025   T.S.O. I
25-0063     1-14-2025   T.S.O. I
25-0065     1-14-2025   T.S.O. I
25-0067     1-14-2025   T.S.O. I
25-0073     1-14-2025   T.S.O. I
25-0278     5-13-2025   150.17
25-0312     3-11-2025   94.63
                        94.56,
25-0511     5-13-2025   94.62,
                        94.81
                        150.15 -
25-0527     5-13-2025   150.22,
                        150.99
                        172.01 -
25-07-16    6-10-2025   172.17,
                        172.99
25-0885     7-8-2025    35.15
25-0887     7-8-2025    35.15
25-0952     8-12-2025   35.36
25-0961     8-12-2025   94.05,
                        94.08
25-1050     9-9-2025    151.045
25-1448     11-18-2025  T.S.O. V
25-1449     11-18-2025  T.S.O. V
25-1450     11-18-2025  T.S.O. V
25-1451     11-18-2025  T.S.O. V
25-1452     11-18-2025  T.S.O. V
25-1453     11-18-2025  T.S.O. V
25-1425     12-9-2025   111.043
25-1552     12-9-2025   T.S.O. III
26-0044     1-13-2026   T.S.O. I
26-0045     1-13-2026   T.S.O. I
26-0046     1-13-2026   T.S.O. I
26-0047     1-13-2026   T.S.O. I
26-0048     1-13-2026   T.S.O. I
                       
 
 
Board of Health Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.                      Date Passed Code Section
                                          94.30 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. II    3-19-1959   94.35,
                                          94.99
                                          50.20 -
                                          50.27,
Bd of Health Ord., Art. VIII  6-12-1961   50.99;
                                          Ch. 50, Apps. A,
                                          B
                                          172.01 -
                                          172.12,
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     11-9-1976   172.14 -
                                          172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          172.01 -
                                          172.07,
                                          172.09,
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     4-10-1979   172.10,
                                          172.12 -
                                          172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          172.01 -
                                          172.07,
                                          172.09,
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     10-9-1984   172.10,
                                          172.12 -
                                          172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          172.01 -
                                          172.10,
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     12-20-1984  172.12 -
                                          172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          173.25 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVI   6-8-1987    173.33,
                                          173.99
                                          172.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     6-11-1990   172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          175.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. VII   - -1993     175.06,
                                          175.99
Bd of Health Ord., Art. VI    7-13-1993   176.15 -
                                          176.17
                                          172.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     1-10-1995   172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          173.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. III   6-13-1995   173.11,
                                          173.99
                                          171.001 -
                                          171.005,
                                          171.020,
                                          171.021,
                                          171.035,
                                          171.050,
                                          171.065 -
                                          171.074,
                                          171.085 -
                                          171.089,
                                          171.100 -
                                          171.111,
                                          171.125 -
                                          171.128,
                                          171.140 -
                                          171.149,
Bd of Health Ord., Art. V     11-12-1996  171.160 -
                                          171.168,
                                          171.180 -
                                          171.186,
                                          171.200 -
                                          171.206,
                                          171.220 -
                                          171.224,
                                          171.235 -
                                          171.240,
                                          171.255 -
                                          171.261,
                                          171.275,
                                          171.290 -
                                          171.292;
                                          Ch. 171, Apps. A -
                                          E
                                          172.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     11-12-1996  172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          177.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. XVIII 11-14-2000  177.08,
                                          177.99
                                          170.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. XV    11-13-2007  170.17,
                                          170.99
                                          172.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     3-15-2011   172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          172.01 -
Bd of Health Ord., Art. X     1-15-2013   172.17,
                                          172.99
                                          174.001 -
                                          174.011,
                                          174.025 -
                                          174.029,
                                          174.040,
Bd of Health Ord., Art. XIX   1-15-2013   174.041,
                                          174.055 -
                                          174.067,
                                          174.080 -
                                          174.086,
                                          174.100,
                                          174.101
                                          171.001 -
                                          171.005,
                                          171.020,
                                          171.021,
                                          171.035,
                                          171.050,
                                          171.065 -
                                          171.074,
                                          171.085 -
                                          171.089,
                                          171.100 -
                                          171.111,
                                          171.125 -
                                          171.128,
                                          171.140 -
                                          171.149,
Bd of Health Ord., Art. V     11-12-2013  171.160 -
                                          171.168,
                                          171.180 -
                                          171.186,
                                          171.200 -
                                          171.206,
                                          171.220 -
                                          171.224,
                                          171.235 -
                                          171.240,
                                          171.255 -
                                          171.261,
                                          171.275,
                                          171.290 -
                                          171.292;
                                          Ch. 171, Apps. A -
                                          E
                                         
 
