VILLAGE OF LEAF RIVER, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through 2023-2 published on 12-18-2023
 
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310, Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Intent
   
10.02   Amendments
   
10.03   Distribution of code
   
10.04   Code alteration
   
10.05   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.06   Court proceedings; new ordinances
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Construction of words
   
10.09   Definitions
   
10.10   Catchlines
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 INTENT.
   All general provisions, terms, and phrases and expressions contained in this
village code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent of the
President and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-3)
§ 10.02 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Any ordinance amending this village code shall set forth the title,
chapter, subchapter, and section number of the section or sections to be
amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of
this village code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be
immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the ordinance material shall be
prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this village code.
   (B)   Any additions or amendments to this code, when passed in such form as
to indicate the intention of the President and Board of Trustees to make the
same a part of this code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code so
that a reference to the municipal code of the village shall be understood to
include them.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-4)
§ 10.03 DISTRIBUTION OF CODE.
   (A)   All of the printed copies of this code belonging to the village shall
be deposited with the Village Clerk, who shall deliver one copy thereof to the
President and each member of the Board of Trustees, and copies to such other
persons as the President and Board of Trustees may direct. The Village Clerk
will keep a list of persons who purchase copies of the village code and charge
a maintenance fee therefor.
   (B)   Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village, and shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the
Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-5)
§ 10.04 CODE ALTERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace, or deface, in
any way, any section or any page of this village code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his or her custody an official copy of this village code shall
make every effort to maintain this code in an up to date and efficient manner.
He or she shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when
such are delivered to him or her, or made available to him or her through the
office of the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of
this village code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this
village code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the village; and all special ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
   (B)   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets
and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service, or rates of
public utilities, shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this village
code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this village code may
contain provisions for such matters, in which case, this village code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance in respect to such provisions only.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-2)
§ 10.06 COURT PROCEEDINGS; NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   (1)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect such
offense or act so committed or so done or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the new ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable.
      (2)   If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this title shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision, nor shall this title be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this village code.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-3)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
village code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code or any part thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares
that it would have passed each section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause,
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
divisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-4)
§ 10.08 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   Whenever any word in any section of this village code importing the
plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or
persons, any single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used.
   (B)   (1)   When any subject matter, party, or person is referred to in this
village code by words importing the singular number only or the masculine
gender, several matters, parties, or persons, and females as well as males and
bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included.
      (2)   Provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to
any section of this village code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant
thereto.
   (C)   The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the village has
been changed in the content of this village code to “title,” “chapter,”
“subchapter,” “section,” and/or “division,” or words of like import, for
organizational and clarification purposes only. Such changes to the village’s
ordinances are not meant to amend the passage and effective dates of such
original ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
§ 10.09 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   BOARD. Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Leaf River, Illinois. Also known as the VILLAGE BOARD.
   CODE. The Municipal Code of the Village Leaf River, Illinois, and amendments
thereto.
   COUNTY. County of Ogle, Illinois.
   EMPLOYEES. When reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, “of the
Village of Leaf River.”
   FEE. Sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business,
profession, or corporation.
   FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May 1 of each
year.
   ILCS. The Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession, or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than six months may be imposed.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village, or any act or thing repugnant to or creating a
hazard to or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
   OCCUPANT. The word OCCUPANT applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICER. Whenever reference is made in this code to a village office by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
Village of Leaf River.”
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business, or
profession.
   OWNER. The word OWNER applied to a building or land shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or lessee of the whole or
of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action, and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right, or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged, or diminished, and every right or
interest therein.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   STATE. Unless otherwise indicated, the State of Illinois.
   STREET. Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places, and sidewalks.
   TENANT. The word TENANT applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Leaf River, County of Ogle, State of Illinois.
   VILLAGE PRESIDENT. The President of the village, and may be referred to as
“Mayor” or “President” of the village.
   WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER. Unless otherwise specifically defined,
shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or
things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person or, in case he or she is unable to write,
by his or her proper mark.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
Cross-reference:
   Clerk as custodian, see §
31.22
§ 10.10 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this village code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify,
or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Unless specifically provided elsewhere, any person found to have
been in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this code shall be
fined in an amount of not less than $50 nor more than $750. No imprisonment for
failure to pay such fine, penalty, or cost shall exceed six months for each
offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate
offense. A penalty for each offense may include a requirement that the
offending party perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not
limited to, picking up litter in public parks or upon public highways, or
performing maintenance of public facilities. A violation hereof may be
established by a preponderance of the evidence.
      (2)   If, by the terms of an ordinance, an act that would be consistent
with the criminal laws of the state, is declared to be a misdemeanor, the
penalty therefor shall be for a period of incarceration in a penal institution
other than the penitentiary not to exceed six months. The matter shall be
prosecuted under the rules of criminal procedure of the state, and the village
shall be required to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)
   (B)   (1)   The penalty provided in this section shall be applicable to
every section of this village code the same as though it were a part of each
and every separate section.
      (2)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this village code, the prosecuting
officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall
be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty
so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
      (3)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this village code, and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this section shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)
   (C)   No provision of this village code designating the duties of any
officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee
liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on
such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)
(Ord. 1984, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1 and 5/1-2-1.1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   FINANCES AND TAXATION
      
33.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
      
34.   VILLAGE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
Village President
   
30.01   Election, term of office
   
30.02   Bond, oath, salary
   
30.03   Powers, duties
   
30.04   President Pro Tem, Vice President Pro Tem
Board of Trustees
   
30.15   Elected officials, term of office
   
30.16   Oath of office; salary
   
30.17   Rules of order and procedure
   
30.18   Copies of village minutes
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
§ 30.01 ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Village President shall be elected for a term of four years and shall be
President of the Board of Trustees as provided by statute.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 30.02 BOND, OATH, SALARY.
   (A)   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the President
shall give bond with sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties, in the sum of
$3,000.
   (B)   He or she shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute and
shall receive $25 per regular or special meeting of the Village Board attended
for which his or her absence is excused.
   (C)   He or she shall, additionally, receive an annual salary of $1,000.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 30.03 POWERS, DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The President shall be the chief executive officer of the
village and shall perform all such duties as may be required of him or her by
statute or ordinance.
      (2)   He or she shall have supervision over all of the executive offices
of the village and shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and
records kept by any officer at any reasonable time.
   (B)   (1)   The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees, all officers of the village whose appointment or
election is not otherwise provided for.
      (2)   Any vacancies occurring in such offices shall be filled in the same
manner.
   (C)   Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of
any officer of the village, this dispute shall be settled by the President, and
the President shall have the power to delegate to any officer any duty which is
to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that
duty.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-3)
Cross-reference:
   Responsibilities of officials, employees, see §
31.05
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 30.04 PRESIDENT PRO TEM, VICE PRESIDENT PRO TEM.
   The Board of Trustees shall annually elect two of its number to act as
President Pro Tem and Vice President Pro Tem who, during the absence or
disability of the President, shall perform the duties pertaining to the office.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-4)
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 30.15 ELECTED OFFICIALS, TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Board of Trustees, consisting of six members, shall be elected to office
for a four-year term as is provided by statute. This Board shall be the
legislative department of the village government and shall perform such duties
and have such powers as may be delegated to it by statute.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 30.16 OATH OF OFFICE; SALARY.
   Each member of the Board of Trustees shall take the oath of office
prescribed by statute and shall receive $125 per regular or special meeting of
the Village Board attended by said Trustee, or for which his or her absence is
excused. Each newly elected Trustee shall, in addition, receive an annual
salary of $300.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 30.17 RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Meetings.
      (1)   Regular meetings. The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees
shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m., and
a public notice of such regular meetings shall be given as required by statute.
The meeting place of the Board of Trustees shall be at the Village Hall unless
otherwise ordered by the Board of Trustees. Any regular meeting falling upon a
legal holiday shall be held on the day following at the same hour and place
specified.
      (2)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the President
or any three Trustees upon at least 24 hours’ notice to all members and the
President; provided, that if all of the Trustees are present at a special
meeting, no notice of the meeting shall be necessary, subject to statutory
requirements.
      (3)   Meetings open to the public. All meetings of the Board are open to
the public with the exception of certain executive sessions. Each person shall
be given three minutes, with no disrespectful language or conduct or he or she
will be asked to leave.
      (4)   Non-attendance. Each member of the Board of Trustees may be excused
upon notice from attending up to four meetings, whether general or special in
nature, during each 12-month period of service.
   (B)   Presiding officer. The Village President shall be the presiding
officer for all regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees and at
all times when the Board meets as a committee of the whole.
   (C)   Rules of order.
      (1)   Order of business. The order of business at meetings of the Board
of Trustees shall be as follows:
         (a)   Roll call;
         (b)   Reading of preceding meeting;
         (c)   Treasurer’s report;
         (d)   Presentation of claims;
         (e)   Presentation of communications and petitions to the Board;
         (f)   Reports of standing committees;
         (g)   Report of special committees;
         (h)   Unfinished business; and
         (i)   New business.
      (2)   Rescinded action. No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall
be rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special
meeting as many members of the Board of Trustees as were present at the meeting
which such vote or action was taken, as is provided statute.
      (3)   Resolutions. Any resolution submitted to the Board of Trustees
shall be reduced to writing before being voted upon.
      (4)   Addressing meetings. No person other than the President of the
Board of Trustees shall address the Board at any regular or special meeting
except upon the consent of a majority of the members present.
      (5)   Suspension of rules. The rules of order, other than those
prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a
majority of the members present at any meeting.
   (D)   Quorum. A majority of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but no ordinance shall be passed except upon a favorable vote by a
majority of the elected members, as is provided by statute.
   (E)   Committees.
      (1)   Standing committees. The following shall be the outstanding
committees of the Board of Trustees:
         (a)   Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks, and Storm Sewers, hereafter referred
to as Streets and Alleys;
         (b)   Finance;
         (c)   Water and Sanitary Sewers;
         (d)   Ordinances;
         (e)   Lights; and
         (f)   Liquor Commission, made up of the Board as a Committee of the
whole.
      (2)   Special committees. Special committees shall be created, from time
to time, as directed by the Board of Trustees.
      (3)   Committee membership.
         (a)   All standing and special committees shall be composed of two
members, including the Chairperson, unless the Board directs otherwise.
         (b)   All committees shall be appointed by the Village President.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-3) (Ord. 2000-2, passed 10-3-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 5 ILCS 120/2.02 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 30.18 COPIES OF VILLAGE MINUTES.
   (A)   Written request. Anyone requesting a copy of the Village Board minutes
must submit a written request to the Village Clerk.
   (B)   Time to produce copy. After this request is submitted, the Village
Board has seven days before producing the copy.
   (C)   Charge. There will be a charge of $1 per sheet for the minutes. Each
additional copy will be $0.50 per sheet. This money is payable in advance upon
request.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-4)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Effect of chapter
   
31.02   Elective officers
   
31.03   Appointive officers
   
31.04   Oath, bond, salaries
   
31.05   Responsibilities
   
31.06   Inspection of records
   
31.07   Removals from office
   
31.08   Gift Ban Act
   
31.09   Paid leave
Village Clerk
   
31.20   Appointment, term of office
   
31.21   Bond, salary
   
31.22   Powers, duties
   
31.23   Vacancy in office
Village Treasurer
   
31.35   Appointment, term of office
   
31.36   Bond, salary
   
31.37   Duties
Village Attorney
   
31.50   Appointment
   
31.51   Suits and actions
   
31.52   Duties
Public Works Superintendent
   
31.65   Position description; status
   
31.66   Supervision
   
31.67   Duties; qualifications, experience and training
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 EFFECT OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers and
employees of the village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office
or position, or the time of the appointment of the officers or employees.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1)
§ 31.02 ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
   Elections for municipal offices shall be held as provided by statute and at
the time prescribed by statute. All officers elected to municipal office, as
provided by statute, shall take office on the first regular or special meeting
which is held in the month following their election.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 31.03 APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Appointment of officers. All officers, other than elective officers,
shall be appointed by the Village President and Board of Trustees as is
provided by statute; provided, that all employees shall, in the absence of any
provision to the contrary, be appointed or selected by the Village President.
   (B)   Term of office; vacancies. Every appointive officer of the village
shall hold office until May 1 following his or her appointment or until his or
her successor is appointed and qualified, unless it is otherwise provided by
ordinance. In case of a vacancy in any such office, it shall be filled in the
same manner as such appointment or selection was made in the absence of any
provision to the contrary.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 31.04 OATH, BOND, SALARIES.
   (A)   Oath. Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his or
her duties, take the oath prescribed by statute.
   (B)   Bond. Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Board of
Trustees, upon entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in
such amount and with such sureties as may be determined by such Board,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office or
position.
   (C)   Salaries. All officers and employees of the village shall receive such
salary as may, from time to time, be provided for by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 31.05 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Monies received. Every officer of the village shall, at least once
each month, turn over all monies received by him or her in his or her official
capacity to the Village Clerk with a statement showing the source from which
the same was received.
   (B)   Conservators of the peace. The Village President, members of the Board
of Trustees, and members of the Police Department are hereby designated to be
conservators of the peace with such powers to make arrests as are given to
conservators of the peace by statute.
   (C)   Books and records to successor. Every officer and employee of the
village, upon the expiration of his or her term for any cause whatsoever, shall
deliver to his or her successor all books and records which may be the property
of the village, and if no successor has been appointed within one week after
the termination of his or her office, such property shall be delivered either
to the Village Clerk or the Village Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 31.06 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open to inspection
by the Village President or any member of the Board of Trustees at all
reasonable times, regardless of whether such records are required to be kept by
statute or village ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-6)
§ 31.07 REMOVALS FROM OFFICE.
   Any officer or employee appointed by the Village President may be removed
from office by him or her; provided, however, that a statement of such removal,
with the reasons therefor, shall be given to the Board of Trustees at its next
meeting following such removal. The President may remove any officer appointed
by him or her on any formal charge, whenever he or she is of the opinion that
the interests of the village demand removal, but he or she shall report the
reasons for the removal to the Board of Trustees at a meeting to be held not
less than five nor more than ten days after the removal. If the President fails
or refuses to report to the Board of Trustees the reasons for the removal or if
the Board of Trustees, by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by
law to be elected, disapproves of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be
restored to the office from which he or she was removed. The vote shall be by
yeas and nays, which shall be entered upon the Clerk’s minutes.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-7)
§ 31.08 GIFT BAN ACT.
   (A)   (1)   The State Gift Ban Act is hereby adopted as required by 5 ILCS
430/10-10 et seq.
      (2)   The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act is prohibited by any elected or appointed
official, or any employee of the village.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-1)
   (B)   To the extent authorized by law and to the extent required by 5 ILCS
430/10-10 et seq., the Village Attorney is appointed to serve as the Ethics
Officer of the village. The Ethics Officer’s duties shall be as provided in 5
ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-2)
   (C)   All complaints for violations of the Act and this section shall be
filed with the State Legislative Ethics Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-3)
(Ord. 99-2, passed 6-1-1999)
§ 31.09 PAID LEAVE.
   Pursuant to § 15(p) of the Paid Leave for All Workers Act (820 ILCS 192/1 et
seq.), the village hereby adopts its current paid leave policy for all village
employees as set forth in the village’s code of ordinances, employee handbook,
annual salary ordinances, any collective bargaining agreements to which the
village is a party, and all other binding legislative actions governing paid
leave adopted by the President and Board of Trustees of the village, as the
same may be amended from time to time. However, in no event shall the village,
as an employer, provide less than one day of paid leave per year to any village
employee.
(Ord. 2023-2, passed 12-18-2023)
VILLAGE CLERK
§ 31.20 APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Village Clerk shall be appointed and serve for a four-year term until
his or her successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 31.21 BOND, SALARY.
   (A)   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Village
Clerk shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as provided by
statute conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties.
   (B)   The Clerk shall receive $25 per regular or special meeting of the
Village Board attended or for which his or her absence is excused. The Clerk
shall, in addition, receive an monthly salary of $833.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 31.22 POWERS, DUTIES.
   (A)   Signatures and seal.
      (1)   The Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the village and
all licenses, permits, and such documents as shall require this formality.
      (2)   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal and shall fix
its impression on documents whenever this is required.
   (B)   Money and accounts.
      (1)   Money collected. The Clerk shall turn over all monies received by
him or her on behalf of the village to the Village Treasurer promptly upon
receipt of the same, and with such money, he or she shall give a statement as
to the source thereof.
      (2)   Accounts. The Clerk shall keep the accounts showing all monies
received by him or her and the source and disposition thereof, and such other
accounts as may be required by statute or village ordinance.
   (C)   Records.
      (1)   Records. In addition to the record of ordinances and other records
which the Clerk is required by statute to keep, he or she shall keep a register
of all licenses and permits issued and the payments thereon, a record showing
all of the officers and regular employees of the village, and such other
records as may be required by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   Documents. The Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents
belonging to the village which are not assigned to the custody of some other
officer.
      (3)   Indices. The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all
documents and records kept by him or her, so that ready access thereto may be
had.
   (D)   Additional duties. In addition to the duties herein provided, the
Clerk shall perform such other duties and functions which may be required by
statute or village ordinance
(Prior Code, § 1-8-3)
Cross-reference:
   Definition of corporate seal, see §
10.09
§ 31.23 VACANCY IN OFFICE.
   In case the office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the
President and Board of Trustees shall appoint a successor as is provided by
statute.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
VILLAGE TREASURER
§ 31.35 APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Village Treasurer who shall be
appointed by the Village President and Board of Trustees as is provided by
statute.
   (B)   He or she shall serve for one year.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et seq.
§ 31.36 BOND, SALARY.
   The Treasurer shall give a bond before entering upon the duties of his or
her office, in the sum required by the Board of Trustees, but such amount shall
not be less than that required by statute. This bond shall be conditioned upon
the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his or her duties, and shall be
conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any neglect of
duty or any act of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall receive a salary of $717
per month.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)
§ 31.37 DUTIES.
   (A)   Generally. The Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be
prescribed for him or her by statute or village ordinance. He or she shall
receive all monies paid to the village either directly from the person paying
the money or from the hands of some other officer or employee as may receive
it, and he or she shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly
signed by the President and Clerk.
   (B)   Deposit of funds. The Treasurer shall deposit the funds of the village
in such depositories as may be selected, from time to time, as provided by law
and shall keep the deposit of the village money separate and distinct from his
or her own money, and shall not make private or personal use of any village
money.
   (C)   Records and reports.
      (1)   The Treasurer shall keep the records showing all monies received by
him or her, showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for
which it is paid, and he or she shall keep records, at all times, showing the
financial status of the village.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the Board of Trustees
showing the state of the finances of the village and the amount received and
spent during the month, which reports shall be filed.
      (3)   The Treasurer shall make an annual report prior to May 1 with the
total of all receipts and expenditures of the village and his or her
transactions as Treasurer during the preceding fiscal year.
   (D)   Accounting. The Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be
required by statute or village ordinance, and he or she shall keep them in the
manner required by the Board of Trustees.
   (E)   Register of warrants. The Treasurer shall keep a register of all
warrants, bonds, or orders filed with him or her, or paid by him or her, and
all vouchers, as required by statute.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3-10-1 et seq., 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 et
seq., and 65 ILCS
    5/11 et seq.
VILLAGE ATTORNEY
§ 31.50 APPOINTMENT.
   The Village Attorney shall be appointed by the Village Board. He or she
shall hold office for the duration of his or her appointment unless sooner
removed by the Village President with the concurrence of the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-1)
§ 31.51 SUITS AND ACTIONS.
   The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions
at law or equity to which the village may be a party or in which it may be
interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the village on
behalf of the village or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the
village.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-2)
§ 31.52 DUTIES.
   The Village Attorney shall perform such duties as are prescribed by
ordinance of the Board and/or by state law, together with the following.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the full enforcement of
all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the village and of all
similar interlocutory orders.
   (B)   He or she shall draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract,
lease or other document or instrument to which the village may be a party and,
upon request of the Board, shall draft ordinances covering any subjects within
the power of the village.
   (C)   He or she shall attend meetings of the Board when requested so to do
by the President and/or Board.
   (D)   He or she shall submit legal opinions when requested so to do by the
President and Board to any village official or employee.
   (E)   He or she shall perform any further service, civil or criminal,
required by statute or ordinance of the village.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-3)
PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT
§ 31.65 POSITION DESCRIPTION; STATUS.
   (A)   To plan, organize, and supervise the work of staff engaged in street
and alley maintenance, water and sewer maintenance, maintenance of parks and
village grounds, or as otherwise directed by the Village President or Trustees
of the Village Board. The Public Works Superintendent is to ensure responsive,
courteous and efficient service to village residents and to the general public.
   (B)   Employment status: exempt (salary).
§ 31.66 SUPERVISION.
   (A)   The Public Works Superintendent (hereafter referred to as “PWS”) is
directly supervised by the Village President, with oversight exercised by the
Village Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The PWS is responsible for the direct supervision of the maintenance
employee(s). As such, the PWS must provide formal monthly supervision to
maintenance employee(s) as evidenced by the completion of a monthly supervision
form that clarifies ongoing projects related to job duties, notes any
difficulties with completing those or any other projects and documents any
corrective action taken.
   (C)   The PWS is responsible for approving requests for time off by signing
a time off request submitted by the employee within three business days of
receiving the request. All other rules regarding time off from work are
specified by the village.
   (D)   The PWS is responsible for approving the employee’s submitted
documentation of hours worked. Approval of the documentation of hours worked
with the PWS’s signature indicates that hours submitted are a fair and accurate
representation of hours worked.
   (E)   The PWS must adhere to all accepted safety procedures when performing
job duties. Failure to follow proper safety precautions will result in
disciplinary procedures up to and possibly including termination of employment.
   (F)   Disciplinary and termination procedures are to be followed as
specified by the village.
§ 31.67 DUTIES; QUALIFICATIONS, EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING.
   (A)   (1)   The PWS is responsible for ensuring that all the tasks
delineated for the maintenance worker are completed. They may involve the
actual completion of those job duties such as snowplowing, repairing of
potholes, and jetting of the sewer system.
      (2)   The above examples are intended only as illustrations of various
types of work performed in this position. The omission of specific statements
or duties does not exclude them from this position if the work is similar,
related or a logical assignment to the position.
      (3)   The PWS may hire part time employees, with Board approval, to
accomplish tasks as directed and appropriated.
   (B)   In addition to the qualifications for maintenance worker, the PWS
needs to be licensed for water and sewer operation for the existing wastewater
treatment facility, per EPA guidelines.
   (C)   Worker must have the necessary licensing to operate the existing
wastewater treatment facility per EPA guidelines.
CHAPTER 32: FINANCES AND TAXATION
Section
Finances and Fees
   
32.01   Signatures on warrants
   
32.02   Surety bonds
   
32.03   Returned check charge
Taxation
   
32.15   Street lighting tax
   
32.16   Municipal utility tax
   
32.17   Municipal telecommunications tax
 
   
32.99   Penalty
FINANCES AND FEES
§ 32.01 SIGNATURES ON WARRANTS.
   No warrant of the village shall be recognized or paid unless it is signed by
both the Village President and the Village Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-2) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.02 SURETY BONDS.
   (A)   Whenever a bond to indemnify the village is required as a prerequisite
to exercising the duties of any office or position or to the issuance of a
license or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on
such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this
state as a surety company unless there is specific provision to the contrary by
ordinance or the Board of Trustees, by majority vote, accepts a personal
surety.
   (B)   Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an additional surety,
may be needed on any bond to indemnify the village against any loss or
liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties, or for
any other reason, the Board of Trustees may order a new surety or sureties to
be secured for such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured
within ten days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the
bond, or his or her assignees, the Board of Trustees shall declare the bond to
be void, and thereupon, such principal or assignee shall be deemed to have
surrendered the privilege or position as condition of which the bond was
required.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-3)
§ 32.03 RETURNED CHECK CHARGE.
   (A)   A charge of $25 will be added to the amount due when a check has been
returned for non- sufficient funds after being presented to the bank twice for
payment.
   (B)   A charge of $25 will be added to the amount due when a check has been
written on a closed or non-existent account.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees will require the amounts due to be paid in cash,
cashier’s check, or money order after a check has been returned.
TAXATION
§ 32.15 STREET LIGHTING TAX.
   (A)   Findings of fact. In order to ensure the adequate construction,
maintenance, and repair of the street lighting system of the village, it is
necessary and proper for the village to levy a street lighting tax pursuant to
65 ILCS 5/11-80-5.
   (B)   Levy of tax. The following sums are hereby levied upon the taxable
property, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-80-5, in the village at 0.05% of the
value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue to be used
exclusively for the purpose of lighting streets.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-1) (Ord. passed 4-30-1990)
§ 32.16 MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX.
   (A)   Tax imposed.
      (1)   (a)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges. The privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail, and used or consumed within the corporate
limits of the municipality, shall be issued at the following rates, calculated
on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
            1.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.556 per kilowatt hour;
            2.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.364 per kilowatt hour;
            3.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.328 per kilowatt hour;
            4.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.319 per kilowatt hour;
            5.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.310 per kilowatt hour;
            6.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.291 per kilowatt hour;
            7.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.287 per kilowatt hour;
            8.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.282 per kilowatt hour;
            9.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.278 per kilowatt hour; and
            10.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt hours in a month: $0.273 cents per kilowatt hour.
         (b)   The tax rates set forth in division (A)(1)(a)1. through (A)(1)
(a)10. above will be used at least through December 31, 2008, are proportional
to the rates enumerated in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Pub. Act No. 90-
561), and do not exceed the revenue that could have been collected during 1997
using the rates enumerated in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Pub. Act No. 90-
561).
      (2)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in division (A)
(1)(a) above shall be effective:
         (a)   On August 1, 1998, for residential customers; and
         (b)   On the earlier of:
            1.   The first bill issued on or after January 1, 2001; or
            2.   The date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/16-
104 for non-residential customers.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not be effective until August
1, 1998.
   (B)   Exceptions. None of the taxes authorized by this section may be
imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to
the extent to which the business of privilege may not, under the Constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this
state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in
the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting
gas, water, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages, or using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail,
be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for those
transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; nor
shall any tax authorized by this section be imposed upon any person engaged in
a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at
the same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the
municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising
the same privilege within the municipality.
   (C)   Additional taxes. Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied
upon the taxpayer or its business.
   (D)   Collection.
      (1)   The tax authorized by this section shall be collected from the
purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
section and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall
constitute a debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering the
electricity; provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed
a credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for
which are written off as uncollectible; and, provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the person delivering electricity shall be
obligated to remit such tax. Persons delivering electricity shall collect that
tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering
the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add
to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person
delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing, and filing returns, remitting the tax, and supplying data
to the municipality upon request.
      (2)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from
the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to
the municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons
delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this division (D) shall, at
the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax
collected pursuant to this section.
   (E)   Reports to municipality.
      (1)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the village for the preceding month stating:
         (a)   His or her name;
         (b)   His or her principal place of business;
         (c)   His or her gross receipts and/or kilowatt hour usage during the
month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
         (d)   Amount of tax; and
         (e)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
      (2)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the
time of making such return, pay to the village the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he
or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings
of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable
gross receipts.
   (F)   Credit for overpayment.
      (1)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was
not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a
mistake of tact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against
any tax due under this section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior
to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
      (2)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-5) (Ord. 98-5, passed 7-7-1998; Ord. 98-11, passed 10-6-
1998)
§ 32.17 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   Pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes, the village hereby adopts the
simplified municipal telecommunications tax. A rate of 5.75% is to be collected
on gross charges by telecommunication retailers beginning January 1, 2003.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-6) (Ord. 2002-3, passed 9-3-2002)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of §
32.16 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $200, and in addition, shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-5)
(Ord. 98-5, passed 7-7-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2
CHAPTER 33: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
   
33.01   No official Police Department
§ 33.01 NO OFFICIAL POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The village’s Police Department was abolished in July 2010.
CHAPTER 34: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
Drug-Free Workplace
   
34.01   Title
   
34.02   Prohibited
   
34.03   Definitions
   
34.04   Procedures
State Acts and Policies Adopted
   
34.15   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
   
34.16   Whistleblower Protection Policy
   
34.17   Freedom of Information Act
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE
§ 34.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Village of Leaf River Drug-Free
Workplace Ordinance” or “this subchapter.”
(Prior Code, § 1-13-1) (Ord. 2003-2, passed 3-4-2003)
§ 34.02 PROHIBITED.
   Employees of the village shall not use illegal drugs, be under the influence
of alcohol, or have alcohol in his or her system such that business activities
are adversely affected. This policy relates only to individual behaviors while
in the scope of employment.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-2) (Ord. 2003-2, passed 3-4-2003)
§ 34.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. An employee, either full-time or part-time, and shall include
permanent and temporary employees of the village.
   ILLEGAL DRUG. Any drug:
      (1)   Which is not legally obtainable;
      (2)   Which may be legally obtainable but has not been legally obtained;
or
      (3)   Which is being used in a manner or for a purpose other than
prescribed.
   LEGAL DRUG. Includes prescribed drugs and over the counter drugs which have
been legally obtained and are being used solely for the purpose for which they
were prescribed or manufactured.
   UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
      (1)   An employee shall be determined under the influence of alcohol or
other drug if, in the course of employment for the village:
         (a)   The employee’s normal facilities are impaired due to consumption
of alcohol or other drug;
         (b)   The employee has a blood alcohol level of 0.04 or higher; and/or
         (c)   The employee is affected by an illegal drug, alcohol, or both in
any detectable manner.
      (2)   (a)   The symptoms of influence are not confined to those
consistent with misbehavior, nor to obvious impairment of physical or mental
ability, such as slurred speech or difficulty in maintaining balance.
         (b)   A determination of influence can be established by a layperson’s
opinion.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-3) (Ord. 2003-2, passed 3-4-2003)
§ 34.04 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   An employee must, within five days, notify the village of any finding
of guilt for a violation of the drug laws where such violation occurred in the
workplace.
   (B)   The village must notify any applicable state or federal funding
agencies within ten days after receiving notice from an employee that he or she
had been found guilty of the drug law.
   (C)   The village will maintain a policy notifying employees that the
unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of drugs
or controlled substances, or unauthorized use of or being under the influence
of alcohol, is prohibited in the workplace.
   (D)   A drug-free workplace acknowledgment form shall be signed by all
employees upon employment.
   (E)   The village will conduct a reasonable investigation if there is
reasonable cause to believe that there has been a violation of this policy.
   (F)   An employee determined to be in violation of this policy is guilty of
misconduct and is subject to disciplinary action which may include:
      (1)   Satisfactory completion of a drug abuse assistance program or drug
rehabilitation program as appropriate;
      (2)   Probationary status with specific objectives to be determined
depending on the situation; and/or
      (3)   Immediate termination.
   (G)   An employee reporting for the village work activities while under the
influence will not be allowed to work. If possible, the employee’s supervisor
should seek a conferring opinion on the status of the impaired employee. The
supervisor should consult privately with the employee to determine cause of
impairment. The supervisor or staff should arrange for the employee’s safe
transportation home.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-4) (Ord. 2003-2, passed 3-4-2003)
STATE ACTS AND POLICIES ADOPTED
§ 34.15 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of § 5-15 and Article 10 of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the
“Act” in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to
the officers and employees of the village to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/
70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village under the Act is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE shall be
defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section; however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the village.
§ 34.16 WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The village provides whistleblower protections in two
important areas: confidentiality and against retaliation. The confidentiality
of a whistleblower will be maintained to the extent allowable by law; however,
an identity may have to be disclosed to conduct a thorough investigation, to
comply with the law and to provide accused individuals their legal rights of
defense. A whistleblower may also waive confidentiality in writing. The village
will not retaliate against a whistleblower. This includes, but is not limited
to, protection from retaliation in the form of an adverse employment action
such as termination, compensation decreases, or poor work assignments and
threats of physical harm. Any whistleblowers who believe they are being
retaliated against must submit a written report to the auditing official within
60 days of gaining knowledge of the retaliatory action. The right of a
whistleblower for protection against retaliation does not include immunity for
any personal wrongdoing that is alleged and investigated.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      AUDITING OFFICIAL. Any elected, appointed or employed individual, by
whatever name, in the village whose duties may include: receiving, registering
and investigating complaints and information concerning misconduct,
inefficiency and waste within the village; investigating the performance of
officers, employees, functions and programs; and, promoting economy,
efficiency, effectiveness and integrity in the administration of the programs
and operations of the village.
         (a)   The AUDITING OFFICIAL shall be the Village Attorney, until
replaced by the village.
         (b)   If the village does not designate an AUDITING OFFICIAL, the
AUDITING OFFICIAL defaults to the State’s Attorney of Ogle County.
      EMPLOYEE. Anyone employed by the village, whether in a permanent or
temporary position, including full-time, part-time and intermittent workers.
EMPLOYEE also includes members of appointed boards or commissions, whether paid
or unpaid. EMPLOYEE also includes persons who have been terminated because of
any report or complaint submitted hereunder.
      IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION.
         (a)   Any action by an employee of the village; an appointed member of
a board, commission or committee; or, an elected official of the village that
is undertaken in violation of a federal or state law or local ordinance; is an
abuse of authority; violates the public’s trust or expectation of their
conduct; is of substantial and specific danger to the public’s health or
safety; or, is a gross waste of public funds. The action need not be within the
scope of the employee’s, elected official’s, board member’s, commission
member’s or committee member’s official duties to be subject to a claim of
IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION.
         (b)   IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION does not include the village
personnel actions, including, but not limited to, employee grievances,
complaints, appointments, promotions, transfers, assignments, reassignments,
reinstatements, restorations, reemployment, performance evaluations, reductions
in pay, dismissals, suspensions, demotions, reprimands or violations of
collective bargaining agreements, except to the extent that the action amounts
to retaliation.
      RETALIATE, RETALIATION or RETALIATORY ACTION. Any adverse change in an
employee’s employment status or the terms and conditions of employment that
results from an employee’s protected activity hereunder. RETALIATORY ACTION
includes, but is not limited to, denial of adequate staff to perform duties;
frequent staff changes; frequent and undesirable office changes; refusal to
assign meaningful work; unsubstantiated letters of reprimand or unsatisfactory
performance evaluations; demotion; reduction in pay; denial of promotion;
transfer or reassignment; suspension or dismissal; or, other disciplinary
action made because of an employee’s protected activity hereunder.
      WHISTLEBLOWER. An employee, as defined herein, of the village who:
         (a)   Reports an improper governmental action as defined under 50 ILCS
105/4.1;
         (b)   Cooperates with an investigation by an auditing official related
to a report of improper governmental action; or
         (c)   Testifies in a proceeding or prosecution arising out of an
improper governmental action.
   (C)   Duties of an auditing official.
      (1)   Each auditing official shall establish written processes and
procedures consistent with the terms of this policy and best practices for
investigations for managing complaints filed hereunder. Each auditing official
shall investigate and dispose of reports of improper governmental action in
accordance with these processes and procedures, and all other provisions
hereof.
      (2)   The auditing official must provide each employee a written summary
or a complete copy hereof upon commencement of employment and at least once
each year of employment. At the same time, the employee shall also receive a
copy of the written processes and procedures for reporting improper
governmental actions from the applicable auditing official.
      (3)   Auditing officials may reinstate, reimburse for lost wages or
expenses incurred, promote or provide some other form of restitution.
      (4)   In instances where an auditing official determines that restitution
will not suffice, the auditing official may make their investigation findings
available for the purposes of aiding in that employee’s, or the employee’s
attorney’s, effort to make the employee whole.
      (5)   Auditing officials are responsible for reading the full context
hereof and complying with all requirements.
      (6)   If no auditing official is designated, the State’s Attorney of Ogle
County will be the default auditing official.
   (D)   Duties of an employee.
      (1)   All reports of illegal and dishonest activities will be promptly
submitted to the auditing official who is responsible for investigating and
coordinating corrective action.
      (2)   If an employee has knowledge of, or a concern of, improper
governmental action, the employee shall make a written report of the activity
to the auditing official. The employee must exercise sound judgment to avoid
baseless allegations. An employee who intentionally files a false report of
wrongdoing will be subject to discipline up to and including termination.
      (3)   The whistleblower is not responsible for investigating the activity
or for determining fault or corrective measures; a designated auditing official
is charged with these responsibilities.
   (E)   Defend Trade Secrets Act compliance. Immunity from liability for
confidential disclosure of a trade secret to the government or in a court
filing:
      (1)   Immunity. An individual shall not be held criminally or civilly
liable under any federal or state trade secret law for the disclosure of a
trade secret that:
         (a)   Is made:
            1.   In confidence to a federal, state or local government
official, either directly or indirectly, or to an attorney; and
            2.   Solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a
suspected violation of law.
         (b)   Is made in a complaint or other document filed in a lawsuit or
other proceeding, if such filing is made under seal.
      (2)   Use of trade secret information in anti-retaliation lawsuit. An
individual who files a lawsuit for retaliation by an employer for reporting a
suspected violation of law may disclose the trade secret to the attorney of the
individual and use the trade secret information in the court proceeding, if the
individual:
         (a)   Files any document containing the trade secret under seal; and
         (b)   Does not disclose the trade secret, except pursuant to court
order (18 U.S.C. § 1833).
   (F)   Employee acknowledgment. Employees are required to sign a written
acknowledgement that they have received, read and understand this policy, and
to submit that acknowledgement to the auditing official or other designated
official of the village. The form that follows on page four of this policy will
satisfy this requirement upon receipt.
 
Employee Acknowledgment of Whistleblower Protection Policy
 
I confirm that I have received, read and understand the “Whistleblower Protection Policy” for employees of the village of Leaf River.
 
I understand that, as an employee, it is my responsibility to abide by this Policy. If I have questions about the Policy, I understand it is
my responsibility to seek clarification from the proper supervisory department, the Auditing Official or the State’s Attorney of Ogle County.
 
Print Name:                                                                        
Employee Signature:                                                            
Date:                                      
 
§ 34.17 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.
   (A)   The village adopts the Freedom of Information Act, 5 ILCS 140/1 et
seq., as revised by Public Act 96-0542, and as amended from time to time, which
is hereby incorporated by reference.
   (B)   Fees for copying and certification of records shall not exceed those
allowed by the Act.
   (C)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall serve as the Freedom
of Information Officer, and she shall meet all the requirements of that office
and shall comply with the act in fulfilling the duties of a Freedom of
Information Officer as providing therein.
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES
Section
   
50.01   Combined water and sewer service charges
   
50.02   Water service only charges
   
50.03   Service deposit
   
50.04   Bills for service; delinquencies
§ 50.01 COMBINED WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   There are hereby established rates or charges for the use of and for the
service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village
based upon the water consumed, as shown by the water meters as follows.
   (A)   For each residential user, the combined water and sewer charge shall
be $75, which shall be effective April 1, 2002, per quarter for each connection
to such combined system, which charge shall be made regardless of the quantity
of services supplied. With the exception of the Bertolet Memorial Building, all
remaining users of a combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be charged a
service charge of $120 per quarter for each connection to such combined system,
which charge shall be made regardless of the quantity of services supplied. In
addition to such minimum charge, the following charges shall be made:
 
First 2,000 gallons per month    $11.25 per month minimum
Next 1,000 gallons per month     $2 per 1,000 gallons
Next 1,000 gallons per month     $1.45 per 1,000 gallons
All over 4,000 gallons per month $1.15 per 1,000 gallons
 
   (B)   Any public school user of the combined water and sewerage system shall
be charged a service charge of $975 per quarter, effective April 1, 2002, for
each connection, which charge shall be made regardless of the quantity of
services supplied.
   (C)   A hydrant rental of not to exceed $30 per hydrant per year shall be
charged.
   (D)   (1)   The Bertolet Memorial Building shall be charged a service charge
of $96 per quarter for the combined water and sewerage system, which charge
shall be made regardless of quantity of service supplied.
      (2)   In addition, the Bertolet Memorial Pool shall be charged a flat
service charge of $150 one time per year to fill the public pool, with the
charge being billed in July of each year.
   (E)   Effective April 1, 2002, the sewer only charge shall be $21 per
quarter.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-1) (Ord. 1990, passed - -; Ord. 2000-1, passed 10-3-2000;
Ord. 2001-4, passed 12-5-2001)
Cross-reference:
   Compliance with building codes, see §
150.03
§ 50.02 WATER SERVICE ONLY CHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   For each residential user of water service only of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system, there shall be charged a service charge of $54
per quarter for each connection to the waterworks system only of the combined
system, which charge shall be made regardless of the quantity of water
supplied.
      (2)   For all remaining users of water service only of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system, there shall be charged a service charge of $81
per quarter for each connection to the waterworks system only of the combined
system, which charge shall be made regardless of the quantity of water
supplied.
      (3)   In addition to such minimum charge, the following charges shall be
made:
 
First 2,000 gallons per month    $11.25 per month minimum
Next 1,000 gallons per month     $2 per 1,000 gallons
Next 1,000 gallons per month     $1.45 per 1,000 gallons
All over 4,000 gallons per month $1.15 per 1,000 gallons
 
   (B)   For each user of the water service only that obtains water from a
hydrant, there shall be charged $0.01 per gallon supplied. This provision shall
not apply to the Village Fire Protection District.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-2) (Ord. 1990, passed - -; Ord. 2001-4, passed 12-5-2001)
§ 50.03 SERVICE DEPOSIT.
   A deposit of $40 shall be made with each application for water service or
for the reinstatement of said service, for a residential consumer, and the sum
of $40 for a commercial or industrial consumer. The deposit so required shall
be returned to the user upon termination of the service and upon payment by the
user of all amounts due the village for water or sewage service rendered. If,
at any time, the user shall fail to pay the village for the charges to which
the village is entitled for services rendered to such user, the Village Clerk
is hereby required to credit the amount owing by said user with all or so much
of said deposit as may be necessary to pay said charges. The provisions of this
section shall not be taken or deemed to be a waiver of the provisions for non-
payment of bills of this chapter (see § 50.04(B)) or of the right of the
village to refuse water and sewage treatment service to any person whose
account shall be unpaid.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-3)
§ 50.04 BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES.
   (A)   Rendition of bills. It is hereby made the duty of the Village Clerk to
render bills each quarter to the users of water and sewer and other charges in
connection therewith, and he or she shall collect all monies due therefor.
   (B)   Payment of bills. All users of the water and sewer systems of the
village shall pay the charges at the rates hereinabove provided, and such
charges shall be payable within 15 days after rendition thereof, and in the
event such bills are not paid within said 15-day period, a penalty of 10% shall
be added thereto.
   (C)   Delinquency procedures.
      (1)   Notice of delinquency; shutoff.
         (a)   In the event the charges for water service are not paid within
15 days after the rendition of the bill, then such service charges shall be
deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter, such
delinquent charges shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such
water services were supplied.
         (b)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized each quarter to file
sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of the county, and the filing of such statement shall be deemed notice of
a lien for the payment of such charges for service.
         (c)   If the delinquency in the payment of the water charges continues
for a period of more than 30 days, the water service may be discontinued. When
the water service has been discontinued by reason of a bill remaining unpaid
for 30 days after it is rendered, connection for restoring use of the water
system shall not be made except upon compliance with the provisions, including
payment of the fee required of §§
50.01 and
50.02. The statement of lien claim may be filed with the Recorder of Deeds by
the Village Clerk for any bill for water service which remains unpaid for 30
days after it has been rendered by the Village Clerk as in this section;
provided, the filing shall contain the legal description of the premises
served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a
lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water services subsequent
to the period covered by the bill.
         (d)   Notice of lien shall be mailed to the owner of such premises as
shown on the real estate tax records of the assessor’s office.
         (e)   The failure of the Village Clerk to record such lien claim or to
mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as in this section
provided.
      (2)   Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid water
charges shall be sold for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such
sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case
of the foreclosure of statutory liens.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-4) (Ord. 1990, passed - -)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Waterworks Committee
   
51.02   Number of houses per pipe
   
51.03   Two sources of supply prohibited
   
51.04   Vacancy permit
   
51.05   Water main extensions
   
51.06   Rights reserved to shut off or limit water supply
   
51.07   Fire hydrants, wrenches
   
51.08   Complaints
   
51.09   Tampering with meters
Use of System; Restrictions and Prohibitions
   
51.20   Interference with water facilities
   
51.21   Injury to water mains, hydrants
   
51.22   Excavations
   
51.23   Leaks and waste forbidden
   
51.24   Contamination
   
51.25   Climbing water tower
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 WATERWORKS COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Membership. The water distribution system and well shall be operated
under the direct supervision and control of the Water and Sewer Committee of
the Board of Trustees. Said Water and Sewer Committee shall consist of two
members of the Board of Trustees, appointed by the President for the term of
one year. The President shall be an ex officio member of said Water and Sewer
Committee.
   (B)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Water and Sewer Committee to
supervise and direct the laying of all service and public and private water
pipes in the streets, alleys and public grounds of the village; inspect all
lead-ins that in any way connect with said water system; supervise the tapping
of all water pipes or mains for either public or private use; direct all
necessary repairs in connection with said system and to control and direct all
turning on or cutting off of water subject only to review by the Board of
Trustees; said Committee shall report annually its activities, funds received
and disbursed and estimate for the coming year.
§ 51.02 NUMBER OF HOUSES PER PIPE.
   Under no circumstances shall more than one dwelling or business be connected
with any one service pipe, unless the President and Board of Trustees shall by
resolution authorize more than one dwelling or business building to be supplied
with water from one water service.
§ 51.03 TWO SOURCES OF SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall be permitted to cause a connection to be made or allow one
to exist between the village water supply and any private source of water
supply regardless of purpose for which said connection is used (the intent of
this section being to prohibit the possibility of any foreign substance coming
in contact with and contaminating any village water).
§ 51.04 VACANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   Any consumer who shall desire to vacate his property or for any other
purpose shall desire to cease using water for a definite period of time may
make application to the Village Clerk for a vacancy permit; whereupon the
Village Clerk, upon the receipt of $25 shall issue such vacancy permit and
cause the water to said, premises to be turned off at the shutoff box. Fourteen
days’ notification to the Village Clerk is required for water turn on.
   (B)   No vacancy permit shall be granted for less than a period of three
months.
   (C)   Any consumer who shall request a village employee to shut off their
water service before or after the employee’s regular working hours, shall pay
the village one and one-half times the hourly wage of said employee’s hourly
wage for all of the time incurred.
§ 51.05 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS.
   Applications for extension of laying of new water mains shall be made in
writing to the Board of Trustees of the village, and shall contain the names of
all possible consumers of water on said extension or new main; and shall also
contain the names of all persons who will connect with said main and the names
of all persons who will not connect with said main. All extensions and new
water mains shall be laid out and constructed entirely at the discretion of the
Board of Trustees of the village.
§ 51.06 RIGHT RESERVED TO SHUT OFF OR LIMIT WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   In case of emergency or for other reasonable cause, the village
reserves the right at any time without notice to shut off the water supply for
repairs, extensions or any other reason and the village shall not be
responsible for any damages, such as bursting of boilers, the breaking of any
pipes or fixtures, stoppages or interruptions of water supply or any other
damage or injury resulting from the shutting off of said water supply.
   (B)   (1)   The President of the Village Board and the Board of Trustees
have the right to regulate and control the use of public water distributed
through the distribution system of the village, which includes, but is not
limited to, the right to suspend the use of sprinkling of lawns, the use of
lawn fountains, the use of water for watering gardens, the use of water to fill
swimming pools or ponds and the use of water for bathing or consumption during
such time that public exigencies require it or a shortage of water exists or
said extension of the use of water is necessary for the health and welfare of
the citizens of the village.
      (2)   From June 1 through August 31, residents living on the south side
of east-west streets and residents living on the east side of north-south
streets shall water lawns or gardens or use water for other similar purposes
only on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Residents living on the north side of
east-west streets and residents living on the west side of north-south streets
shall water lawns or gardens or use water for other similar purposes only on
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. Any resident may water on Sunday.
   (C)   No resident shall water lawns or gardens or use water for other
similar purposes when a complete watering ban is in effect. Notice of such ban
will be displayed at the Village Hall and at the post office.
§ 51.07 FIRE HYDRANTS, WRENCHES.
   (A)   Fire hydrants.
      (1)   All hydrants erected in the village or which may hereafter be
erected for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public
hydrants and no person other than the Village President, members of the Board
of Trustees or their duly authorized agents shall at any time open any of said
hydrants or attempt to draw water from them in any manner or in any way
interfere with any of the said hydrants.
      (2)   Under no circumstances shall any water be withdrawn from any
hydrant for any purpose other than to extinguish a fire, flush out water mains
and sewers, or to supply water for public construction purposes.
   (B)   Fire hydrant wrenches. No person, other than the following, shall have
in his or her possession and use or own any fire hydrant wrench:
      (1)   The President of the Board of Trustees;
      (2)   The members of the Water and Sewer Committee;
      (3)   The Chief of Police;
      (4)   The Chief of the Fire Department; and/or
      (5)   The Village Clerk.
   (C)   Private hydrants. There shall be no private hydrants except as may be
authorized by the Board of Trustees.
§ 51.08 COMPLAINTS.
   All complaints concerning water service, water rates or any objection to the
operation of the water system of the village shall be made in writing,
addressed to the Board of Trustees of the village, and it shall be the duty of
the Board of Trustees to consider such complaint; take any necessary action
resulting therefrom and to report to the complainant what action has been taken
by said body in respect to said complaint.
§ 51.09 TAMPERING WITH METERS.
   (A)   Any consumer, resident or business suspected of tampering with the
water meter on their premises will be investigated. TAMPERING shall be defined
as any adjustment or changing of any water meter, water pipes or appurtenances
thereto which results in an inaccurate water meter reading. Upon investigation
of the inside and outside meter, if an initial determination of tampering is
made by a village employee, a final determination shall be made by the Village
Board.
   (B)   After a hearing before the Village Board following a seven-day written
notice to the consumer, resident or business after investigation and said
hearing if the Village Board finds proof of tampering, the following action
will be taken:
      (1)   Disconnect water service;
      (2)   Submit charges on amount used over and above what was paid for;
      (3)   Collect amount due on all unpaid water bills;
      (4)   A $1,500 fine shall be collected;
      (5)   A connection fee of $125 shall be required to resume service;
      (6)   Public works shall immediately investigate any negative water usage
reading;
      (7)   Only public works or a licensed plumber shall install, work on or
remove a water meter;
      (8)   Any time a water meter is worked on or removed by a licensed
plumber or by anyone else the homeowner is required to contact public works to
schedule an inspection; and
      (9)   Administrating review of said village board action may be filed
with the Circuit Court of Ogle County by any aggrieved party.
USE OF SYSTEM; RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS
§ 51.20 INTERFERENCE WITH WATER FACILITIES.
   No person shall wilfully, carelessly or unintentionally break, deface, mar,
injure, interfere with or disturb the well or its fixtures, nor any machinery,
apparatus, water tower, water main, public hydrant, private hydrant, shut-off
valve, service pipe or any other appurtenances to the water system of the
village; nor shall any person deposit anything in any stopcock box or shut-off
valve box, or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of
any of the above mentioned appurtenances, without first securing the permission
of the President and Board of Trustees of the village.
§ 51.21 INJURY TO WATER MAINS, HYDRANTS.
   Any person who may be working in paving, repairing or using any street or
streets of the village who shall molest or in any way damage the village water
mains or appurtenances thereto shall be responsible to the village for any and
all such damages, and such person, his or her heirs, representatives or assigns
shall bear all expense of such replacement or repair made necessary thereby.
§ 51.22 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall make any excavations in any of the streets, alleys or
other public places in the village for the purpose of laying water pipes, or
tapping any water main or making any connections with any water tap or water
service pipe, or to repair any water pipe without first obtaining the consent
in writing of the President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   (B)   Under no circumstances shall any person be permitted to make any
excavation either in any street, or upon any private property while the ground
is frozen, which excavation is within five feet of any water pipe or water
main, or any appurtenance of said water system.
   (C)   All excavations made for the purpose of laying service pipes shall be
at least five feet in depth, and there shall be at least a four and one-half
foot earth cover over all service pipes from the main to the dwelling or
business house.
§ 51.23 LEAKS AND WASTE FORBIDDEN.
   It shall be the duty of all consumers of water, at any and all times, to
exercise due diligence to prevent waste of said water supply and to this end
shall stop all leaks on their premises, and the village water supply may be
shut off from any and all premises until such violation of this section is
corrected.
§ 51.24 CONTAMINATION.
   No privy, cesspool, septic tank, vault and the like shall be constructed on
any property within the village.
§ 51.25 CLIMBING WATER TOWER.
   It is made unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized agent of the
Board of Trustees of the village to climb on the water tower or standpipe of
said water distribution system; and any person who shall climb or in any way
loiter around the standpipe shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   For the violation of any section of this chapter or any sections which
hereafter may be adopted, the Board of Trustees reserves the right to cut off
the supply of water following seven days’ notice and hearing before the Village
Board at its next regular meeting. No service will be restored until all back
water rents, costs and damages shall be paid, together with the fee of $50 for
the expense of turning on said water, and a satisfactory understanding that no
further cause of complaint shall arise.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who draws water from a fire hydrant or public
hydrant, without first securing the permission of the President and Board of
Trustees of the village, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and
not more than $500 for the first offense plus paying to the village the cost of
the water which was released from said hydrant, as estimated by the Village
Board of Trustees. The minimum fine for the second offense shall be $200, and
for a third offense $300, and for a fourth offense $500, plus the cost of the
water, as determined by the Village Board of Trustees.
      (2)   Any person who damages any fire hydrant or public hydrant shall be
fined no less than $100 and no more than $500, and shall also pay the cost of
the damage to said hydrant, as determined by the Village Board of Trustees,
which cost shall include both labor and material to restore the hydrant.
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Private sewage disposal
   
52.03   Building sewers and connections
   
52.04   Cost borne by owner
   
52.05   Prohibited connections
   
52.06   Building sewers; materials; construction
   
52.07   Powers and authority of inspectors; inspection
   
52.08   Use of storm water drains
Sewer Use Standards
   
52.20   Discharge of harmful substances
   
52.21   Interceptors
   
52.22   Flow equalizing facilities
   
52.23   Control manhole
   
52.24   Compliance
   
52.25   Testing
   
52.26   Industrial waste
   
52.27   Discharge into sanitary sewer
   
52.28   Discharge into storm sewers
   
52.29   Prohibited deposits
   
52.30   Unlawful construction of sewage facilities
   
52.31   Mandatory sewer hookup
Use of Public Sewers
   
52.45   Storm and unpolluted waters prohibited; discharge of
   
52.46   Prohibited wastes
   
52.47   Procedure regarding undesirable wastes
   
52.48   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
52.49   Measurements, tests, analyses
   
52.50   Protection from damage
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The President and Board of Trustees of the village
acting by and through the Superintendent of Waterworks and Sewerage System
being their duly authorized agent or representative.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other
approved point of discharge, beginning ten feet (3.0 m) outside the inner face
of the building wall.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector of the village or his or her
authorized deputy, agent or representative as designated by the Village Board
of Trustees.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permits.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the MANHOLE shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of the CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for a village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of revenue bonds outstanding and shall be
computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number or users connected
to the wastewater facilities.
   DIRECTOR. The chief administrative officer of the State Environmental
Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. Government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II - Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a “compatible pollutant,”
as defined herein.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   For the purpose of industrial cost recovery, said term shall mean
any nongovernmental use of publicly owned treatment works identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
         (a)   Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
         (b)   Division B, Mining;
         (c)   Division D, Manufacturing;
         (d)   Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
         (e)   Division I, Services.
      (2)   A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined
by the Superintendent that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL USER, for the purpose of developing the user charge
system, may be a manufacturing or processing facility which is engaged in a
productive and profit-making enterprise.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. (INFILTRATION does
not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.)
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quality of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar,
yard and area drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling water discharges;
drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers, cross connections from
storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff,
street wash waters or drainage. (INFLOW does not include, and is distinguished
from, infiltration.)
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 10,000 gallons or more per average workday;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Act; or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the
waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters (ml) of
water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to
which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the
United States pursuant to § 402 of Pub. Law No. 92-500.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, direct and indirect, (other than
debt service) necessary to ensure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing
basis, conforming with related federal, state and local requirements, and
assuring optimal long-term facility management. (These costs include
depreciation and replacement.)
   PPM. Parts per million by weight.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed in grams per liter of solution. It shall be determined
by one of the procedures outlined in “Standard Methods”.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One POPULATION EQUIVALENT is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated as the
equivalent of the highest of the three parameters. Impact on a stream is the
higher of the BOD suspended solids parameters.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer dedicated to or provided by or subject to the
jurisdiction of the village consisting of collector sewer, interceptor sewer,
force main and pumping station. It shall also include sewers within or outside
the village boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge
into the village sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have
been constructed with village funds.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes
REPLACEMENT.
   RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL USER. Nonindustrial user, shall mean any user of
the treatment works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an
industrial user as provided for in the definition of “industrial user” in this
section.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residence, business
building, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices, structures and equipment
for treating sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SHALL, MAY. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissible.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY. Any industry that will contribute greater than 10% of
the design flow and/or design pollutant loading of the treatment works.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage
and Industrial Wastes”, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Federation of Sewage
and Industrial Wastes Association.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. The portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
sewers.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Waterworks and Sewerage System of
the village or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal
sewage.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods” as
defined in this section.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the treatment works will be
operated and shall be 30 years from the date of start up of any wastewater
facilities constructed with a federal grant.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance including replacement of such works pursuant to § 204
(b) of Pub. Law No. 92-500 and the cost of any bond debt of such works and
shall consist of both basic user charges and surcharges.
   USER CLASS. The type of user either “residential or commercial” or
“industrial” as defined in this section.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. It may be a combination of the
liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water, surface
water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or POLLUTION CONTROL
PLANT.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all
revenues received and expenses incurred in the operation of the waterworks and/
or sewerage system. These revenues and expenses shall be segregated so that
water system revenues and expenses shall be recorded in the Waterworks Account
of the WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND and revenues and expenses of the sewerage
system shall be recorded in the Sewerage Account of the WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE
FUND.
§ 52.02 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   A private sewage disposal system will not be allowed within the
village. In the event a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions hereof, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent of the Waterworks and Sewerage System. The application for such
permit shall be made on a form furnished by the village, which the applicant
shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are
deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $50
shall be paid to the Village Treasurer at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours
of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent, exclusive of weekends.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health
of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 30,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided herein, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned. The building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within 60 days
and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with clean bank run gravel or dirt compacted and maintained in a safe
condition.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the village.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the village.
§ 52.03 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No unauthorized person shall make any connection with any public
sewer, nor make any excavation in any street or alley for the purpose of making
any connection with a public sewer, or for the purpose of laying any sewer pipe
or altering or repairing the same, without first obtaining a written permit
from the Superintendent of the Waterworks and Sewerage System.
      (2)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful,
except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated
pursuant to the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be three classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential services;
         (b)   For commercial services; and
         (c)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the village. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. An inspection fee
of $100 shall be paid to the Village Clerk at the time the application is
filed. This inspection fee is in addition to the sewer connection tap-on fee as
set forth in the village ordinances, the provisions of which are expressly made
a part hereof and also in addition to user charge fees, the provisions of which
are detailed herein. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must
provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and
type of activity.
      (3)   An additional fee of $25 will be charged for all inspections
required other than during the regular 40-hour workweek.
      (4)   Each excavation for any of the above purposes shall require a
separate permit.
      (5)   Any person who makes any excavation, or does any other work without
first securing the permit required by this section, shall in addition to any
other penalty imposed by §
52.99, pay to the Clerk within 24 hours of receipt of demand therefor, the sum
of $100 for the purpose of paying the fees of the Building Inspector. Such
inspector shall thereupon make an inspection as in other cases. Failure to pay
the said sum on demand as provided shall constitute a separate violation.
      (6)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sanitary sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately handle the additional
anticipated waste load.
§ 52.04 COST BORNE BY OWNER.
   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
§ 52.05 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer. In no case shall any person be
permitted to maintain, without the consent of the approving authority, any
sewer connection connecting a building owned by him or her to the public sewer
across or under the property of another.
   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent of the
Waterworks and Sewerage System to meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 52.06 BUILDING SEWERS; MATERIALS; CONSTRUCTION.
   The methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
village.
   (A)   (1)   Each connection shall be made at the “Y” designated for that
property. Only where the designated “Y” is not located within three feet of the
point of measurements furnished by the Superintendent of the Waterworks and
Sewerage System, will a tap-in connection be allowed.
      (2)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials and the
Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such
connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent
before installation.
      (3)   The person making the connection shall make an opening in the main
sewer similar to the interior diameter of the “Y” branch and then properly
cement and attach a saddle in place. The saddle shall have a suitable curvature
to conform to the outside diameter of the public sewer.
   (B)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Codes, or other applicable rules and regulations of
the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (C)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (D)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (E)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. Each and every part of a sewer connection shall be
inspected and approved by the Waterworks Superintendent or his or her
representative before being concealed or backfilled.
   (F)   (1)   Any person filling in an excavation without having first
received the written approval of the sewer or building inspector as provided in
this chapter, shall, in addition to suffering the fine herein imposed, expose
the sewer for inspection by the Superintendent or Building Inspector at no cost
to the village. In any case where the Inspector finds the work on any sewer not
done in a satisfactory manner as herein provided, he or she shall serve written
notice on the person to whom the permit is issued, stating wherein such work is
deficient, and ordering said person to remedy such defect within 24 hours. In
the event such person fails to comply therewith, the Inspector shall cause such
defect to be corrected at the expense of the person to whom the permit was
issued. The sum of $25 as herein provided shall be paid to the Clerk as a fee
for the performance of the inspector, and it shall be the duty of the Inspector
to inspect any sewer connection or sewer pipe within the village. It shall also
be the duty of said Inspector to inform the approving authority of any
violation of this section, and to assist in the prosecution of offenders.
      (2)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall comply with
the provisions of this code relating to excavations in streets and shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
§ 52.07 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS; INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Superintendent of the Waterworks and Sewerage System and other
duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent or his or her
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   The Superintendent of the Waterworks and Sewerage System and other
duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 52.08 USE OF STORM WATER DRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect or cause
to be connected, any drain carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement,
septic tank, cesspool, industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging
polluting substances, to any storm water drain in the village.
SEWER USE STANDARDS
§ 52.20 DISCHARGE OF HARMFUL SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics which, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Engineer may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
   (B)   If the Engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants, and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Engineer, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
§ 52.21 INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand,
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Engineer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
§ 52.22 FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment of flow equalizing facilities is provided, such
facilities shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense.
§ 52.23 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole when required shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Engineer. The manhole and
equipment shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 52.24 COMPLIANCE.
   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analysis of waters and
wastes to illustrate compliance with this section and any special conditions
for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type, and frequency of laboratory
analysis to be performed by the owner shall be stipulated by the village, but
no less than twice per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharged to assure that compliance with the
federal, state, and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analysis to the engineer at such times
and in such manner as he or she prescribes. The owner shall bear the expense of
all measurements, analysis, and reporting required by the village. At such time
as deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
§ 52.25 TESTING.
   (A)   All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be determined in
accordance with that publication entitled “Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater”, fifteenth edition, published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
   (B)   The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken.
§ 52.26 INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
   No statement contained herein shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern whereby
an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the
village for treatment, subject to payment by the industrial concern.
§ 52.27 DISCHARGE INTO SANITARY SEWER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
§ 52.28 DISCHARGE INTO STORM SEWERS.
   Storm water, roof runoff and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to
a natural outlet approved by the Engineer. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Engineer to a
storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 52.29 PROHIBITED DEPOSITS.
   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the village, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or
other objectionable waste.
§ 52.30 UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION OF SEWAGE FACILITIES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
§ 52.31 MANDATORY SEWER HOOKUP.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer in the village, is hereby
required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in a
manner approved by the Superintendent of the Waterworks and Sewerage system
within 90 days after the official notice so to do, provided that said public
sewer is within 200 feet (61 m) of the property line.
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 52.45 STORM AND UNPOLLUTED WATERS PROHIBITED; DISCHARGE OF.
   (A)   Discharge prohibited. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Discharge of storm and unpolluted waters. Storm water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
Superintendent of the Waterworks and Sewerage System. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.
§ 52.46 PROHIBITED WASTES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant, or to cause the effluent from the treatment works to
violate applicable effluent standards;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths
(5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structure, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; and
      (4)   Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes to any public sewers if it
appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, as determined in the NPDES permit received by
the village or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these
waters, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The
substances prohibited including all limitations and prohibitions imposed by the
NPDES permit of the village are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l) or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F
and 150°F and 0°C and 65°C;
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourth
horsepower (0.76 horsepower, metric) or greater shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Superintendent;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances beyond the maximum allowable
concentrations as determined by the Superintendent.
         (a)   The Superintendent will evaluate each toxic or objectionable
substance waste on a concentration-dilution basis and will establish maximum
allowable discharge concentrations for each individual person to protect
against the following:
            1.   Decreased sewage plant treatment process efficiencies and
degraded effluent qualities exceeding the current requirements of the
regulatory agencies;
            2.   Concentrations of any toxic or objectionable substance in the
sewage treatment plant effluent exceeding the current maximum limits
established by the regulatory agencies for such plant effluent flows; and
            3.   Any concentrations of toxic or objectionable substances in
plant effluent flows which will result in concentrations of such substances in
the receiving waters which will exceed the regulatory agency’s maximum
allowable limits for these substances in the receiving waters.
         (b)   Any waters containing mercury or any of its compounds in excess
of 0.0005 milligrams per liter as Hg at any time;
         (c)   No waste discharged to the municipal sewer system shall contain
detectable levels of cyanide at any time, except as permitted below;
         (d)   Any person desiring to discharge cyanide or cyanogen compounds
to the municipal sewer system shall apply for and procure approval from the
village. The application shall contain sufficient information on discharge
concentrations, flows and the like to provide adequate data to enable the
village and its representatives to evaluate the discharge and secure required
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency approval;
         (e)   When permitted, total cyanide shall not exceed ten milligrams
per liter, provided any sample tested shall not release more than two
milligrams per liter of cyanide when tested at a pH of 4.5 and at a temperature
of 150°F for a period of 30 minutes. Such discharges shall be permitted only
when the agency has determined that no violation of the effluent criteria of
0.025 milligrams per liter concentration (alone or in combination with other
sources) will result from such discharge;
         (f)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; and
         (g)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (6)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (7)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs”, as defined herein.
      (8)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters including the NPDES permit of the
village; and
      (9)   All exhaust from steam engines and all blowoffs from steam boilers
shall be first connected with a proper basin, and shall not be allowed to
connect directly with the public sewers without special permission from the
approving authority.
§ 52.47 PROCEDURE REGARDING UNDESIRABLE WASTES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics of this chapter, and/or which are in violation of the
standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations,
subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment Standards, Federal
Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and amendments
thereto, and which, in the judgment of the Superintendent of the Waterworks and
Sewerage System, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes, and require the violator to cease and desist
discharging said materials into the sewer system immediately;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers; and/or
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and also
require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes
not covered by the existing sewer charges.
   (B)   If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to review and approval of the village and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws of the village.
§ 52.48 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Superintendent of the Waterworks and Sewerage System, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except
that, such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection.
§ 52.49 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS, ANALYSES.
   (A)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Waste Water”, published by the American Public Health Association or
Manual of Laboratory Methods for Sewage Plants published by the Illinois
Department of Public Health. Substances shall be determined at the control
manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.) Normally, but
not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour
composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab
samples.
   (B)   (1)   Any person discharging wastes having concentrations greater than
the “normal” concentrations as set forth herein shall, upon notification by the
approving authority, install a composite sampler with a compatible pacing
(metering) device for monitoring said substances. The pacing and sampling
devices shall be of a type approved by the Superintendent.
      (2)   All testing and measuring procedures for the analysis of pollutants
shall be in conformance with title 40 C.F.R. part 136.
   (C)   The cost of all required measurements, tests and analyses shall be
borne by the contributor.
   (D)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
presenting any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, by the industrial concern,
provided such payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for
user charge system and industrial cost recovery system.
§ 52.50 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A)(1) above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in §
10.99 for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day in which any such violation shall continue.
      (3) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
village by reason of such violation.
   (B) Any person, firm or corporation violating §
52.08 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during
which a violation continues or exists.
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
Section
   
53.01   Duty of occupants
   
53.02   Prohibited materials
   
53.03   Collection of refuse
   
53.04   Collection of recyclables
   
53.05   Dumpsters
   
53.06   Garbage and debris removal
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DUTY OF OCCUPANTS.
   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any
residence in the village to place all garbage, refuse or waste in approved
receptacles as set forth and defined hereinbelow.
   (A)   The refuse material shall be placed in bags not exceeding a capacity
of 30 gallons with a 50-pound limit per bag.
   (B)   Residents shall be furnished a recycling bin by the village for
disposal of glass, plastic, metal cans and other recyclable materials
designated by the village by ordinance.
§ 53.02 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   Residents shall not place for collection rocks, broken concrete, Christmas
trees, hot ashes, and bulky items, including, but not limited to, large
furniture, refrigerators, stoves, water heaters, hazardous materials, materials
resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of any
structure or from manufacturing, commercial, industrial or agricultural
processes.
§ 53.03 COLLECTION OF REFUSE.
   Collection of refuse shall take place one time per week for all residences.
A week is determined as Monday through Friday. If the collection schedule falls
on a holiday, the collection days of that week will be set back one day, after
the holiday. Holidays are New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas Day. All refuse materials to be collected will
be placed at curb location by 6:00 a.m. local time on the day of collection.
§ 53.04 COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLES.
   Each residence shall be provided with one recycling bin for recyclable
material as defined below. Damaged bins which are no longer usable due to
normal wear and tear will be exchanged. Collection of recyclable materials
shall take place as defined hereinbelow.
   (A)   All recycling materials shall be placed in the bin provided by the
village at curb location by 6:00 a.m. local time on the day of collection.
RECYCLING MATERIALS shall be defined as clean glass, clean plastic, clean metal
cans, and newspapers and magazines.
   (B)   Collection of all recycling materials from residences shall take place
one time per week. If the collection schedule falls on a holiday, the
collection days of that week will be set back one day, after the holiday.
Holidays are New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas Day.
§ 53.05 DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   DUMPSTERS are defined as garbage collection containers larger than 33
gallons in capacity and used to mechanically tip refuse/garbage directly into a
garbage truck.
   (B)   Dumpsters are prohibited on single-family residentially zoned
properties except for reasonable periods of time during demolition,
construction, or remodeling of structures on the property.
   (C)   Any village resident in need of a dumpster during demolition,
construction, or remodeling of structures on his, her or their property are
required to purchase a $5 permit from the Village Hall stating the purpose and
length of time needed.
§ 53.06 GARBAGE AND DEBRIS REMOVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow garbage or debris to be located
upon his or her property. Any violation of this section shall be deemed a
public nuisance.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      DEBRIS. Materials, which are placed outside in a haphazard manner, which
may create rodent and pest harborage of items, which are not intended or
customarily stored outdoors, and if left exposed and unprotected from the
elements have, or potentially will, deteriorate by reason of vandalism,
moisture, and exposure. Such materials can include rubbish and items which
might otherwise be considered usable such as furniture, appliances, boards,
cardboard boxes or items, clothing, dishes, machinery and so forth.
      GARBAGE. Offal; refuse, animal or vegetable matter; or trash.
      RUBBISH. Waste or rejected matter.
      TRASH. Worn out, broken up, or worthless things; and refuse.
   (B)   Notice to remove; failure to abate; lien.
      (1)   Any owner or tenant who, if given a ten-day notice in writing from
the village clerk to remove garbage, debris or graffiti, shall remove such
garbage or debris within such ten-day period. If the owner or tenant, after
receipt of such notice, refuses or neglects to remove such garbage or debris,
the village may remove the same and collect from the owner of the premises the
reasonable costs thereof. Within 60 days after such cost and expense is
incurred by the village, the Village Clerk shall file a notice in the office of
the County Recorder of Deeds consisting of a sworn statement setting out:
         (a)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the service; and
         (c)   The date when such cost and expense was incurred by the
municipality.
      (2)   Such notice shall be addressed to the owner of such real estate.
This notice shall be a lien upon the real estate affected superior to all
subsequent liens and encumbrances except tax liens. However, the lien of the
village shall not be valid as to any purchasers whose rights in and to such
real estate have arisen subsequent to removal of the garbage and debris and
prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of such municipality shall not
be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien holder whose
rights in and to such real estate arose prior to the filing of such notice. The
lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or
mechanics’ liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two
years after the date of filing the notice of a lien as is set forth in 65 ILCS
5/11-20-13.
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, persons, corporations, firms or organizations which shall
violate §
53.05 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $200 plus court costs.
Each day any violation of §
53.05 shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person, corporation, firm or organization which shall violate any
provision of §
53.06 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750, plus costs of court.
Each day any violation of §
53.06 shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
74.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   State law adopted
§ 70.01 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   In lieu of using any section or in addition to any section of this title,
the officer issuing a citation may issue it by using any of the sections of the
State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS, as the same may be amended, from time to time,
which are incorporated and adopted by reference as a part of this chapter,
three copies of said code having been on file in the office of the Village
Clerk and available for public use, inspection, and examination for at least 30
days prior to the effective date hereof as provided in 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2. All
citations issued for these violations shall be in the name of the village and
shall refer to the numbered sections in the State Vehicle Code, but shall also
be referred to as an ordinance violation in the traffic ticket or complaint.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Encroachments on public right-of-way; parking restricted
   
71.02   Loading zones
   
71.03   Parking in alleys
   
71.04   Time limit parking
   
71.05   Parking after a snowstorm
   
71.06   Parking motor vehicles on private property
   
71.07   Signs to be posted
   
71.08   Parking vehicles for sale or for peddling merchandise
§ 71.01 ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; PARKING RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ENCROACHMENT. Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or object
of any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs) which is
placed, located, or maintained in, on, under, or over any portion of the
roadway right-of-way.
      ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those existing or acquired by dedication or by fee
simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect.
   (B)   Erection of encroachments prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to erect or cause to be erected to retain or cause to be retained an
encroachment (defined in division (A) above) within the limits of the roadway
right-of-way.
   (C)   Additional provisions. This section is intended to and shall be in
addition to all other ordinances, rules, and regulations concerning
encroachments, and shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any other
ordinance or part of any ordinance unless in direct conflict therewith.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Specific areas with restriction on parking, see
Chapter 74, Schedule I
§ 71.02 LOADING ZONES.
   During the times specified herein, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a
vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for longer than is necessary to load or
unload passengers, not to exceed three minutes, and for the driver to stand any
freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load,
unload, and deliver materials not to exceed 30 minutes at any of the following
places:
   (A)   In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night;
   (B)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance
to any hospital or hotel at any time;
   (C)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance
to a public building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sunday; and
   (D)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time the
theater is open for business.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-1) (Ord. passed 11-1-1977) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.03 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of width of roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or
park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway
entrance to any abutting property.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-2) (Ord. passed 11-1-1977) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.04 TIME LIMIT PARKING.
   Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for
a longer consecutive period of time than that designated between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in any area designated as a limited parking area and so
marked.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-3) (Ord. passed 11-1-1977) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.05 PARKING AFTER A SNOWSTORM.
   (A)   Parking on public streets restricted. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park any vehicle on any public street in the village at any time
after a snowfall of two inches or more has accumulated unless the snow has been
plowed or otherwise removed from the street in the area surrounding all sides
of such parked vehicle, except:
      (1)   Vehicles may be parked on that side of the street where the even
numbered buildings are or would be located between the hours of 7:00 a.m. on
that day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day on even calendar days; and
      (2)   Vehicles may be parked on that side of the street where the odd
numbered buildings are or would be located between the hours of 7:00 a.m. that
day and 7:00 a.m. on the following day on odd calendar days.
   (B)   Violations.
      (1)   Vehicles to be towed. The Police Department and all members thereof
assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have
removed and towed away, by commercial towing service, any vehicle which is
parked in violation of division (A) above.
      (2)   Towing fees and charges. Vehicles so towed for illegal parking
shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle on the payment of a
fee of $15, plus all towing, storage, and related costs if such payment is made
within 48 hours after such time the vehicle was removed, and for any payments
made subsequent to the first 48-hour period, there shall be paid an additional
$25 for each additional 48-hour period or fraction thereof. Vehicles not
restored to their owners within 15 days shall be considered abandoned vehicles
and shall be disposed of in accordance with §§
90.35 through 90.40.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-4) (Ord. passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 2002-1, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 71.06 PARKING MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-5) (Ord. passed 11-1-1977) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.07 SIGNS TO BE POSTED.
   The President, with the advice and consent of the Village Board, shall cause
signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited,
indicating such limitations or prohibitions.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-6) (Ord. passed 11-1-1977)
§ 71.08 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE OR FOR PEDDLING MERCHANDISE.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale or to park any vehicle upon any business street from
which vehicle merchandise is peddled.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-7) (Ord. passed 11-1-1977) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles
   
72.01   Regulations
Non-Highway Vehicles, Low-Speed Vehicles
   
72.15   Operation
   
72.16   Definitions
   
72.17   Regulations
   
72.18   Insurance requirements
   
72.19   Seatbelts required
   
72.20   Permit required
 
   
72.99   Penalty
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.01 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Snowmobiles may operate within the village limits of the village upon
an approved snowmobile route as marked by signs placed under the authority of
village officials.
   (B)   No snowmobile shall be operated in excess of 20 mph.
   (C)   Each person operating a snowmobile shall observe all traffic signs and
signals, and all of the rules and regulations applying to traffic within the
village.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1) (Ord. 2004-2, passed 2-3-2004) Penalty, see §
72.99
Cross-reference:
   Specific areas with restrictions on operating a snowmobile, see
Chapter 73, Schedule II
NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES, LOW-SPEED VEHICLES
§ 72.15 OPERATION.
   The use of non-highway and low-speed vehicles on the streets, roadways, and
alleys of the village shall be permissible subject to the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-2, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 72.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway device designed to travel
primarily off-highway, 50 inches or less in width, having a manufacturer’s dry
weight of 1,500 pounds or less, traveling on four or more non-highway tires,
designed with a seat or saddle for operator use, and handlebars or steering
wheel for steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons aud their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
   LOW-SPEED VEHICLE. Any four-wheeled vehicle with a maximum speed greater
than 20 mph, but not greater than 25 mph, that conforms with the federal motor
vehicle safety standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 571.500.
   NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE. A self-propelled, electric-powered, four-wheeled motor
vehicle (or a self-propelled, gasoline-powered, four-wheeled motor vehicle with
an engine displacement under 1,200 cubic centimeters) that is capable of
attaining in one mile a speed of more than 20 mph, but not more than 25 mph,
and which does not conform to federal regulations under 49 C.F.R. § 571.500.
   NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle not specifically designed to be used on
a public highway, including:
      (1)   An all-terrain vehicle;
      (2)   A golf cart;
      (3)   A neighborhood vehicle;
      (4)   An off-highway motorcycle; and
      (5)   A recreational off-highway vehicle.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Any motorized device designed to travel primarily
off-highway on two wheels, having a seat or saddle for the use of the operator,
upon or by which any person, persons or property may be transported or drawn.
   RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway device designed
to travel primarily off-highway, 64 inches or less in width, having a
manufacturer’s dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less, traveling on four or more
non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for
steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers.
(Ord. 2018-2, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 72.17 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a non-highway vehicle at any time from
November 1 of every year to April 30 of the following year.
      (2)   No non-highway vehicle may be operated at a speed limit in excess
of 15 mph.
      (3)   All non-highway vehicles shall be operated only on streets where
the posted speed limit is 35 mph or less. The foregoing provision shall not
prohibit a non-highway vehicle from crossing a road or street at an
intersection where the road or street has a posted speed limit of more than 35
mph.
      (4)   A person may not operate a non-highway vehicle upon any street,
highway, or roadway unless he or she:
         (a)   Is 21 years of age or older; and
         (b)   Has a valid driver’s license issued in his or her name by the
Secretary of State, or such other applicable foreign jurisdiction.
      (5)   No person operating a non-highway vehicle shall make a direct
crossing upon or across any tollroad, interstate highway, or controlled access
highway. No person operating a non-highway vehicle shall make a direct crossing
upon or across any other highway under the jurisdiction of the state except at
an intersection of the highway with another public street, road, or highway.
      (6)   No non-highway vehicle may be operated on a roadway unless, at a
minimum, it has the following: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview
mirror, red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving
emblem (as required of other vehicles in § 12-709 of the State Vehicle Code,
being 625 ILCS 5/12-709) on the rear of the non-highway vehicle, a headlight
that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front, a
tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100 feet from the rear,
brake lights, and turn signals. When operated on a roadway, a non-highway
vehicle shall have its headlight and tail lamps lighted as required by § 12-201
of the State Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/12-201.
      (7)   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a non-
highway vehicle on a roadway while under the influence is subject to §§ 11-500
through 11-502 of the State Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 5/11-
502, and all other applicable laws.
      (8)   The operation of a non-highway vehicle upon any street, roadway, or
alley is subject to the provisions of Chapter 11 of the State Vehicle Code,
being 625 ILCS 5/11, concerning the rules of the road and all applicable
village ordinances, as the same may be amended from time to time.
      (9)   No person shall be permitted to operate an off-highway motorcycle
upon any street, roadway, or alley in the village unless said off-highway
motorcycle meets all of the requirements of the State Vehicle Code and is
licensed to travel on streets thereunder.
      (10)   No non-highway vehicle shall be operated on any village sidewalks
or other surfaces other than village streets.
      (11)   Non-highway vehicles shall be permitted to operate at only the
following times: on Mondays through Thursdays, from 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.;
on Fridays and Saturdays, from 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.; and on Sundays, from
6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.
   (B)   (1) No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle at any time from
November 1 of every year to April 30 of the following year.
      (2)   No low-speed vehicle may be operated at a speed limit in excess of
15 mph.
      (3)   All low-speed vehicles shall be operated only on streets were the
posted speed limit is 35 mph or less. The foregoing provision shall not
prohibit a low-speed vehicle from crossing a road or street at an intersection
where the road or street has a posted speed limit of more than 35 mph, subject
to the conditions set forth in division (B)(4) below.
      (4)   Low-speed vehicles may cross a street at an intersection where the
street being crossed has a posted speed limit of not more than 45 mph. Low-
speed vehicles may not cross a street with a speed limit in excess of 45 mph
unless the crossing is at an intersection controlled by a traffic light or
four-way stop sign.
      (5)   (a)   No low-speed vehicle may be operated on any street unless, at
a minimum, it has the following: a parking brake, a steeling apparatus, tires,
a windshield that conforms to the federal safety standards on glazing materials
as set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 571.205, a vehicle identification number, seat
belts, a rearview mirror, an exterior rearview mirror mounted on the driver’s
side of the vehicle, red reflectorized warning devices on each rear side and
one on the center rear of the vehicle, a headlight that emits a white light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front, a tail lamp that emits a red
light visible from at least 100 feet from the rear, brake lights, and front and
rear turn signals.
         (b)   When operated on a street, a low-speed vehicle shall have its
headlight and tail lamps lighted as required by § 12-201 of the State Vehicle
Code, being 625 ILCS 5/12-201.
      (6)   A person may not operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street,
highway, or roadway unless he or she:
         (a)   Is 21 years of age or older; and
         (b)   Has a valid driver’s license issued in his or her name by the
Secretary of State, or such other applicable foreign jurisdiction.
      (7)   The operation of a low-speed vehicle upon any street, roadway, or
alley is subject to the provisions of Chapter 11 of the State Vehicle Code,
being 625 ILCS 5/11, concerning the rules of the road and all applicable
village ordinances, as the same may be amended from time to time.
      (8)   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a low-speed
vehicle on a roadway while under the influence is subject to §§ 11-500 through
11-502 of the State Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 5/11-502, and
all other applicable laws.
      (9)   No low-speed vehicle shall be operated on any village sidewalks or
other surfaces other than village streets.
      (10)   Low-speed vehicles shall be permitted to operate at only the
following times: on Mondays through Thursdays, from 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.;
on Fridays and Saturdays, from 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.; and on Sundays, from
6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2018-2, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 72.18 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person who operates a non-highway or low-speed vehicle on a street,
highway, or roadway of the village shall be subject to the mandatory insurance
requirements under Article VI of Chapter 7 of the State Vehicle Code, being 625
ILCS 5/7.
(Ord. 2018-2, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 72.19 SEATBELTS REQUIRED.
   During the operation of a non-highway or low-speed vehicle, the operator and
all passengers shall wear a seatbelt.
(Ord. 2018-2, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 72.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a non-highway or low-speed vehicle on the
village’s streets, roadways, or alleys without first obtaining an annual permit
from the village as provided herein. The annual cost of the permit shall be
$25. A permit, regardless of the date of its issuance, shall be valid, unless
suspended or revoked, from May 1 until April 30 of the following year. The cost
of a permit granted after May 1 shall be prorated on a per diem basis. Every
non-highway or low-speed vehicle shall be required to have a permit, and such
permit shall be non-transferable.
   (B)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
village and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Name of insurance carrier and policy number and/or a photocopy of
applicable liability insurance coverage card issued specifically for the non-
highway or low-speed to be operated pursuant to the permit;
      (3)   The serial number, make, model, and description of the non-highway
or low-speed vehicle; and
      (4)   Such other information as the village may require, including a
release and waiver of liability signed by applicant releasing the village and
its employees, and agreeing to indemnify and hold the village harmless,
including the costs of defense, from any and all claims, penalties, costs,
judgments, settlements, or causes of action resulting or arising from the
operation of applicant’s non-highway or low-speed vehicle on village streets.
   (C)   No permit shall be granted by the village until the non-highway or
low-speed vehicle shall be submitted to and pass an inspection by the village
(or its designee) to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
the State Vehicle Code.
   (D)   Each person operating a non-highway vehicle or low speed vehicle shall
carry the permit issued by the village at all times during the operation of
said vehicle
(Ord. 2018-2, passed 4-9-2018) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The village may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder
upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of §§
72.15 through
72.20, or there is a finding that the permittee cannot safely operate a non-
highway or low-speed vehicle on village streets.
      (2)   A violation of any provision of §§
72.15 through
72.20 shall be punishable by payment of a fine of not less than $50 and not
more than $500, and the village’s enforcement costs incurred, including its
attorney fees, for each offense. Any second or subsequent offense shall result
in the revocation of the village permit for a period of not less than one, nor
more than three years. To the extent that any violation of §§
72.15 through
72.20 may also constitute a violation of a minimal statute of the state, the
violator shall also be subject to criminal prosecution and all other penalties
as permitted by law
(Ord. 2018-2, passed 4-9-2018)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates on right-of-way
      
II.   Snowmobiles on right-of-way
SCHEDULE I. BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, IN-LINE SKATES ON RIGHT-OF-
WAY.
   (A)   No bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, or in-line skates, or like
items, shall be operated, ridden, or used in any fashion on the sidewalks of
Main Street located between First Street and Second Street, and none shall be
operated, ridden, or used in any fashion on the sidewalks of Second Street
between Main Street and Blaine Street in the village. No bicycles, skateboards,
roller skates, or in-line skates, or like items shall be operated, ridden, or
used in any fashion in any part of the village so as to be a hazard to, or
interfere with, traffic or pedestrians.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of division (A) above shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense; however, the
notice of ordinance violation may contain a provision that any person violating
any provision of said division (A) above may avoid a court appearance and a
fine of not less than $10 and not more than $100 by paying the sum of $10 to
the Village Clerk’s office within 72 hours after issuance of the notice of said
ordinance violation. The village shall impound any equipment used in violation
of this schedule until such time as the fine is paid or for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1) (Ord. 99-1, passed 1-5-1999)
SCHEDULE II. SNOWMOBILES ON RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Snowmobilers will be allowed to be used all streets and alleys, except Main
Street and State Route 72, within the village limits to reach the approved
snowmobile route within the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1) (Ord. 2004-2, passed 2-3-2004)
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking encroachments prohibited
SCHEDULE I. PARKING ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   Automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles shall be prohibited from parking
along either side of Third Street, marked State Route 72, within the corporate
limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-8)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   FIREWORKS
      
93.   FAIR HOUSING
      
94.   PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances
   
90.01   Nuisances declared unlawful
   
90.02   Nuisances enumerated
   
90.03   Investigation by village; power of entry
   
90.04   Abatement procedures
   
90.05   Costs assessed; lien
   
90.06   Health Officer appointed
Plants and Weeds
   
90.20   Weeds defined
   
90.21   Height restrictions
   
90.22   Nuisance declared; cutting, removal of neglected weeds and grass
Abandoned, Inoperable Vehicles and Trailers
   
90.35   Abandoned vehicles
   
90.36   Inoperable vehicles and trailers
Hazardous Substances and Conditions
   
90.50   Hazardous substances and materials prohibited
   
90.51   Contagious diseases
   
90.52   Offensive premises
   
90.53   Garbage, refuse and harmful attractions
   
90.54   Water
 
   
90.99   Penalty
NUISANCES
§ 90.01 NUISANCES DECLARED UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
wilfully or negligently create, erect, maintain, or permit a nuisance to exist
anywhere within the village.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-1) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of village to define, prevent, and abate nuisances, see 65 ILCS 5/11-
60-2
§ 90.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   (A)   Any thing, act, omission, occupation, or condition which shall exist
or continue for such a length of time as to do any of the following is hereby
declared a nuisance:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure, or endanger the health, safety, peace,
or welfare of the public;
      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or property;
      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct, or render
dangerous for passage any street, sidewalk, alley, navigable body, or other
public way or place.
   (B)   Nuisances enumerated in this subchapter shall not be deemed exclusive,
but are in addition to, and shall be construed in conjunction with, any other
nuisances enumerated in statutes or other provisions of this code or ordinances
of the village.
   (C)   Any nuisance declared by statute, this subchapter, or other provisions
of this code or ordinances of the village shall be enforceable under the
provisions of this subchapter as if enumerated specifically herein.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-2)
§ 90.03 INVESTIGATION BY VILLAGE; POWER OF ENTRY.
   (A)   For the purpose of discovering nuisances, it shall be the duty of the
police, fire, health, and building officers and inspectors to investigate,
confirm, and report any nuisances coming to their attention.
   (B)   In order to investigate, confirm, and report nuisances, said officers
and inspectors shall, upon proper identification, be permitted at any
reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner, to visit and enter into or upon any
premises or property within the village to make an examination thereof, if they
shall have reasonable grounds to believe that a nuisance exists.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-3)
§ 90.04 ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Nuisance determined. Whenever any nuisance shall be reported to or
investigated and determined by the police, fire, health, or building officers
or inspectors, notice shall be given to the owner or person in control of the
property or premises involved and to the appropriate village officials whose
functions include the abatement of such nuisances.
   (B)   Notice to abate.
      (1)   Whenever any health or building official or inspector, or any
police or fire officer, determines that a nuisance exists on any private
property or premises, the proper village official shall cause a written notice
to be served upon the owner or person in control of the property, or premises
who is causing, permitting, or maintaining such nuisance, which notice shall
give the person served ten days from the date of service of the notice to abate
the nuisance. Such notice shall be by means of personal service of a copy of
the complaint or by certified or registered mail of a copy of the complaint.
Personal service shall be by any authorized inspector from the village or by
any police officer of the Police Department, or any person authorized by law to
make personal service.
      (2)   Such notice shall fairly apprise such person of the nature of the
nuisance, his or her duty to abate or remove the nuisance within the time
provided therein, the penalty for failure to abate the same, and shall state
that, if said nuisance is abated by the village, liability for necessary
expenses to be incurred shall accrue as provided for in §
90.05.
   (C)   Time limits. It is hereby declared the duty of any person determined
to have created, caused, erected, maintained, or permitted a nuisance to exist
within the village to discontinue and abate such nuisance within ten days, or
such other time period as may be specified in the notice, from the time he or
she receives written notice thereof.
   (D)   Abatement by village. Whenever any nuisance is not abated by the
owner, lessee, or person in control of the premises or property affected within
the time provided by notice, the proper village officer shall cause the
abatement or removal of such nuisance.
   (E)   Summary abatement by village. Whenever any following nuisance occurs,
the proper village officer shall cause such nuisance to be summarily and
immediately abated and removed, regardless of any ten-day or other time period
specified by notice to the person responsible therefor; provided, however, that
in division (E)(1) below, such officer shall have first applied for and
obtained the written permission of the President for such summary abatement:
      (1)   Constitutes or is deemed to be an imminent or immediate danger to
the public health or safety; or
      (2)   Exists on public property.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-4)
§ 90.05 COSTS ASSESSED; LIEN.
   (A)   (1)   Any costs or expenses of abatement reasonably incurred by the
village pursuant to the provisions of §
90.04(D) shall be deemed a debt to the village by the owner, lessee, or person
in control of premises upon which such nuisance existed.
      (2)   Provided, that where specifically provided in this code or by
statute, such costs and expenses shall become a lien upon the real estate
affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to enforce by civil
action any and all such debts or liens as provided in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7, 5/11-20-8, 5/11-20-12, and 5/11-
31-1
§ 90.06 HEALTH OFFICER APPOINTED.
   The Village President shall appoint a Health Officer, with the consent of
the Village Board.
PLANTS AND WEEDS
§ 90.20 WEEDS DEFINED.
   WEEDS, as used in this subchapter, shall include the following:
   (A)   NOXIOUS WEEDS, such as ragweed, giant and common; Canada thistles and
all of its varieties; perennial sow thistle; European bind weed; hoary cress;
leafy spurge; and Russian knapweed; and
   (B)   OTHER WEEDS, such as Burdock, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common
milk weed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter,
wild lettuce, curled dock, smart weeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, wild
hemp, ox eye daisy, goldenrod, yellow hemlock, buckhorn, or other weeds of a
like kind.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-1)
§ 90.21 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be a nuisance and, therefore, unlawful for any owner, lessee, or
occupant, or any agent, servant, representative, or employee of any such owner,
lessee, or occupant, having charge or control of any lot within the village to
permit or maintain on any such lot, including the area located between the
property line and the curb or edge of roadway, any growth of weeds as herein
defined over eight inches in height from the ground. OWNER shall include the
legal title holder and/or the beneficial owner of any such lot.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-2)
§ 90.22 NUISANCE DECLARED; CUTTING, REMOVAL OF NEGLECTED WEEDS AND GRASS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any resident, occupant, owner, or agent of
any premises to allow any weed or lawn grass to grow a height exceeding seven
inches anywhere within the village. Any such weed or lawn grass exceeding such
height is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of
every owner or occupant of any lot or parcel within the village to remove said
weed or lawn grass.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every resident, occupant, owner, or agent of
any premises within the village to remove all Canada thistles, ragweed, or
other noxious weeds, and it shall be unlawful for anyone to permit such weeds
to grow or remain on any lot or parcel in the village, and the same are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   Notice in writing of a violation of divisions (A) or (B) above shall
be given by the Village Clerk to the owner, or his or her agent, and the
occupant of any lot or parcel in the village violating divisions (A) or (B)
above. Upon failure of the owner, or his or her agent, or the occupant to cut
and remove the offending weeds or grass as defined in divisions (A) or (B)
above within ten days of the mailing of notice, it shall be the duty of the
Village Clerk to arrange to have the offending weeds or grass cut or removed.
   (D)   The expense incurred by the village in cutting or removing said weeds
and/or grass, which expense shall include an administrative fee of $100, shall
be charged to and paid by the owner of the lot or parcel and shall be collected
by the village by suit or otherwise and shall be in addition to any applicable
fines or penalty.
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
§ 90.35 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
      (1)   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof on any highway, street, alley, public parking lot, park or any other
public area in the village is unlawful and any such offender shall be subject
to penalty as set forth in §
10.99.
      (2)   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof on private or public property, other than a highway, in view of the
general public, anywhere in the village is unlawful except on property of the
owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or
any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal
by the Village Police Department after a waiting period of seven days or more
following notification of the owner. A violation of this section is subject to
penalties as set forth under §
10.99.
   (B)   Notification to enforcement agencies. When an abandoned, lost, stolen
or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession
or custody of a person in the village, not the owner of the vehicle, such
person shall immediately notify the Village Police Department when the vehicle
is within the corporate limits of the village. Upon receipt of such
notification, the Police Department may authorize a towing service to remove
and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle
or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its
contents and maintain a record of the tow as set forth herein for the Village
Police Department until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person
legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided
in this section.
   (C)   Removal of abandoned vehicles.
      (1)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a state
highway in the village ten hours or more, its removal by a towing service may
be authorized by the Village Police Department.
      (2)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned or left
unattended on a highway other than a toll highway, interstate highway or
expressway for 24 hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by the Village Police Department.
      (3)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially
dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because
of its position in relation to the highway, street, alley, public parking lot,
park or any other public area, or its physical presence is causing the impeding
of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway, street, alley, public
parking lot, park or any other public area, or private property adjacent to the
highway by a towing service may be authorized by the Village Police Department.
      (4)   When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is
authorized by the Village Police Department, the owner of the vehicle will be
responsible for all towing costs.
§ 90.36 INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND TRAILERS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of
at least ten days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise
so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power.
The term INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle which has
been rendered temporarily, or for a period not exceeding ten days, incapable of
being driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations.
      INOPERABLE TRAILER. Any trailer from which, for a period of at least ten
days, the wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which wheels or other
parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the trailer is
incapable of being pulled under the power of an operational vehicle.
      STREET OPERABLE.
         (a)   When referring to a motor vehicle, any motor vehicle which may
be legally operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this state.
Examples of motor vehicles which are not STREET OPERABLE include ATVs, race
cars, stock cars, and any motor vehicle which, because of equipment or the lack
thereof, precludes the operation of that motor vehicle upon the roadways,
streets, and highways of this state.
         (b)   The term STREET OPERABLE as used in this section, and when
referring to a trailer shall mean any trailer which may be legally operated on
the roadways, streets, or highways of this state.
   (B)   Public nuisance declared.
      (1)   It is hereby declared that all inoperable motor vehicles, and motor
vehicles which are not street operable, whether on public or private property,
shall be stored in a garage.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle or part thereof which is inoperable or
deteriorated or in need of repair, or which is not street operable, which is
located for at least ten days upon public or private property within the
village, outside a garage is hereby declared a public nuisance.
   (C)   Repairs/time limit.
      (1)   Any inoperable motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily,
for a period of at least ten days, incapable of being driven under its own
power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Said inoperative motor vehicle which has been
rendered temporarily, for a period of at least ten days, incapable of being
driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations shall be placed in a garage.
      (2)   Any inoperable trailer which has been rendered temporarily, for a
period of at least ten days, incapable of being pulled under the power of an
operable vehicle in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Said inoperative trailer which has
been rendered temporarily, for a period of at least ten days, incapable of
being pulled under the power of an operable vehicle in order to perform
ordinary service or repair operations shall be placed in an enclosed garage.
   (D)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall apply to any motor vehicle
that is kept in a building or garage so as to be completely out of view of the
general public, or a motor vehicle on the lawfully zoned premises of a place of
business engaged in repair, wrecking or junking of motor vehicles, provided
they are kept within an enclosure on all sides so as not to be in view of the
general public.
   (E)   Public nuisance declared. It shall be unlawful and it is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance to have a motor vehicle on property owned,
leased or controlled by any person that does not display a current license
plate or sticker issued by any state of the United States to the particular
motor vehicle on which it is displayed, whether or not said motor vehicle is
operable or inoperable; except that this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any motor vehicle is kept within a building or garage; or
      (2)   New or used car lots which are properly zoned for the same.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES AND CONDITIONS
§ 90.50 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES AND MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any explosives and any radioactive material.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer,
flammable, or which generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means, if such substance or mixture of substances may cause substantial
personal injury or substantial illness during or as a proximate result of any
customary, or reasonably foreseeable handling or use.
      RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL. Any material or combination of materials which
spontaneously emits ionizing radiation.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-1)
   (B)   No person shall store or dispose of any hazardous substance or
hazardous material anywhere within the village.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-2)
(Ord. passed 10-10-1992) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.51 CONTAGIOUS DISEASES.
   (A)   Report required. Every physician called in to care for or treat a
person afflicted with a contagious disease or any epidemic disease shall make a
report of the same to the Health Officer within 24 hours after being called in.
In case no physician is in attendance, it shall be the duty of the person in
charge of or having the care of such person to make a report within 24 hours
from the time the disease is recognized.
   (B)   Quarantine.
      (1)   Health Officer’s duties. The Health Officer shall have charge of
the enforcement of the quarantine rules. He or she shall have the power and the
authority to place any premises, within which a contagious or epidemic disease
occurs, under quarantine, and the Health Officer shall determine the time when
the quarantine ends.
      (2)   Fumigation. Premises which have been quarantined in accordance with
the terms of division (B)(1) above shall be thoroughly fumigated or otherwise
freed from all risk of contagious disease, under the supervision of the Health
Officer before the quarantine shall end.
      (3)   Deliveries to premises. No person engaged in the delivery of food
or drink intended for human consumption shall enter any premises which are
quarantined because of the existence of a contagious or epidemic disease. No
containers or bottles shall be removed from any such premises until the
termination of quarantine, and no such container which has been left at such
premises during the quarantine shall be placed in use for carrying food or
drink until it has been thoroughly sterilized.
   (C)   Spreading unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to spread, willfully
or carelessly, any contagious disease or to so cause the spread of the same.
§ 90.52 OFFENSIVE PREMISES.
   (A)   No owner or occupant of any premises in the village shall suffer any
cellar, vault, private drain, pool, privy, sewer, stable, barnyard, pen or
place where any domestic animals or fowls are kept upon such premises to become
nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the public health or to his or her
neighbors.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall deposit, throw, discharge, place or leave the
dead body of an animal, or any nauseous, foul, offensive or putrid liquid or
any other substance or liquid whatsoever or substance likely to become
nauseous, foul, offensive or putrid within the village or within one-half mile
thereof, so as to be or become offensive or injurious to the health or comfort
of any persons residing within the village.
      (2)   No person shall, in removing any dead animal, excrement or other
nauseous, offensive or putrid liquid or substance, purposely or necessarily
cause the same to be offensive or annoying to any person.
   (C)   No person shall, within the village, steam, boil or render any tainted
lard or tallow, offal or other animal substance so as to taint the air and
render it unwholesome or offensive.
   (D)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (D), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
         FOOD. Any food or beverage intended for human consumption.
         FOOD DEALER. Means and includes every person, firm or corporation
engaged in conducting or operating any of the following businesses:
            1.   Fruit store or establishment for the retail sale of fresh
fruit and of berries;
            2.   Grocery store, or establishment for the sale at retail of
butter, cheese, vegetables or other provisions;
            3.   Ice cream parlor;
            4.   Meat market or establishment for the retail sale of fresh
meat, poultry or fish;
            5.   Retail beverage store;
            6.   Bakery; and/or
            7.   Restaurant.
      (2)   Sale of unwholesome food prohibited.
         (a)   No person shall sell, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of
selling or offering for sale any food of any kind which is spoiled or tainted
or is unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for any reason.
         (b)   All tainted or unwholesome food intended for human consumption
may be condemned by the Board of Health, and shall, thereupon, be seized and
destroyed by the Board of Health, the Health Officer or any police officer of
the village.
      (3)   Sale of adulterated food unlawful. It is unlawful to sell, offer
for sale, or keep for such purpose, any food or drink intended for human
consumption which has been adulterated by any material harmful in any way, or
which does not comply with the state statutes governing the same.
      (4)   Premises, sanitary regulations. Premises used for the sale or
storage of food intended for human consumption must be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. It is unlawful to permit any accumulation of refuse, or
waste of any kind thereon for more than 24 hours; and it is unlawful to permit
any decaying animal or plant matter to remain on any such premises at all.
      (5)   Premises, kept free from flies and vermin. Premises used for the
storage of food intended for human consumption shall be kept free from flies
and vermin of all kinds.
      (6)   Employee regulations. All persons engaged in handling or coming in
contact with food or drink intended for human consumption shall keep themselves
clean and shall keep their clothes clean. It is unlawful to permit any person
afflicted with a contagious or venereal disease to handle any food intended for
sale for human consumption, or for any such person to handle any such food.
      (7)   Inspections of establishments. The Health Officer shall inspect, or
cause to be inspected, every place, building or establishment used for the
storage, handling, sale or preparation of food or drink intended for human
consumption. It shall be the duty of every food dealer to give to the Health
Officer such samples of each such food or drink as may be necessary for the
purpose of making an analysis of the same to determine whether it is clean and
wholesome.
      (8)   Utensils. Utensils for personal use in all places serving food or
drink to the public shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized after each such
usage.
§ 90.53 GARBAGE, REFUSE AND HARMFUL ATTRACTIONS.
   (A)   Receptacle required.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of every owner or his agent or occupant of any
house, building, flat or apartment, or tenement in the village where people
reside, board or lodge, or where animal or vegetable matter is prepared or
served, and at all times to maintain in good order and repair, a receptacle for
garbage, bottles, ashes and similar refuse.
      (2)   The receptacle for garbage shall be water-tight.
   (B)   Placement in street prohibited. No garbage or refuse of any kind shall
be deposited in any street, alley or public way, excepting as is provided in
this section; and no such refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown about
or scattered by the wind.
   (C)   Storage of refuse dangerous to health prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any plot of ground to
store, dump or permit the accumulation of debris, refuse, garbage, inoperable
air conditioners, snowmobiles, motorcycles, bicycles, lawn mowers, appliances
and old furniture. Also tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, or other containers
in a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents, and other
animal pests that are offensive, injurious or dangerous to the health of
individuals or the public.
   (D)   Harmful conditions attractive to children prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person owning, leasing or controlling any plot of ground to
allow or have on said premises any condition to exist on said premises of such
a character as to be an attraction to children or other individuals, including,
but not limited to, mounds of dirt, piles of lumber, vehicles, or pools of
water which would cause children or other individuals to be attracted to the
same and thereby exposing children or other individuals to a dangerous
condition which would affect the public safety and welfare of children or other
individuals.
   (E)   Placement on private property, notice to remove, refusal. In the event
that garbage and debris is located upon private property of any owner of the
same within the village limits, the Village Clerk is directed to send a notice
in writing to the owner of such property giving the owner at least ten days to
remove the garbage and debris. In the event that the owner refuses or neglects
to remove such garbage and debris after such notice, the village may remove the
garbage and debris from such private property and may collect from the owner of
such private property a reasonable cost of the removal thereof. The costs are
to be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens
and encumbrances, except tax liens if within 60 days after such cost and
expense is incurred by the village, or the person performing the service by
authority of the village, in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Ogle County. The notice shall consist of a
sworn statement setting out:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expenses incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
village.
   (F)   Failure to remove garbage, lien.
      (1)   The lien set forth in division (E) above shall not be valid as to
any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to
removal of the garbage and debris and prior to the filing of such notice, and
the lien of the village shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment
creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to
the filing of such notice.
      (2)   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons
interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall
be released by the village, or person in whose name the lien has been filed,
and the release may be filed of record in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Ogle County.
      (3)   The lien may be in force by proceedings to foreclose as in case of
mortgages or mechanic’s lien. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced
within two years after the date of filing the notice of lien.
§ 90.54 WATER.
   (A)   Water pollution prohibited. It is unlawful and a nuisance for any
person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the
village.
   (B)   Stagnant pools, deemed nuisance. Any stagnant pool of water in the
village is a nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any such
nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his or her control.
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever in §§
90.01 through
90.05 any act is prohibited or is made, or declared to be unlawful or a
nuisance, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any
act is declared to be unlawful, when no specific penalty is provided therefor,
any person violating such provision shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a penalty as provided in §
10.99(A).
      (2)   (a)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of §§
90.01 through
90.05 for any person to neglect, refuse, or otherwise fail to remove or abate
any nuisance after expiration of the ten days or other specified time period
provided by notice thereof, and each 24 hours or fraction thereof during which
such nuisance continues or exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
         (b)   Any person who shall cause, permit, or allow a nuisance to
continue or exist as provided for in division (A)(2)(a) above shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99(A).
(Prior Code, § 4-2-6)
   (B)   (1)   Any person who does not abate the nuisance within the required
time period or who otherwise violates the provisions of §§
90.20 and
90.21 shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §
10.99(A) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a nuisance continues unabated after ten days from
receipt of notice.
      (2)   In addition to any penalties herein provided, the village may issue
stop work orders upon owners of lots where work is unfinished under a
previously issued building permit for any violation of §§
90.20 and
90.21.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-3)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
90.50 shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500 for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each date during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-3)
(Ord. passed 10-10-1992)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Running at large prohibited
   
91.02   Keeping of swine, pigs, livestock, poultry prohibited
   
91.03   Cruelty to animals
   
91.04   Diseased animals; regulations
   
91.05   Condition of premises
   
91.06   Noisy animals
   
91.07   Releasing animals from enclosure
   
91.08   Encouraging animals to fight
   
91.09   Removal of dead animals
   
91.10   Dangerous animals
Dogs
   
91.25   Collars and tags
   
91.26   Running at large prohibited
   
91.27   Dog bites
   
91.28   Impoundment, redemption fee
   
91.29   Animal defecation cleanup
   
91.30   Kennels for breeding and boarding prohibited
   
91.31   Noisy dogs
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No animal, including, but not limited to, a stallion, horse, mare,
gelding, colt, mule, ass, jenny, bull, ox, cow, heifer, steer, hog, shoat,
goat, chicken, duck or goose shall be allowed to run at large within the
village. Any such animal running at large in any public place in the village
shall be impounded.
   (B)   The herding of any animals or tying out of the same to graze upon any
street or alley of the village shall be deemed and taken as permitting the same
to run at large, within the meaning of this section. It is further unlawful to
picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the village for the
purpose of grazing or feeding.
§ 91.02 KEEPING OF SWINE, PIGS, LIVESTOCK, POULTRY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to keep any live swine or pigs, cattle, sheep, goat or
poultry anywhere in the village, except as may be specified by the Village
Board.
§ 91.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No person shall cruelly treat any animals in the village in any way. Any
person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animals
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 91.04 DISEASED ANIMALS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of humans or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal
be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the
supervision of the Chief of Police or the Health Officer.
   (B)   It is the duty of the Health Officer to secure such disposition of any
diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the
communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where
the state veterinarian is empowered to act.
§ 91.05 CONDITION OF PREMISES.
   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or
may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome.
§ 91.06 NOISY ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud
noises at any time of the day or night.
§ 91.07 RELEASING ANIMALS FROM ENCLOSURE.
   No person shall willfully drive or entice any animal from beyond the village
limits into the village, or aid or abet the same, or let any animal out of an
enclosure in which it may be confined, or aid or abet in the letting out or
escape thereof, in order to take up and impound the same.
§ 91.08 ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be present at any dog fight within
the village when the animals shall meet accidentally, and by any act or word,
encourage or urge the dogs to fight. It shall further be unlawful for any
person to purposely or by agreement set any dogs, cocks or any other animals
whatsoever to fighting.
§ 91.09 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   All dead animals in the village shall, within 12 hours of death of the same,
be removed and disposed of by the owner or keeper thereof, by burial or
cremation.
§ 91.10 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor within the village:
      (1)   Any snake, reptile or lizard that is physically capable of causing
bodily injury to any person or animal, regardless of age, by bite, poison,
constriction or other means;
      (2)   Any lion, tiger, cougar, jaguar, panther, bobcat, mountain lion,
lynx, ocelot, leopard, any hybrid thereof or any similar feline animal, bear,
exotic or wild animal not native to the state and which when fully grown will
attain a weight in excess of 30 pounds;
      (3)   Any wolf, coyote, jackal, fox, wild dog, or hybrid thereof;
      (4)   Any squirrels, opossums, raccoons, or skunks;
      (5)   Any birds of prey;
      (6)   Any monkey, gorilla, chimpanzee or other similar ape-like primate;
      (7)   Any bees, wasps, or hornets;
      (8)   Any farm animals; and/or
      (9)   Any other animals not allowed to be owned, kept or harbored under
any applicable local, state or federal law.
   (B)   Any animal listed in division (A) above is declared a public nuisance
and shall be removed within 30 days of the adoption of this section.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to properly zoned and constructed zoos,
veterinary hospitals, pounds, federally licensed exhibits, circuses, scientific
or research laboratories or educational or other licensed institutions.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the forgoing, in the discretion of the Village Board,
written permission may be granted upon application for special and limited
purpose to have a dangerous animal(s) present in the village for the following
limited purposes:
      (1)   Petting zoos;
      (2)   Pony rides;
      (3)   Zoos; and
      (4)   Circus.
   (E)   In addition to the penalties provided herein, any such dangerous
animal found within the village may be apprehended and impounded by the village
or its designee.
DOGS
§ 91.25 COLLARS AND TAGS.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be on any public street, sidewalk,
alley or other place unless such a dog has a collar firmly attached around his
neck with a county license tag for the current year attached to such collar.
§ 91.26 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to run at large within the village.
Any dog found upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, parkway or any
unenclosed place shall be deemed running at large unless such dog is firmly
held on a leash or is in an enclosed vehicle.
§ 91.27 DOG BITES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner or person having custody of any dog
which bites any human being to keep such dog locked up in an enclosure for a
period of two weeks following the time the dog has bitten a person; and to have
the dog examined by a physician or licensed veterinarian at the commencement
and termination of this two-week period. If such dog, during this period, shall
die or shall show definite signs of illness, it shall be the duty of such owner
or person having the dog to turn the dog over to the Health Officer or Chief of
Police so that it can be determined whether or not the dog had rabies.
   (B)   Members of the Police Department and Animal Control Officers, as
designated by the Village Board, are authorized to remove any dangerous dog to
a qualified veterinary service to destroy the animal. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER is
defined as any village employee authorized by the Village Board, including
Board members to carry out impoundment for the village.
§ 91.28 IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION FEE.
   (A)   Any dog found upon any public street or highway running at large, or
any dog for which the annual tax has not been paid as hereinabove provided
shall be impounded by the Police Department. If such dog shall not have been
redeemed within five days after publication of notice of impoundment, it shall
be disposed of in the manner prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   (1)   Any person seeking to redeem any impounded animal shall pay the
cost of impoundment and an additional fee of $50 for administrative cost charge
for the first offense, $100 for the second offense, and $200 for the third
offense, and also such person shall pay an additional charge for any additional
treatment, including, but not limited to, rabies shots, which are required for
every animal impounded.
      (2)   The administrative fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk. The
receipt will allow for release of such impounded dog, on payment of other fees.
      (3)   These fees include all court costs and attorney fees.
§ 91.29 ANIMAL DEFECATION CLEANUP.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone being the owner of or having charge of any
animal, to permit it to defecate, scratch or dig upon any public or private
property. The owner or person having charge of such animal shall clean up after
and remove any animal feces on such property and dispose of it immediately. It
shall be illegal to use the village sewer for disposal.
§ 91.30 KENNELS FOR BREEDING AND BOARDING PROHIBITED.
   No kennels for the breeding, boarding or selling of dogs or any other
animals for income shall be allowed within the village limits.
§ 91.31 NOISY DOGS.
   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any dog which disturbs the peace by loud
barking and noises at any time of the day or night.
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or persons who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, plus
court cost and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the village in enforcing
this chapter.
   (B)   The penalty for violation of §
91.10 is $750 per offense. Each day any dangerous animal is kept in violation
of §
91.10 shall constitute a separate offense. It is not a defense to a violation
of §
91.10 that the owner or keeper of any such animal which is prohibited under §
91.10 has attempted to domesticate such animal.
CHAPTER 92: FIREWORKS
Section
   
92.01   Fireworks
   
92.02   Explosives
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Storage. It shall be unlawful to store any fireworks in the village,
excepting as may be necessary for the giving of a licensed public exhibition of
pyrotechnics as hereinafter provided. Any such storage must be under the
supervision of and subject to the approval of the State Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Sales prohibited. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any
fireworks or pyrotechnics in the village.
   (C)   Discharge. It shall be unlawful to discharge or set off any fireworks
or pyrotechnics in the village; provided, that public exhibitions of fireworks
and pyrotechnics may be given if a permit therefor is granted by the Board.
Such exhibitions shall be given subject to the supervision of the State Fire
Marshal or of some person designated by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-1) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Dynamite. It shall be unlawful to keep or store any dynamite in the
village in excess of five pounds on any one premises or in any one building.
   (B)   Nitroglycerine; T.N.T. It shall be unlawful to keep or store any
nitroglycerine or the explosive commonly known as T.N.T. in the village in any
quantities, excepting for medicinal or laboratory purposes, and for such
purpose, no more than one-half pound shall be stored in any one building or
premises.
   (C)   Gunpowder. It shall be unlawful to keep or store any black powder,
gunpowder, or guncotton in excess of five pounds on any one premises in the
village.
   (D)   Rules of State Fire Marshal. All explosives kept or stored in the
village shall be kept and stored in accordance with the rules enforced by the
State Fire Marshal with regard thereto.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-2)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to penalty as provided in §
10.99(A).
(Prior Code, § 4-6-3)
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Short title
   
93.02   Purpose, declaration of policy
   
93.03   Construction of chapter
   
93.04   Definitions
   
93.05   Representation
   
93.06   Other violations
   
93.07   Complaints
   
93.08   Hearings
   
93.09   Enforcement
   
93.10   Remedies
Owner of Dwelling, Housing
   
93.25   Discriminatory terms
   
93.26   Refusals to deal
   
93.27   Withholding housing
   
93.28   Advertisements
   
93.29   Signs, notices
   
93.30   Exemptions
   
93.31   Limitations
Real Estate Agent for Dwelling, Housing
   
93.45   Withholding housing
   
93.46   Refusal of offers
   
93.47   Advertisements
   
93.48   Signs, notices
   
93.49   Discrimination in lending
   
93.50   Refusals to deal in lending
   
93.51   Coverage
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Fair Housing Ordinance
of the Village of Leaf River, Illinois” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 8-7-1) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.02 PURPOSE, DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village and the purpose of
this chapter, in the exercise by the village of its policy and regulatory
powers for the protection of the public safety for the health, morals, safety,
and welfare of the persons in and residing in the village, and for the
maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry, and good government in the
village, to secure to all persons living or desiring to live in the village a
fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent, or occupy housing without
discrimination based on race, color, religion, or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-2) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.03 CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be constructed according to the fair import of its terms
and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy stated in §
93.02 and the special purposes of the particular provision involved.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-3) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the village,
which is arranged, designed, or used as a home, residence, or living quarters
of one or more individuals.
   HOUSING. Includes any building or structure or portion thereof, within the
village, which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged, or designed to be
used or occupied as the home, residence, or living quarters of one or more
individuals, groups, or families, and includes any vacant land within the
village which is zoned and intended to be used for construction of any such
building or structure.
   LEASE. Includes sublease, assignment, and rent (or rental), and includes any
contract to any of the foregoing.
   LENDING INSTITUTION. Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association, other persons in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging, or negotiating loans
or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying or
selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by
title to a security interest in real estate, but shall not include any
religious institution or organization, nor any charitable or educational
organization operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious institution or
organization.
   NATIONAL ORIGIN. Includes the national origin of an ancestor.
   OWNER. Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any dwelling or housing, or who holds legal or
equitable title or share of, or holds any beneficial interest in any real
estate cooperative which owns any dwelling or housing.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, legal representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated
organizations, trust, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and
fiduciaries.
   PURCHASE. Includes any contract to purchase.
   REAL ESTATE AGENT. Any real estate broker, any real estate salesperson, and
any other person who as employee or agent or otherwise, engages in the
management or operation of any dwelling or housing.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person licensed as a real estate broker in
accordance with the provisions of the relevant Illinois Compiled Statutes, or
required thereby to be so licensed.
   REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON. Any person licensed as a real estate salesperson in
accordance with the provisions of the relevant Illinois Compiled Statutes, or
required thereby to be so licensed.
   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION. The purchase, sale, exchange, or lease of any
dwelling or housing, and an option to do any of the foregoing.
   SALE. Includes any contract to sell, exchange or convey, transfer, or assign
legal or equitable title to, or a beneficial interest in, real estate.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-5) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.05 REPRESENTATION.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for
any person, for the purpose of inducing any other person to enter into a real
estate transaction with such person, his or her principal, or his or her agent:
   (A)   To represent that a change has occurred, will occur, or may occur with
respect to the race, color, religion, or national origin in the composition of
the owners or occupants in any block, neighborhood, or area in which the
dwelling or housing (which is the subject of the real estate transaction) so
located; or
   (B)   To represent that a change with respect to the race, color, religion,
or national origin in the composition of the owners or occupants in any block,
neighborhood, or area will result in lowering of property values, or in an
increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of
schools, in such block, neighborhood, or area.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-8) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 OTHER VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for
any person:
   (A)   To aid, abet, incite, or coerce a person to engage in unlawful housing
practice;
   (B)   Willfully to interfere in the performance of a duty or the exercise of
a power by the Village Board or one of its member or representative; or
   (C)   Willfully to obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the
provisions of this chapter or an order issued thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-9) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.07 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of
this chapter may file with the Village Board a written verified complaint
setting forth his or her grievance. The complaint shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the complainant;
      (2)   The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is
brought if known to the complainant; and
      (3)   The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this
chapter, and such complaint shall state the name and address of all persons
believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged facts.
   (B)   After the filing of any complaint, the Village Board shall serve a
copy of the complaint on the party or parties charged.
   (C)   Any complaint filed hereunder with the Village Board must be filed
within 30 days after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred or it shall
be barred.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-10) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.08 HEARINGS.
   (A) Such hearing shall be conducted by the Village Board upon due and
reasonable notice to all parties. The Village Board shall have power to
administer oaths and to take sworn testimony. Any party alleged to have
violated this chapter shall be entitled to be represented by counsel and shall
have the right to call witnesses in his or her own behalf and to cross-examine
witnesses.
   (B)   At the conclusion of such hearing, the Village Board shall render the
complainant a decision.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-11) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Village Board shall be empowered to order any person found to be
engaging in an unfair housing practice to cease and desist from such practice,
upon such terms as shall be necessary and proper for the enforcement of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Village Board shall be empowered at the conclusion of the
proceedings held under §
93.08 to direct the Village Attorney to do any one or more of the following:
      (1)   To institute and prosecute proceedings to enforce, against any
person found in violation of this chapter, the fine provided for in §
93.99;
      (2)   To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction:
         (a)   For an order restraining any person from violating any provision
of this chapter; and
         (b)   For such other further relief as may seem to the court
appropriate for the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of
violations hereof.
      (3)   To petition or institute proceedings with the Department of
Registration and education for the purpose of causing the Department to revoke,
suspend, or refuse to renew the license granted by such Department to any real
estate broker or real estate salesperson found to have violated any provision
of this chapter;
      (4)   In the case of any unlawful housing practice or violation of this
chapter by any person in the course of performing under a contract or
subcontract with the state or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or
with the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, to
petition or institute proceedings with such contracting agency for the purpose
of causing it to terminate such contract or any portion thereof, either
absolutely or on condition of compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
and
      (5)   The Village Board may issue such cease and desist orders and may
direct such action by the Village Attorney as shall be necessary for
enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-12) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.10 REMEDIES.
   Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of this
chapter who has exhausted the remedies provided in §
93.08 may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief
from such violation, including:
   (A)   An order compelling compliance with this chapter;
   (B)   An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have violated
any provision of this chapter from the sale, lease, exchange, transfer,
conveyance, or assignment of any dwelling or housing which is the subject of
such violation;
   (C)   An order requiring specific performance of any contract for the sale,
lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance, or assignment of any dwelling or
housing, or any person who, in violation of this chapter, refuses or fails to
perform such contract;
   (D)   Compensatory damages; and
   (E)   Such other and further relief as many seem to the court appropriate
for the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of violations thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-13) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
OWNER OF DWELLING, HOUSING
§ 93.25 DISCRIMINATORY TERMS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for
any owner or other person to sell or lease a dwelling or housing on terms,
conditions, or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race,
color, religion, or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-6-1) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.26 REFUSALS TO DEAL.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for
any owner or other person to refuse to negotiate for, enter into, or perform
any sale or lease of any dwelling or housing because of the race, color,
religion, or national origin of any party to such sale or lease, or any member
of the family of any such party, or of any person using or occupying or
intending to use or occupy such dwelling or housing, or of any person using or
occupying any dwelling or housing in the area in which such dwelling or housing
is located.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-6-2) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.27 WITHHOLDING HOUSING.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for
any owner or other person to represent to any person that any dwelling or
housing is not available for inspection, purchase, sale, lease, or occupancy
when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to withhold housing from any
person because of race, color, religion, or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-6-3) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.28 ADVERTISEMENTS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any owner or other person to publish or circulate a statement,
advertisement, or notice of an intention to sell or lease any dwelling or
housing in a manner that is unlawful under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-6-4) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.29 SIGNS, NOTICES.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any owner or other person to post or erect, or cause any person to post or
erect, any sign or notice upon any dwelling or housing indicating an intent to
sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-6-5) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.30 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to the rental of any room or dwelling unit
in any owner occupied dwelling which consists of more than one but less than
five dwelling units. As used herein, the term DWELLING UNIT means one or more
rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family
or one individual. The term OWNER includes the spouse or any lineal descendant
or ancestor of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-6-6) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.31 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall require any owner to offer property to the
public at large before selling or renting it; provided, he or she complies with
all other provisions of this subchapter. Nor shall this subchapter be deemed to
prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenants or buyers for any
reason other than religion, race, color, or national origin. Nothing in this
subchapter shall require an owner to offer property for sale or lease or to
show his or her property to any person if such person is not negotiating for
the purchase or lease of such property in good faith.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-6-7) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
REAL ESTATE AGENT FOR DWELLING, HOUSING
§ 93.45 WITHHOLDING HOUSING.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any real estate agent or other person to represent to any person that any
dwelling or housing is not available for inspection, sale, lease, or occupancy
when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to withhold housing from any
person because of race, color, religion, or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-7-1) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.46 REFUSAL OF OFFERS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any real estate agent or other person to refuse to receive or to fail to
transmit a bona fide offer for the purchase, sale, exchange, or lease of any
dwelling or housing because of race, color, religion, or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-7-2) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.47 ADVERTISEMENTS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any real estate agent or other person to publish or circulate a statement,
advertisement, or notice of an intention to sell or lease any dwelling or
housing in a manner that is unlawful under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-7-3) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.48 SIGNS, NOTICES.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any real estate agent or other person to post or erect, or cause or permit
any person to post or erect, any sign or notice upon any dwelling or housing,
managed by or in the custody, care, or control of such real estate agent or
other person, indicating an intent to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in
a manner that is unlawful under §§
93.25 through
93.31 or this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-7-4) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.49 DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any lending institution in making, agreeing to make, arranging, or
negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds for the purpose of financing the
purchase or sale, construction, lease rehabilitation, improvement, renovation,
or repair of any dwelling or housing, to offer, seek, or agree to terms,
conditions, or privileges that discriminate because of race, color, religion,
or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-7-5) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.50 REFUSALS TO DEAL IN LENDING.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any lending institution to refuse to negotiate for, enter into, or perform
any agreement to lend or guarantee the loan of funds for the purchase, sales
construction, lease rehabilitation, improvement, renovation, or repair of any
dwelling or housing because of race, color, religion, or national origin of any
party to such agreement or of any member of the family of any such party, or of
the residents of the area in which such dwelling or housing is located.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-7-6) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.51 COVERAGE.
   This subchapter shall apply, respectively, to every real estate agent who,
within the village, performs any function as such real estate agent, but does
not maintain an office or place of doing business within the village, and this
subchapter applies to every real estate agent and lending institution who
maintains an office or place of doing business within the village; provided,
however, that the provisions of this subchapter shall not be so construed as to
prohibit a real estate broker or real estate agent, on behalf of the owner,
from inquiring into and reporting upon qualifications of any prospective buyer
or tenant with respect to limitations or exclusions other than those of race,
color, religion, or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-7-7) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of the chapter shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $500.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-14) (Ord. 2003-5, passed 8-5-2003)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
94.01   Hours of use; use by children
   
94.02   Loitering, annoying acts
   
94.03   Damaging or destroying village park or property
   
94.04   Motor vehicles, bicycles, skateboards prohibited
   
94.05   Prohibited acts in village parks or Village Hall
§ 94.01 HOURS OF USE; USE BY CHILDREN.
   (A)   The hours that village parks and public grounds may be utilized by
members of the public are daily from dawn to dusk. No member of the public
shall be allowed in a village park or in any village grounds, place or building
after dusk or before dawn except with written permission from the Board of
Trustees of the village.
   (B)   At no time shall a child under the age of 18 be permitted in any
public park, public grounds or public building unless actively supervised by an
adult.
§ 94.02 LOITERING, ANNOYING ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or lounge in or about any
village park, public grounds, place or building at any time for any immoral
purpose, or to the annoyance of others and to idly and without lawful business,
and with evident intent or purpose of annoyance, disturb or insult others by
any acts, gestures or language or for immoral purposes stand or be in and about
any of the village parks, village grounds, places or buildings, or be on any
public streets, alleys, walks or bridges or any other public places, to
obstruct or encumber any street crossing or any other public place of the
village by lounging or loitering in and about the same.
§ 94.03 DAMAGING OR DESTROYING VILLAGE PARK OR PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to injure, tamper, break, destroy or deface, or assist
in injuring, breaking, destroying or defacing any public property in any public
park or on any public grounds within the village limits at any time.
§ 94.04 MOTOR VEHICLES, BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS RESTRICTED.
   Except as for public roadways, motor vehicles and bicycles are prohibited in
village parks or other village property. Except as permitted by the proper
signage, all skateboards are prohibited in village parks or other village
property.
§ 94.05 PROHIBITED ACTS IN VILLAGE PARKS OR VILLAGE HALL.
   Smoking or possession of a firearm in village parks or on village property
is prohibited. Unless authorized by the Board of Trustees, possession of
alcohol in a village park or on village property is prohibited. Permitting a
dog in a village park or on village property without restraint by leash is
prohibited.
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMUSEMENT AND LEISURE
      
113.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
114.   FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
115.   CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
      
116.   VIDEO GAMING
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
   
110.01   Purpose, jurisdiction
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Licenses required; exceptions
   
110.04   Application for license or permit
   
110.05   Investigation and inspections
   
110.06   Issuance or denial of license, permit
   
110.07   Forms of licenses, permits; signatures required
   
110.08   Term of license
   
110.09   License to be posted
   
110.10   Building and permits
   
110.11   Location
   
110.12   Health and safety requirements
   
110.13   Inter-track wagering prohibited
   
110.14   Suspension or revocation of license or permit
   
110.15   Appeals
§ 110.01 PURPOSE, JURISDICTION.
   Because each business located in the village is a basic part of, and affects
the physical and economic well-being of, the village, necessitating special
services from the village in the form of fire, health, and police inspections,
and services such businesses shall, in all respects, be in full compliance with
the provisions hereinafter contained in this chapter. This chapter is designed
to provide for the means whereby the village may render the necessary
inspections and services to businesses in order to promote, protect, and
safeguard the public safety, health, and welfare of the citizens of the
village, and to enable the maintenance of an accurate record of businesses
located and carrying on commercial activities or commerce within the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise, establishment,
concern, or any other type of activity, together with all devices, machines,
equipment, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted
for profit; provided, however, that the term BUSINESS shall not include those
vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, or concerns
licensed exclusively by the state or department thereof.
   PERSON. Any Individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust,
or any other legal entity, except for such person or persons as may be
organized as a state not-for-profit corporation or governmental bodies properly
organized under the laws of the state.
   TOTAL FLOOR AREA. The sum total of the horizontal areas of any and all
floors, or portions thereof, of any building, including any and all accessory
buildings, basements, attics, and/or cellars, devoted to, reserved for, or
retained for the use of any business, regardless of whether or not any such
area(s) is vacant or not in use.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)
§ 110.03 LICENSES REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on, or
manage any business, either by himself or herself or through any agent,
employee, or partner, without first having obtained a license therefor from the
village.
   (B)   A license shall be required if any person, by himself or herself, or
through an agent, employee or partner, is held forth as being engaged in any
business, or if he or she solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively,
or if he or she performs or attempts to perform any part of such business
within the village. Where two or more separate businesses, separately owned
and/or operated, share floor space in the same building or on the same parcel
of property, and any floor space is subdivided between the separate businesses,
then each such business shall obtain a license pursuant to the provisions
contained in this chapter.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary, no
license shall be required of any person for the mere delivery within the
village of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from such person at
his or her regular place of business outside the corporate limits of the
village.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)
§ 110.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   Applications for all licenses or permits required by this code shall be
made, in writing, to the Village Clerk, except as may otherwise be provided by
this code. Each application shall contain such information as may be prescribed
by the Village Clerk, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   The name of the applicant;
   (B)   The permit or license desired;
   (C)   The location to be used, if any;
   (D)   The license period;
   (E)   The fee to be paid;
   (F)   The total floor area of the business, if any (proof acceptable to the
Village Clerk is required); and
   (G)   The number of the certificate of registration required under the
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, Service Occupation Tax Act, and/or Use Tax Act,
if applicable.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-4)
Statutory reference:
   Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, see 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
   Service Occupation Tax Act, see 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
   Use Tax Act, see 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
§ 110.05 INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Investigation of applicant.
      (1)   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where
an investigation or inspection is required by ordinance before the issuance of
such permit or license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be deemed
reasonably necessary or appropriate, the Village Clerk, within 48 hours of such
receipt, shall refer the application to the appropriate official for the making
of such investigation or Inspection.
      (2)   The official to whom the application has been referred shall make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten days after receiving such
application or a copy thereof.
      (3)   If it shall appear to the Village Clerk that the matters and
circumstances relating to an application require further information before a
proper determination can be made, such application shall be returned to the
applicant for the inclusion of such additional information as may be specified
by the Village Clerk.
   (B)   Inspection officials. The Village Clerk shall request the County
Health Department to make or cause to be made inspections regarding such
permits and licenses as relate to the care and handling of food, the prevention
of nuisances and the spread of disease, and the protection of the health of the
public. All other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be
made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer designated by the Village
Clerk.
   (C)   Inspections; analyses.
      (1)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with
the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required
by ordinance or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the
provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the village, or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in
charge of the premises to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the
inspection, any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to
make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is
requested.
      (2)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or
regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give any duly authorized
officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient samples of
such material or commodity.
      (3)   (a)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
Village President may revoke the license of any owner or operator of a licensed
business in the village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or
employee to make such inspection or to take an adequate sample of said
commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the
performance of his or her duties.
         (b)   Provided, however, that no license shall be subject to
revocation for such cause unless such officer or employee has been refused
permission to enter upon the premises in the name of the village after first
having presented a warrant authorizing such entry.
      (4)   In order to facilitate proper inspection in keeping with the
provisions of this division (C), any official, sanitarian, inspector, or other
employee or person designated to make such inspections under the supervision of
the County Board of Health shall be considered to be an officer or official of
the village for such purpose and for any purpose relative to the provisions of
this chapter, but for no other purpose unless so designated by ordinances of
the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-5)
§ 110.06 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE, PERMIT.
   (A)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related investigative report, it appears that the applicant
does not meet the requirements, the Clerk shall notify the applicant of such
fact, in writing, and such notice shall give an additional ten days to correct
the deficiencies or appeal the refusal to the Village Board who shall hear the
matter at its next meeting.
   (B)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related investigative report, the Village Clerk determines
that the applicant meets the standards set forth in this chapter, he or she
shall grant such permit or license and notify the applicant thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-6)
§ 110.07 FORMS OF LICENSES, PERMITS; SIGNATURES REQUIRED.
   Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the Village Clerk. Each license or permit issued
shall bear the signature of the Village President and the Village Clerk, except
as may otherwise be provided by this code.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-7)
§ 110.08 TERM OF LICENSE.
   All annual licenses shall be operative, and the license year for the village
shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall terminate on April 30 of the
following year where no provision to the contrary is made.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-8)
§ 110.09 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the
village to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business at all times so that it is plainly visible to someone
standing outside the main entrance to such business.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-9)
§ 110.10 BUILDING AND PERMITS.
   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit
shall be issued for any purpose or activity if the premises and building to be
used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the village and the state.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-10)
§ 110.11 LOCATION.
   (A)   No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the
village shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business or
establishment in more than one location in the village; a separate license
shall be required for each location of a licensed establishment. For the
purposes of this chapter, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced
by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall
be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel, shall be operated
and managed by the same person or owner, and shall be an establishment with the
same classification.
   (B)   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location
of any permitted act, may be changed; provided, that ten days’ notice thereof
is given to the Village Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary;
provided, however, that all applicable ordinances and regulations of the
village shall be complied with.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-11)
§ 110.12 HEALTH AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Nuisances prohibited. No business or establishment, whether or not
licensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in
fact, and no building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof
shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health.
   (B)   Unsafe or unhealthy business.
      (1)   No building or structure utilized, constructed, or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe, or dangerous condition.
      (2)   No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatever which shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health shall be allowed to exist in connection with
any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in the
village.
   (C)   Refuse removal. It shall be the duty of the occupant of every
building, structure, or premises used or maintained in connection with any
business or occupation to cause to be removed, at his or her own cost and
expense, at least once each week, all refuse produced therein.
   (D)   Working conditions.
      (1)   No owner, lessee, manager, or superintendent of any store, factory,
workshop, or other place where persons are employed shall cause or permit such
place or any room or part thereof to be overcrowded, inadequate, or faulty in
respect to light, ventilation, heat, or cleanliness.
      (2)   All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition,
free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, or other nuisance; also, as
far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all gases, vapors, dust,
or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes or otherwise which are
injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities for male and female
employees shall be provided, and such facilities shall be properly ventilated.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-12)
§ 110.13 INTER-TRACK WAGERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall establish, operate, maintain, or manage any inter-track
wagering location or off-track betting parlor within the village, and no
license therefor shall be issued by the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.14 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   Suspension of business operation.
      (1)   When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment,
whether or not licensed, shall constitute a nuisance, in fact, and a clear and
present danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare, the Village
President shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the
closing of the premises, and the suspension of any license or permit for a
period not to exceed ten days.
      (2)   Within eight days after he or she has so acted, the Village Board
shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
or permit should be revoked.
   (B)   Revocation of license or permit.
      (1)   Licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the village,
unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Village President after notice
and hearing, as provided in division (C) below, for any of the following
causes:
         (a)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in
the application for the license or permit;
         (b)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance
provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license, or permit or the premises occupied;
         (c)   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
         (d)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the village; and/or
         (e)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the performance of
his or her duties in making such inspections, as provided in §
110.05(C).
      (2)   Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable ordinances of the village.
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall
be given, in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified
mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his or her last
known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
      (2)   At the hearing, the Village Attorney shall present the complaint
and shall represent the village. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted
counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Village President shall preside and shall render the decision.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-14)
§ 110.15 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Clerk in regard to the
denial of an application for a business license, as provided in §
110.06, or by the Village President in connection with the revocation of a
license or permit, as provided in §
110.14, shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees. Such appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk, within ten days after notice
of a denial of an application or a revocation of a license or permit, a written
statement, under oath, setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The
Board of Trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such
appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee
or permittee in the same manner as provided in §
110.14. The decision of the Board of Trustees on such appeal shall be by vote
of a majority of all the members then holding office and shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-15)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
111.04   License required
   
111.05   Application for license
   
111.06   Restrictions on issuance of license
   
111.07   Examination and investigation of applicant
   
111.08   License classification and fees
   
111.09   Number of licenses
   
111.10   Insurance required
   
111.11   Term of license; renewals; forfeitures
   
111.12   Transfer of license; changes in licensee
   
111.13   Conditions of license
   
111.14   Building and location restrictions
   
111.15   Sanitary conditions
   
111.16   Attire
   
111.17   Prohibited acts and conditions
   
111.18   Certain sales prohibited
   
111.19   Minors
   
111.20   Application of other provisions
   
111.21   Suspension or revocation of license; fines
   
111.22   Records kept
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the policy of the village to regulate the sale of alcoholic liquor. It
is the policy of the village to limit the purchase, consumption, or possession
of alcoholic liquor to persons of the age of 21 years or older and to prevent
intoxication, disorderly conduct, trespasses, unruly disturbances at public or
private assemblies, and similar conduct that often results from the purchase,
consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the lawful age.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-1)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   All words and phrases defined in an act entitled “An Act Relating to
Alcoholic Liquors,” approved January 31, 1934, as amended from time to time, as
set forth generally in 235 ILCS 5/1-3 et seq., are hereby incorporated and made
a part of this chapter. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following,
as used in this chapter, shall be construed as follows.
   LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. The provisions of “An Act Relating to Alcoholic
Liquors,” approved January 31, 1934, as amended, and as set forth in 235 ILCS
5/1-1 et seq.
   MOTEL. Every building or other structure falling within the definition of
“hotel” as defined in 235 ILCS 5/1-3.25.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2)
§ 111.03 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   President to serve as Commissioner. The President shall be the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner as defined in 235 ILCS 5/4-2 of the Liquor Control
Act and shall be charged with the administration of the Liquor Control Act and
of such ordinances and resolutions related to alcoholic liquor as may be
enacted by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   (B)   Compensation. The compensation otherwise provided for the office of
Village President, as set forth in §
30.02, shall be deemed to include compensation to the President for acting in
his or her capacity as Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have
the following powers and duties:
      (1)   (a)   To grant and/or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke
for cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises within the village;
and
         (b)   In lieu of suspension or revocation of a local license, the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, instead, levy a fine on the licensee.
The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000 for each violation. Each day on which
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than
$10,000 in fines may be imposed against any licensee during any license year.
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter, at
any time, upon a premises licensed hereunder, to determine whether any of the
provisions of the state statutes or this code or any rules or regulations
adopted by the village or by the State Liquor Control Commission have been or
are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith;
      (3)   To receive complaints from any citizen within the village when any
provision of the state statutes or this chapter have been or are being
violated, and act upon such complaints in the manner provided by law;
      (4)   To receive local liquor license fees and deposit the same to the
credit of the village;
      (5)   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for
a local license or for the renewal thereof or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, or
any licensee against whom a citation proceeding has been instituted by the
State Liquor Control Commission; to examine, or cause to be examined, the books
and records of any such applicant or licensee; and to hear testimony and take
evidence for his or her information in the performance of his or her duties,
and for such other purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any
part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired
by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this division (C), he or she may
authorize his or her agent to act on his or her behalf;
      (6)   (a)   To order, by issuance of a written order, any licensed
premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period, if the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the village; and
         (b)   Except, that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the
conduct of another business on the licensed premises, such order shall not be
applicable to such other business.
      (7)   To make such reasonable rules and regulations as he or she may deem
necessary in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3)
§ 111.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away or to
keep with the intention of selling at retail, or giving away alcoholic liquor
within the village without having a retail liquor dealer’s license. Further, it
shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail or to give away alcoholic
liquor within the village in violation of the terms of a retail liquor dealer’s
license issued by the village; provided, however, nothing herein contained
shall prevent the possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor for the
lawful, personal use of the possessor, his or her family, and his or her guests
over the age of 21 years.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Applications for a retail dealer’s license shall be made to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual,
signed by each individual partner if a partnership, or signed by the President
and Secretary thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit,
and shall contain the following statements and information:
   (A)   The applicant’s name, mailing address, and telephone number;
   (B)   The name and address of the applicant’s business;
   (C)   If applicable, the date of the filing of the “assumed name” of the
business with the County Clerk;
   (D)   In case the applicant is a partnership, the date of the formation of
the partnership, the full name, age, address, and telephone number of all
persons with an ownership interest in the partnership or who have a right to
receive a direct or indirect benefit from the profits of the partnership;
   (E)   In the case of a corporation, if a state corporation, the date of its
incorporation, or if a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated
and the date of its becoming qualified under the State Business Corporation
Act, being 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq., to transact business in the state, and in
either case, a statement of the objects for which the corporation was
organized, the full name, age, address, and telephone number of all officers,
directors, managers, and shareholders with an aggregate of more than 5% of the
capital stock of the corporation, or of any persons receiving a direct or
indirect benefit from the profits of the sale of alcoholic liquor in the
village;
   (F)   The name, age, address, and telephone number of the persons who will
manage the business of the applicant in the village;
   (G)   The citizenship of all persons required herein to be identified in the
application, their date and place of birth, and, if a naturalized citizen, the
time and place of their naturalization;
   (H)   The character of the business of the applicant;
   (I)   The length of time that the applicant has been in business of that
character;
   (J)   The location or description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license, and the following information:
      (1)   If a leased premises, a copy of the lease shall be provided, and
the lease shall be for a term of sufficient length to encompass the term of the
license sought; and
      (2)   The name and address of the owner of the premises and the names and
addresses of all the owners of the beneficial interest of any trust if said
premises is held in trust.
   (K)   A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this application and
the disposition of such application;
   (L)   A statement signed by or on behalf of the applicant and by all
individuals required to be identified therein that each of them has never been
convicted of a felony or a Class A misdemeanor, and is not disqualified to
receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in the laws of the
state or the provisions of this chapter;
   (M)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
the federal government has been issued, and if so, where and when, or if any
such license has been revoked, state the reasons therefor;
   (N)   A statement that the applicant and all individuals required to be
identified in the application have not in the past and will not, in the future,
violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinance
of the village controlling the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the conduct
of his or her place of business;
   (O)   A statement whether applicant is delinquent under the 30-day credit
law and, if so, the reasons therefor;
   (P)   Whether the applicant possesses a current federal wagering and gaming
device stamp and, if so, the reasons therefor;
   (Q)   Whether the applicant, any individual identified in the application,
or any other person, directly or indirectly, interested in the place of
business, is a public official and, if so, the particulars thereof;
   (R)   A statement whether applicant is in violation of 235 ILCS 5/6-6 of the
Liquor Control Act and, if so, the reasons therefor;
   (S)   A statement that applicant and all individuals required to be
identified in the application have not sold, delivered, or given away alcoholic
liquor in violation of any state law or village ordinance to a person under the
minimum age required to purchase or possess alcoholic liquor; and
   (T)   Such additional information or identification as the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may deem necessary in order to establish the character of
the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)
§ 111.06 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   No local retail liquor dealer’s license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the village;
   (B)   A person who is not of fit character and reputation in the community
in which he or her resides and in the village;
   (C)   A person who has not yet attained the age of 21 years;
   (D)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law If determined by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, that such person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant public trust;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of a house of ill
fame;
   (G) A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (H)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (I)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   (J)   A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall be
qualified to obtain a license;
   (K)   A corporation or association if any officer, manager, or director
thereof, or any stockholder or member, owning in the aggregate more than 5% of
the stock of such corporation or association, would not be eligible to receive
a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship or residence in the
village;
   (L)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state or unless it is
a foreign corporation which is qualified under the State Business Corporation
Act, being 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq., to transact business in the state;
   (M)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager unless said
manager possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee;
   (N)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for
any such violation;
   (O)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (P)   Any elected public official, law enforcing officer, the Village
President or member of the Village Board of Trustees, village officer, or
employee or member of any village board or commission;
   (Q)   Any person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer’s license;
   (R)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
any of the 720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3) through (a)(10), or as prescribed by 720 ILCS
5/28-3 of the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or
hereafter amended, or as prescribed by a statute replacing any of the aforesaid
statutory provisions; or any person who has been convicted of a gambling
offense as prescribed by an ordinance of the village;
   (S)   For federal gaming device or wagering stamps:
      (1)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period;
      (2)   A partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp
or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period;
      (3)   A corporation or association if any officer, manager, or director
thereof, or any stockholder or member, owning in the aggregate more than 5% of
the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or
a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period; and
      (4)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
   (T)   Any person who has sold, given away, or delivered alcoholic liquor to
any person under the age of 21 years in violation of the applicable state laws
or village ordinances, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known to
him or her to be an habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally
deficient, or in need of mental treatment unless otherwise determined by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)
§ 111.07 EXAMINATION AND INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   Examination of applicant.
      (1)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to
examine or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a retail liquor
dealer’s license or for a renewal thereof or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served or records of any such applicant or
licensee, to hear testimony and take proof for his or her information in the
performance of his or her duties and, for such purpose, to issue subpoenas
which shall be effective in any part of this state.
      (2)   For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, he or she may authorize
his or her agent to act on his or her behalf, as provided by statute.
      (3)   The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed
by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for his or her examination or to
produce books and records requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be
deemed to be an admission that the objections or charges are true and that the
applicant is not qualified to receive a license.
   (B)   Investigation of applicant.
      (1)   No license shall be issued until the applicant shall have been
investigated by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and a report filed in the
records of said Commissioner approving the new applicant.
      (2)   The new applicant shall not be licensed until said new applicant
and managers, if any, have had record searches made of the files of the Sheriff
of the county, the State Bureau of Investigations, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, and any other record agency that the Commissioner shall deem
necessary.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-7) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 LICENSE CLASSIFICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Classes and fees established. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall have the right to grant retail liquor dealer’s licenses for the selling
at retail of alcoholic liquor. Such license shall be divided into the following
classes and none other.
      (1)   Class A. Class A license for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises as well as sale in packages or bottles. The fee
for such licenses shall be $800 per year.
      (2)   Class B. Class B license for the sale of alcoholic liquor in
original packages but not for consumption on the premises where sold. The fee
for such licenses shall be $400 per year.
      (3)   Class C. Class C license shall authorize the retail sale of beer
and wine in sealed packages but not for consumption on the premises where sold.
The annual fee for such license shall be $300, payable in advance.
      (4)   Class D. Class D license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well as sale in packages or
bottles on Sunday during the hours as further provided in this chapter. The fee
for such license shall be $1,000 a year.
      (5)   Class E. Class E license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor in the original packages but not for consumption on the premises where
sold on Sunday during the hours as further provided in this chapter. The fee
for such license shall be $500 a year.
   (B)   Proration of license fee. When an application is made for a license
after the expiration of six calendar months of the current license year, the
license fee shall be prorated, and the license fee paid shall be one-half of
the license fee provided for hereinabove.
   (C)   Disposition of fees. At the time application is made to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner for the original issuance or renewal of a license
of any class, the applicant shall pay to the village the fee hereinabove
provided for the class of license for which the application is filed. In the
event the license applied for is issued or renewed, the fee shall be applied to
the license; however, in the event the license applied for is denied, the fee,
except for a processing charge of $200, shall be returned to the applicant.
   (D)   Forfeiture of license fee. Whenever any license hereunder has been
revoked as provided for in this chapter, the licensee shall incur a forfeiture
of all monies that have been paid for said license.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-8) (Ord. passed 12-1-1992; Ord. 96-4, passed 10-1-1996; Ord.
2003-1, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.09 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The number of liquor licenses shall not exceed the following:
 
Class A license 1
Class B license 1
Class C license 1
Class D license 1
Class E license 1
 
(Prior Code, § 3-2-9) (Ord. passed 12-1-1992; Ord. 2003-1, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.10 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant
shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
that such applicant is covered by a policy of liquor liability insurance, and
in the event he or she is not the owner of the premises described in said
application, that he or she has a lawful right to possession of the same until
the expiration of the term of the license for which application is made.
   (B)   Each licensee shall furnish the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with
a certificate of such insurance, and in the event of cancellation, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner shall be notified immediately of such cancellation.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.11 TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS; FORFEITURES.
   (A)   Term of license. All licenses shall be valid for a period not to
exceed one year after issuance unless sooner terminated, revoked, or suspended
as provided in this chapter, and all licenses shall terminate on April 30 next
following their issuance.
   (B)   Renewal of license.
      (1)   Any licensee may apply for renewal of a license at the expiration
thereof; provided, that he or she is then qualified to receive a license, and
the premises for which such renewal license is sought is suitable for such
purpose.
      (2)   Provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for
shall not be construed as a vested right which shall, in any case, prevent the
President and Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be
issued within the village or to be issued within the village within any class.
   (C)   Cessation of business; forfeiture of license. Any licensee who ceases
to do business or closes his or her place of business for a period of more than
30 successive days shall be subject to having his or her license declared
forfeited and lapsed by order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-11)
§ 111.12 TRANSFER OF LICENSE; CHANGES IN LICENSEE.
   (A)   Transfer of license. A license shall be a purely personal privilege,
good for a period of not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner
revoked, and shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall
not descend by the laws of testate or intestate succession; provided, that
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of sale of alcoholic liquor
under the order of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges of the
deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or
such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but no
longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of such
licensee.
   (B)   Changes in licensee.
      (1)   (a)   Any changes in partnership, officers, directors, or persons
holding directly or beneficially more than 5% of the stock or ownership
interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be
reported, in writing, to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days
of the change.
         (b)   All new personnel shall meet all of the standards of this
chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license.
      (2)   When a license has been issued for a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate.
      (3)   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in officers, directors, managers, or shareholders of more than 5% of the
stock resulting in the holding of such office position or such shares of stock
by one who is not eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
      (4)   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer
eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-12)
§ 111.13 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Display of license. All retail liquor dealer’s licenses issued in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be displayed in a
prominent place in the licensed establishment.
   (B)   Hours of sale.
      (1)   Daily. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic
liquor in the village between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall be
unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public to any premises in or
on which alcoholic liquor is sold during the hours within which such sale is
prohibited; provided, that in the case of restaurants, clubs, and hotels, such
establishments may be kept open, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or
consumed by the public during such hours.
      (2)   Sunday. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any
alcoholic liquor between the hours of 1:00 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday
except as herein provided in divisions (B)(4) and (B)(5) below.
      (3)   Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve. The hours of closing on Christmas
Eve (December 24) shall be 6:00 p.m. When New Year’s Eve (December 31) falls on
Sunday, retail liquor licensees shall be allowed to open at 5:00 p.m. on
Sunday, December 31. The hours of closing on New Year’s Eve shall be 2:00 a.m.
on January 1.
      (4)   Class D license. A Class D license holder may sell or offer for
sale alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well as sale in
packages or bottles on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
      (5)   Class E license. A Class E license holder may sell or offer for
sale alcoholic liquor in the original packages, not for consumption on the
premises where sold, on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (C)   Refilling original packages. No person licensed under this chapter
shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic
liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession for sale at
retail any bottles, casks, or other containers of alcoholic liquor, except in
original packages.
   (D)   Solicitation.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his or her manager, or other
person in charge of any licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or
offered for sale for consumption thereon to engage, employ, or permit the
engagement or employment of any person, nor shall any person be permitted to
remain on said premises who shall solicit any patron or customer thereof to
purchase alcoholic or non-alcoholic liquor for said person or any other person
therein, nor shall any person, whether employee, entertainer, or otherwise,
solicit any patron or customer therein to purchase alcoholic or non-alcoholic
liquor for said person or any other person therein.
      (2)   Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit any
adult manager, bartender, waiter, or waitress, who shall be regularly employed
therein, from accepting and serving the order of a patron or customer in the
regular course of employment as such manager, bartender, waiter, or waitress.
   (E)   Gambling. It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor.
   (F)   Lewdness. It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to permit or
allow any lewd person to remain in and about any such premises or to allow any
soliciting or prostitution practices or lewdness.
   (G)   Intoxication; disorderliness. It shall be unlawful for any licensee,
individually or through his or her agents or employees, to allow intoxicated
persons to loiter on or about that part of the premises described in the
license, which part is in use by or in view of the general public, or permit
any conduct which shall tend to disturb the peace or quiet of the neighborhood
or the premises.
   (H)   Peddling liquor. It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in
the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-13) (Ord. 95-3, passed 12-5-1995; Ord. 2003-1, passed 2-18-
2003) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.14 BUILDING AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Location restrictions.
      (1)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans,
their spouses or children, or any military or naval station; provided, that
this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on if such
place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes
prior to the taking effect of this chapter, nor to the renewal of a license for
the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any
church or school where such church or school has been established within such
100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church,
the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building
used for worship services or educational programs and not to property
boundaries.
      (2)   Nothing in this division (A) shall prohibit the issuance of a
license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any
such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises
solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Multiple locations.
      (1)   Where two or more locations, places, or premises are under the same
roof or at one street address, a separate local retail liquor dealer’s license
shall be obtained for each such location, place, or premises.
      (2)   Provided, that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to
prevent any hotel or motel operator licensed under the provisions of this
chapter from serving alcoholic liquor to his or her registered guests in any
room or part of his or her hotel or motel if such liquor so served shall be
kept in and served from a licensed location, place, or premises in said hotel
or motel.
   (C)   Change of location.
      (1)   All licenses issued hereunder shall embrace only one place of
business. A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only on the premises described in the application and license.
      (2)   A license may be transferred upon the approval of the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner from one location or premises to another only when and
upon the written permit to make such change is issued, by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner and upon the payment of $200.
      (3)   No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-14) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.15 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Premises. All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or
for the storage of such liquor for sale shall be kept in full compliance with
the ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or
sale of food for human consumption.
   (B)   Employees. It shall be unlawful to employ in the premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a
carrier of any contagious, infectious, or venereal disease, and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the
handling, preparation, or distribution of such liquor.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-15) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.16 ATTIRE.
   (A)   (1)   Every licensee and every employee, associate, agent, member,
officer, representative, or independent contractor of such licensee, whether
compensated or not, shall be properly and decently attired during the course of
the sale, distribution, service, pouring, mixing, drawing, dispensation or
delivery of alcoholic liquors of every description, either independently or in
conjunction with food or foodstuffs, across a bar or at a table.
      (2)   Topless or similar costumes are prohibited.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any employee, associate,
agent, member, officer, representative, or independent contractor of such
licensee, whether compensated or not, at any time on the premises or in the
course of the conduct of the business to which the license provided under this
chapter applies, to:
      (1)   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region;
      (2)   Expose any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region, or pubic hair region; and/or
      (3)   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person
described in divisions (A) or (B) above to violate any of the provisions
hereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-16) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.17 PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Gratuities for public officials. No official or employee of the
village shall solicit or accept any gift, gratuity, emolument, or employment
from any person or agent of any person holding a village liquor license and the
holder of any liquor license is hereby forbidden to give or offer to give any
official or employee of the village any gift, gratuity, emolument, or
employment.
   (B)   Consumption of liquor in public. It shall be unlawful for any person
to consume any alcoholic liquor, as defined by law, on any public way in the
village or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public way in the village.
   (C)   Open bottle law. No person shall transport, carry, possess, or have
any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle upon a public way in
the village, except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-17) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/1-3.05
§ 111.18 CERTAIN SALES PROHIBITED.
   No licensee or officer, associate member, representative, agent, or employee
of such licensee shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of 21 years or to any intoxicated person or to any person known
by him or her to be an habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally
deficient, or in need of mental treatment.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-18) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.19 MINORS.
   (A)   Possession, consumption, or sale to prohibited.
      (1)   (a)   No person under the age of 21 years shall consume, purchase,
or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession within the village.
         (b)   Provided, the possession and dispensing or consumption of
alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, the
consumption by a person under the age of 21 under direct supervision and
approval of the parent or guardian of such underage person in the privacy of
the parent’s or guardian’s home, or the possession or delivery of alcoholic
liquors in pursuance of a person’s employment by a licensee under this chapter
as allowed in division (E) below is not prohibited.
      (2)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person
under the age of 21 years, except as allowed under division (A)(1) above.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises
located within the village to knowingly allow any person under the age of 21
years to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or
while consuming alcoholic liquors in violation of this division (A).
   (B)   Presence on licensed premises.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license, or his or
her agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person under the age of 21 years
to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated
in the room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided, that
this division (B) shall not apply to any person under the age of 21 years who
is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to that portion of any
licensed premises which derives its principal business from restaurants or the
sale of service or commodities other than alcoholic liquor.
      (2)   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this division (B),
any licensee, or his or her agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of 21
years, as required by this chapter.
   (C)   Identification requirements.
      (1)   If a licensee, or his or her agent or employee, believes, has
reason to believe, or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage,
then he or she shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation
of at least two separate forms of positive identification, each containing
proof of age, each issued by a public officer in the performance of his or her
official duties, and one of those forms of identification must contain a
picture of the holder thereof. A traffic citation shall not be accepted as
identification or evidence of age.
      (2)   No person shall transfer, alter, or deface an identification card
issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision or
agency thereof, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or
forged identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
identification.
      (3)   No person shall purchase, accept delivery, or have possession of
alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged, or defaced identification
card or by the use of an identification card of another person.
      (4)   No person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village where
alcoholic liquor is sold at retail.
   (D)   Warning signs. In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is
sold, there shall be displayed, at all times, in a prominent place, a printed
card which shall read substantially as follows:
 
WARNING: If you are under 21 years of age, you are subject to a fine up to
$500.00, under the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Leaf River, if you
PURCHASE alcoholic liquor or MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor. OFFICIAL PHOTO IDENTIFICATION will be
required to prove age before purchase.
 
   (E)   Employment of minors.
      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee to
engage, employ, or permit any person under the age of 21 years to attend bar
and/or to draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises.
         (b)   Provided, that the provisions of this division (E) shall not be
construed to prevent the employment of persons who are at least 19 years of age
as waiters or waitresses in restaurants, hotels, or motels for the purpose of
serving food and alcoholic liquor on the licensed retail premises.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee to engage, employ,
or permit any person under 21 years of age to sell any alcoholic liquor in any
licensed premises.
   (F)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent or
guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any minor child, of which he or she may
be the parent or guardian, to violate any provision of this chapter.
   (G)   Additional penalty for sale to minors.
      (1)   In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew any license of a
licensee who violates the provisions of §
111.18 and division (B) above, or whose employee or agent violates the
provisions of said division (B) above or §
111.18.
      (2)   Proof that the licensee, or his or her employee or agent, demanded,
was shown and reasonably relied upon written evidence of identification, as
required by division (C) above, in any transaction forbidden by §
111.18 and division (B) above, is competent evidence and may be considered in
any ordinance violation prosecution or in any proceedings for the suspension or
revocation of any license based on a violation of §
111.18 and division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-19) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.20 APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner,
proprietor, or person in charge of any place in the village where alcoholic
liquor is sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other provision of
this code or of the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-20)
§ 111.21 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES.
   (A)   Suspension or revocation of license. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may, in accordance with the Liquor Control Act, revoke or suspend
any license issued under the provisions of this chapter if he determines that
the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act,
being 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., this chapter, or any other ordinance or
resolution enacted by the corporate authorities of the village, or any
applicable rules or regulations established by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner or the State Liquor Control Commission, or any state and/or
federal statute which is not inconsistent with this chapter.
   (B)   Fine in lieu of suspension or revocation. In lieu of suspension or
revocation of a local license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may,
instead, levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000
for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Not more than $10,000 in fines may be imposed against any
licensee during any license year.
   (C)   Immediate closure of business.
      (1)   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that
any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately
threaten the welfare of the community, he or she may, upon the issuance of a
written order stating the reasons for such conclusion and without notice or
hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days,
giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period.
      (2)   Except, that if the licensee is also engaged in another business on
the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other
business.
   (D)   Public hearing.
      (1)   No such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee
shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner with a three-day written notice to the licensee affording the
licensee an opportunity to appear and defend the charges contained in such
notice.
      (2)   The three-day notice provisions shall begin the day following
delivery by certified or registered mail or by personal service.
   (E)   Decisions.
      (1)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall, within five days after
such hearing, if he or she determines after such hearing that the license
should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, state the
reason for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the
fine, the period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked and serve
a copy of such order within the five days upon the licensee.
      (2)   Review of the decisions of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall be as provided for in 235 ILCS 5/7-9 of the Liquor Control Act, being 235
ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., and shall be limited to a review of the official record of
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (F)   Costs.
      (1)   (a)   Any licensee determined by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner to have violated any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act,
being 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., or any ordinance or resolution of the village, or
any rule or regulation established by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or
the State Liquor Control Commission shall pay to the village the costs of the
hearing before the Local Liquor Control Commissioner on such violation.
         (b)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall determine the costs
incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but not limited to, court
reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney’s fees, the cost
of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous
expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may allow.
      (2)   (a)   The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within 30
days of notification of the costs by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
         (b)   Failure to pay said costs within 30 days of notification is a
violation of this section and may be cause for license suspension or revocation
or the levy of a fine.
      (3)   In the event of an appeal to the State Liquor Control Commission,
and in cases where the appeal is taken pursuant to the Administrative Review
Act, being 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., payment is due 40 days after the entry of
an order finally affirming the determination of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   (G)   Effect of license revocation. When any license shall have been revoked
for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for the period of
one year thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic liquor
at retail in the premises described in such revoked license.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-21)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-5 and 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
§ 111.22 RECORDS KEPT.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall keep a complete record of all local retail
liquor dealers’ licenses issued and shall immediately give written notice to
the Chief of Police of the issuance, renewal, revocation, or suspension of any
license.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall process all applications for local retail
liquor dealers’ licenses and any renewal thereof. In addition, at the request
of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, the Village Clerk shall perform such
other duties as may be necessary to administer the provisions contained in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-22)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Liability for violations. Every act or omission of whatsoever nature
constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any
officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be
deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and such employer
or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission
had been done or omitted by him or her personally.
   (B)   Penalties generally. Any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §
10.99(A) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition to any
other penalty, a licensee convicted of violating any provision of this chapter
may be subject to having his or her license revoked, suspended, or not renewed
by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   License revocation as additional penalty. Whenever any licensee shall
have been convicted by any court of a violation of any of the provisions of the
Liquor Control Act, being 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., or of this chapter, or any
other ordinances of the village controlling or regulating the sale of alcoholic
liquors, the licensee shall, in addition to all other penalties for such
offense, incur a forfeiture of any local retail liquor dealer’s license issued
pursuant to this chapter and all monies that have been paid therefor.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-23)
   (D)   License revoked. Any person violating the provisions of §
111.17(A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the license of any such person
who, himself or herself, or through an agent, violates §
111.17(A) shall be revoked forthwith.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-17)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENT AND LEISURE
Section
Circuses and Carnivals
   
112.01   Applicability
   
112.02   License required; fees
   
112.03   Circuses and carnivals; bond required
   
112.04   Conditions of license
   
112.05   Building and premises
Coin-Operated Devices
   
112.20   Definition
   
112.21   License required
   
112.22   Application for licenses
   
112.23   Requirements and restrictions
   
112.24   Inspections
Pool Halls and Billiards
   
112.35   License required; application and fees
   
112.36   Consent of adjoining landowners
   
112.37   Closing hours
Raffles
   
112.50   Purpose
   
112.51   Definitions
   
112.52   Compliance with provisions required
   
112.53   Application for license
   
112.54   Licensee qualifications
   
112.55   Review of application
`   
112.56   Issuance of license; fees; terms; conditions
   
112.57   Raffles Manager; bond requirements
   
112.58   Conduct of raffles
   
112.59   Accounting and records
 
   
112.99   Penalty
CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
§ 112.01 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter, except as to licenses and fees, shall
apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses, and other amusements in the
village, whether licensed specifically in another chapter of this title or not.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open
to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged without having first
secured a license therefor; provided, that the provisions of this section shall
not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by
other provisions of this subchapter, this code, or other ordinances.
   (B)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Village Clerk and
shall comply with the general provisions of this subchapter relating to such
applications.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided, the fees for such licenses shall be as
follows:
 
Carnivals (for each separate concession)          $15 per day
Exhibitions of inanimate objects                  $5 per day
Menageries                                        $10 per day
Other public amusements not specifically licensed $5 per day
 
(Prior Code, § 3-3-2) Penalty, see §
112.99
Cross-reference:
   Application for license or permit, see §
110.04
§ 112.03 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS; BOND REQUIRED.
   No license for a circus, menagerie, or carnival shall be issued until the
applicant therefor shall have filed with the Village Clerk a surety and
indemnity bond in such amount as may be required by the Board of Trustees from
a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be
approved by the Village Attorney and shall be conditioned to save harmless the
village from any liability which might arise by reason of the operation or
conduct of such circus, menagerie, or carnival.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Order; crowding.
      (1)   The audience of any amusement, show, or theatrical shall be orderly
and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful to create or permit a
disturbance at such performance.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness
any amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or
other risks.
   (B)   Indecent shows. It shall be unlawful for any person to present,
exhibit, or conduct any indecent show, theatrical, motion picture, exhibition,
or other form of public amusement or show.
   (C)   Riots and public disturbances. It shall be unlawful to present any
public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to promote
any riot or public disturbance.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-4) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 BUILDING AND PREMISES.
   (A)   Compliance with building regulations. It shall be unlawful to conduct
or hold any public show, theatrical, or public meeting in any building or
premises which does not comply with the requirements of this code and other
ordinances of this village relating to the construction of buildings.
   (B)   Exits. It shall be unlawful to conduct or hold any such performance or
exhibition in any place not equipped with adequate exits, and all exits in such
building or place shall be kept free of access and unobstructed.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-5) Penalty, see §
112.99
Cross-reference:
   Building regulations, see §§
150.01 through
150.08
COIN-OPERATED DEVICES
§ 112.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any mechanical amusement device or equipment
which is governed by or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token,
including, without being limited to, any such device or equipment capable of
reproducing musical sounds.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-1)
§ 112.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a coin-operated amusement
device, either by himself or herself, or through an agent, employee, or
partner, without first having obtained a license as is herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-2) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.22 APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   An application for a license under this chapter shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to applications
for licenses.
   (B)   Such application shall also state the description of the coin-operated
device or devices intended to be kept for use on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-3)
§ 112.23 REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Disturbing the peace. No license issued hereunder shall permit the
operation of any coin-operated musical device at any place or in any manner
which will disturb the peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed
premises.
   (B)   Game rewards posted. No coin-operated amusement device shall be
licensed where the reward for skill in the operation thereof is not plainly
posted upon such machine or where the opportunity for a reward for skill in the
operation thereof is not the same for each individual player.
   (C)   Gambling prohibited. No gambling device or individual wagering on any
such device is permitted.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-4) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.24 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Village President, or such officer as
appointed by the Village President, to make or cause to be made such
inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter and all other ordinances relating hereto.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-5)
POOL HALLS AND BILLIARDS
§ 112.35 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   License required; application.
      (1)   No person shall operate, maintain, or conduct a billiard, pool,
bagatelle, or other pigeonhole table open to the public without first having
obtained a license therefor as is herein provided.
      (2)   All applications for such a license shall state thereon the
intended location of the place of business and the number of tables to be used
therein.
   (B)   License fee. The annual fee for any such license shall be $10 for the
first table and $5 for each additional table.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-1)
§ 112.36 CONSENT OF ADJOINING LANDOWNERS.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any billiard or pool
establishment anywhere in the village where a majority of the buildings lying
wholly within a radius of 300 feet are used for residential purposes without
having first secured the written consent of the owners of two-thirds of the
lots or parcels of land lying within such radius.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-2) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.37 CLOSING HOURS.
   All pool or billiard establishments open to the public in the village are
hereby required to be closed for all purposes and cease doing business of any
kind whatsoever at 1:00 a.m., and they shall remain so closed, and no business
whatever shall be done therein until 6:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-3)
RAFFLES
§ 112.50 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate and control the conduct of
raffles within the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-1)
§ 112.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Village Board of the Village of Leaf River, Ogle County,
Illinois.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to
those eligible for benefits must confer benefit upon the public generally.
   CLERK. The Village Clerk.
   EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION. An organization or institution organized and
operated to provide instruction by methods common to schools and institutions
of learning which compare in their scope and intensity, but are not necessarily
limited to, the course of study presented in tax supported public schools.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS. An organization of persons having a common
interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote welfare of its
members and provide assistance to the general public.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION. An organization of workers organized with the objective
of betterment of the conditions in their respective occupations.
   LICENSEE. An organization which has been issued a license to operate a
raffle as provided under this subchapter.
   NET PROCEEDS. Gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less sums expended
for prizes, license fees, and other normal and reasonable operating expenses
incurred as a direct result of the raffle.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization which is operated and conducted on a not-for-
profit basis with no personal profit incurring to the benefit of any one
individual as a result of said operation.
   PERSON. Individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation,
government, partnership, or unincorporated association.
   RAFFLE. As defined in 230 ILCS 15/2.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. A church congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS ORGANIZATION. An organization or association comprised of members
who are veterans or spouses, or widows or widowers of veterans, the primary
purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and provide
assistance to the public.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-2)
§ 112.52 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a raffle or to sell, offer for
sale, convey, issue, or otherwise transfer for value a chance on a raffle
unless done in accordance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-3) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.53 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle shall file an application
therefor with the Clerk on the forms provided by the Clerk. Said application
shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and type of organization;
   (B)   The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the
date and state of incorporation;
   (C)   The name, address, telephone number, Social Security number, the date
of birth of the organization’s presiding officer, secretary, raffles’ manager,
and other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle;
   (D)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle;
   (E)   The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded in the raffle;
   (F)   The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold;
   (G)   The maximum number of raffle chances to be issued;
   (H)   The area in which raffle chances will be issued or sold;
   (I)   The time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold;
   (J)   The date, time, and location at which winning chances will be
determined;
   (K)   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the
applicant organization signed by its presiding officer and secretary;
   (L)   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the applicant
organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in the
application is true and correct; and
   (M)   A fidelity bond in an amount equal to the aggregate retail value of
all prizes to be awarded shall accompany said application.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-4)
§ 112.54 LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS.
   Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide charitable, educational,
fraternal, labor, religious, and veterans’ organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five years or more immediately before making application for a
license and which have had, during that entire five-year period, a bona fide
membership engaged in carrying out the purpose of said organization. The
following are ineligible for any raffle license:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character; and/or
   (D)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B), and
(C) above has a proprietary, equitable, or credit interest, or in which such
person is active or employed, whether compensated or not, or is an officer or
director.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-5)
§ 112.55 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   The Clerk shall review all raffle license applications and recommend
approval or denial, in writing, to the Village Board within ten days from the
date of application. The Board shall, within 30 days from the date of
application, accept or reject a raffle license application.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-6)
§ 112.56 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FEES; TERMS; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Issuance. If an application is accepted, the Clerk shall issue a
raffle license to be valid for a period of time stated in the application but,
in no event, longer than 120 days.
   (B)   Fee. A license shall be valid for one raffle only. The fee for each
license shall be $5.
   (C)   Conditions of license.
      (1)   The raffle license shall limit the area in which raffle chances may
be sold or issued to the village limits, and shall show the period of time
during which raffle chances may be sold or issued. The license shall also show
the date, time, and location at which the winning chances will be determined.
      (2)   The license shall be prominently displayed at the time and location
of the determination of the winning chances.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-7)
§ 112.57 RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   The operation and conduct of a raffle shall be under the supervision of a
single raffle manager designated by the licensee. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond equal in the amount to the aggregate retail value of all prizes
to be awarded in favor of the licensee, conditioned upon his or her honesty in
the performance of his or her duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that
notice shall be given, in writing, to the village not less than 30 days prior
to the cancellation of such bond. Corporate surety shall be given on such bond
unless waived by the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-8)
§ 112.58 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The operation and conduct of raffles are subject to the following
restrictions.
   (A)   Lawful purpose. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purpose of the licensee.
   (B)   Participation. No person except a bona fide member of the licensee may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   Profit. No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating
in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   Raffle area. Raffle chances may be sold, offered for sale, or issued
only within the area specified in the license, and the winning chances may be
determined only at the location specified on the license.
   (E)   Value of prizes; cost of chances. The aggregate retail value of all
prizes awarded shall not exceed $2,500, and the maximum retail value of any one
individual prize shall not exceed the value of $1,000. The maximum price for
each raffle chance shall be $5.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-9) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.59 ACCOUNTING AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Gross receipts account. Gross receipts from the operation of raffles
shall be segregated from other revenues of the licensee until the raffle is
complete, prizes awarded, and final report made to the village.
   (B)   Records to be kept.
      (1)   Each licensee shall keep records of its gross receipts and net
proceeds for each raffle. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as
to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.
      (2)   Raffle records shall be preserved for three years, and such records
will be made available for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-10)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Failure to comply with the provisions of §§
112.50 through
112.59 shall constitute a violation of this code, and each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable under the general penalty provisions of §
10.99(A). The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
state’s Attorney of the county from instituting appropriate action to prevent
unlawful raffles or restrain, correct or abate a violation of §§
112.50 through
112.59, or of the conditions of a raffle license issued pursuant hereto.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-11)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
Peddlers
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License required; exceptions; food and health regulations
   
113.03   Applications for license; contents
   
113.04   License fees
   
113.05   Applicant to file sales tax returns
   
113.06   License expiration
   
113.07   Obstruction of traffic
   
113.08   Exhibiting license
   
113.09   Time limits on peddling
   
113.10   Exemptions from provisions
   
113.11   Revocation or suspension of license
Solicitors
   
113.25   Definitions
   
113.26   Certificate (license) of registration
   
113.27   Soliciting without certificate of registration prohibited
   
113.28   Time limit on soliciting
   
113.29   Exemptions
 
   
113.99   Penalty
PEDDLERS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person who travels within the village or has a temporary
location in the village for the conduct of his or her business, and who has no
permanent place of business in the village but offers or exposes for sale
goods, wares, or merchandise, or who makes sales and delivers articles to
purchasers.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels within the village or has a temporary
location for the conduct of his business, who solicits or takes or attempts to
take orders for sale or purchase of goods, wares, or merchandise, including
magazines, books, periodicals, or real or personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be performed or for the
donation of money or financial assistance, whether or not such individual has,
carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject for such order or whether
or not he or she is collecting advance payment on such orders. Such definition
includes, but is not limited to, any person who, for himself or herself or for
another person, firm, or corporation hires, leases, uses, or occupies any
building, motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, hotel room, lodging house,
apartment, shop, or other place within the village for the primary purpose of
exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Includes any person, firm, or corporation, whether as
owner, agent, or consignee, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares, property, services, and merchandise within the village
and who, in furtherance of said purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, hotel, motel or lodging
house, room, apartment, shop, street, alley, or other place within the village,
for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares, services, and merchandise,
either privately or at public auction. The person, firm, or corporation so
engaged is not relieved from complying with the provisions of this subchapter
by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, traders, merchant,
or auctioneer; provided, however, that if all sales made by such person, firm,
or corporation of goods, wares, merchandise, or services shall be reported for
sales tax collection purposes as made by such local dealer, trader, merchant,
or auctioneer and all monies derived from such sales shall be collected by such
local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, then such transient merchant
shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter. Only one such transient
business shall be allowed to associate temporarily with any local dealer,
trader, merchant, or auctioneer as a part of or in the name of any local
dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer at any one time. A resident of the
village conducting a yard sale shall not be considered to be a TRANSIENT
MERCHANT until he or she has conducted such sale for a total of four days
within one calendar year. After conduct of such sales for four days in any one
calendar year, the person conducting said sale shall be considered to be a
TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-1)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS; FOOD AND HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   License requirements. It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant to engage in any such businesses within the village without
first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter; provided, however, the Board of Trustees, by resolution, may exempt
from licensing peddlers, solicitors, or transient merchants selling at
locations approved in said resolution during an event declared to be of
village-wide interest, but provided further, that the sponsor of such exempted
event shall file with the Village Clerk prior to such event a list of the
names, Social Security numbers, and addresses of any participating peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant, along with a copy of a current sales tax
license.
   (B)   Compliance with state laws. All peddlers, solicitors, or transient
merchants shall comply with all applicable state food and health rules and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-2) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS.
   Applicants for a license under this subchapter shall file with the Village
Clerk a sworn application, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the Village
Clerk which shall give the following information:
   (A)   Name, proof of identity, photograph, and Social Security number of the
applicant;
   (B)   Complete permanent business, home, and local address of the applicant
and, in the case of the transient merchants, the local address from which
proposed sales will be made;
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold by such applicant;
   (D)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;
   (E)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; and
   (F)   The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold or
orders taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at
the time said application is filed and the proposed method of delivery.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-3)
§ 113.04 LICENSE FEES.
   Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this subchapter shall
pay the following fee upon the issuance of the license:
   (A)   For a one-day license: a fee of $10;
   (B)   For a one-week license, Monday through Saturday: a fee of $50; and
   (C)   For a 30-day license: a fee of $100.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-4)
§ 113.05 APPLICANT TO FILE SALES TAX RETURNS.
   Every applicant for a license hereunder shall file all required sales tax
returns.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-5)
§ 113.06 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   All licenses issued hereunder shall expire at 9:00 p.m. of the last day for
which the license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-6)
§ 113.07 OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to conduct his or her business at any
location, private or public, in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-7) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 EXHIBITING LICENSE.
   All licensees shall be required to exhibit their license at the time of
initial introduction to any person in the village for the purpose of
negotiating any transaction covered by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-8)
§ 113.09 TIME LIMITS ON PEDDLING.
   No person shall engage in peddling as herein defined prior to 8:00 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m. of any day; provided, that no person shall engage in peddling
at any time on a Sunday or any state or national holiday.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-9) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.10 EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The terms of this subchapter do not apply to persons engaged wholly in
selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, nor to the
acts of merchants having a permanent place of business in the village or their
employees in delivering goods in the regular course of business, nor shall it
include the following professions or businesses: newsboys, any public utility
and its employees franchised to do business within the village, auto
salesperson, and any dissemination of information without solicitation of money
or other consideration.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this subchapter prohibits any sales required by
statute or by order of any court or to prevent any person conducting a bona
fide auction sale pursuant to law.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-10)
§ 113.11 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Cause for revocation or suspension. Licenses issued under the
provisions of this subchapter may be revoked or suspended by the Village Board,
after notice and hearing, and for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the
application for license or made in the course of carrying on any business as
solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or
itinerant vendor;
      (2)   Any violation of this subchapter; and/or
      (3)   Conducting the business of a peddler, canvasser, solicitor,
transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor, as the case may
be, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of
the public.
   (B)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by
the Village President, in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds or
complaint and the time and place of the hearing.
      (2)   Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at
his or her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for
hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a
summons at least three days prior to the date set for hearing.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-11)
SOLICITORS
§ 113.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who engages in one or more of the following activities
within the village:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; and
      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project.
§ 113.26 CERTIFICATE (LICENSE) OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Every “solicitor”, as herein defined, is hereby required to make
written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon
a form provided by the Village Clerk and filed in the Clerk’s office. The
applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the
application, as follows:
         (a)   Name of applicant and his current residence address;
         (b)   Social Security number;
         (c)   Business address, if other than residence address;
         (d)   Age of applicant and date and place of birth;
         (e)   Physical description of the applicant;
         (f)   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or
organization by whom the applicant is employed or represents;
         (g)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter
for which the applicant will solicit;
         (h)   Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under
this subchapter ever been revoked, suspended or cancelled;
         (i)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of
the provisions of this subchapter or the ordinance of any other municipality
regulating soliciting;
         (j)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony;
         (k)   Description and registration of the motor vehicle that the
applicant is using; and
         (l)   Such other information and proof of identification as the
Village Board may require.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall cause to be kept in his or her office an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this subchapter, and of the denial
of applications.
      (3)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who
has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or
any other state or federal law of the United States within five years of the
date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter; nor to any person whose
certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as
herein provided.
   (C)   (1)   The Village Clerk, after consideration of the application and
all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the
applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein
required, or that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the
applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this
subchapter. Endorsement shall be made by the Village Clerk upon the application
of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be fully
qualified and payment of the registration fee is made to the Village Clerk, the
certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith.
      (2)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked
by the Village Clerk if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or has made a false
material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for
the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this
subchapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be
given by the Village Clerk to the holder of the certificate in person or by
certified U.S. mail addressed to the applicant at his or her residence or
business address set forth in the application.
      (3)   Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of
registration shall become null and void.
      (4)   The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date
thereof.
      (5)   A fee of $10 per day shall be charged to persons or entitles
soliciting for profit as a registration fee.
§ 113.27 SOLICITING WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION PROHIBITED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for anyone to enter
onto private property to engage in soliciting without a valid certificate of
registration in his or her possession. Such a certificate of registration shall
be presented by the solicitor for examination upon demand to any police
officer, village official, or owner or occupant of the premises wherein the
soliciting occurs. The certificate of registration is valid only for the person
for whom it is issued.
§ 113.28 TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.
   A certificate of registration for a solicitor shall expire at 9:00 p.m. on
the same day that it is issued. It shall be unlawful to engage in soliciting
prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any weekday or at any time on a Sunday
or on a holiday.
§ 113.29 EXEMPTIONS.
   Any person who, for the purpose of selling or taking orders for the sale of
merchandise or services, has been previously invited by the occupant of a
residence to call thereon.
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Each violation of any provision of §§
113.25 through
113.29 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50 and not more than
$300, and may be cause for revocation of the certificate of registration by the
village.
      (2)   Revocation of a certificate of registration shall cause a solicitor
to be ineligible to receive a new certificate of registration permit for a
period of up to one year.
CHAPTER 114: FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
   
114.01   Compliance required
   
114.02   Gross receipts fee
   
114.03   Reports of premiums
   
114.04   Payment due date
§ 114.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any corporation or association not incorporated
under the laws of the state to engage in effecting fire insurance to the
village or to transact any business of fire insurance in the village without
fully complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.02 GROSS RECEIPTS FEE.
   Any such corporation or association shall pay to the Treasurer, for the
maintenance, use, and benefit of the Fire Department Pension Fund, a sum of
money equal to 2% of the gross receipts each year received for premiums by any
and all agents of any such corporation or association, or received as premiums
in any way, for fire insurance policies on any property in the village. Such
payments shall be made for the year ending July 1 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-2)
§ 114.03 REPORTS OF PREMIUMS.
   Every person acting as a representative for or on behalf of any such company
or association shall, on or before July 15 of each year, render to the Village
Treasurer a full, true, and just account, verified by his or her oath, of all
premiums which have been received by him or her on behalf of the company during
the year ending the preceding July 1 on such fire insurance policies.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-3)
§ 114.04 PAYMENT DUE DATE.
   All payments under the provisions of this chapter shall be made on or before
July 15 following the termination of the year for which such payments are due.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-4)
CHAPTER 115: CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Cannabis business establishments prohibited
   
115.03   Public nuisance declared
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization,
or transporting organization.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to cultivate,
dry, cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (Pub. Act No. 101-0027),
being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport, and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (Pub. Act No. 101-
0027), being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of Financial
and Professional. Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis
business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis,
cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia, or related supplies
to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (Pub. Act No. 101-0027),
being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION or INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (Pub. Act No. 101-0027), being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.,
as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION or PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (Pub. Act No. 101-0027), being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may
be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION or TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (Pub. Act No.
101-0027), being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer, or
agent.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 11-11-2019)
§ 115.02 CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in
the village. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be
operated, or aide, abet, or assist in the operation within the village of any
of the following:
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
   (B)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
   (C)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization;
   (D)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   (E)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; and
   (F)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 11-11-2019) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the
village in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a
public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 11-11-2019)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $750. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 11-11-2019)
CHAPTER 116: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
116.01   Background
   
116.02   Regulation of terminals
§ 116.01 BACKGROUND.
   (A)   The village is authorized by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., (“Act”) to establish a fee for the operation of video game
terminals and the Act also establishes other regulations regarding the
installation, use, and operation of video gaming terminals.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees of the village find it to be in the best
interests of village residents to regulate video gambling terminals in
accordance with the Act and the rules of the Illinois Gaming Board.
(Ord. 12-4, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 116.02 REGULATION OF TERMINALS.
   (A)   An annual fee of $25 is hereby imposed on each video gaming terminal
operated within the village.
   (B)   An establishment licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board to operate
video gaming terminals will:
      (1)   Supply information about the location of such video gaming
terminals on a form supplied by the village;
      (2)   Provide a copy of the licensee’s application to the Illinois Gaming
Board and a copy of the license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board; and
      (3)   Pay the fee established in division (B)(1) above each year on or
before August in conjunction with the licensee’s application for a renewal of a
liquor license.
   (C)   Video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons over 21 years of age, the entrance to which is within the view of at
least one employee of the establishment who is over 21 years of age. Any
licensed establishment that allows persons under 21 years of age to enter must
segregate video gaming terminals in a separate are inaccessible to minors.
   (D)   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area of the licenced
establishment with restricted visibility from areas outside the business.
   (E)   An owner, manager or employee over the age of 21 years will be present
during all hours of operation when video gaming terminals are available for use
by the public.
   (F)   The licensed establishment will prevent access to video gaming
terminals by persons who are visibly intoxicated.
   (G)   The village and its agents shall have unrestricted access to enter the
licensed establishment to determine compliance with this chapter and the
Illinois Video Gaming Act.
(Ord. 12-4, passed 8-7-2012)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
132.   CURFEW FOR MINORS; LOITERING
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Purpose
   
130.02   State law provisions adopted
§ 130.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is designed to assure uniform application of state and
municipal regulations concerning the ownership, use, operation, and regulation
of certain statutory offenses.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-1)
§ 130.02 STATE LAW PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The following enumerated sections of the Illinois Compiled Statutes,
exclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalties or the punishment
to be imposed for violation of such sections, are adopted and by reference made
a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though set forth here
verbatim, and the terms “this Act” wherever used in any such section shall mean
this chapter, when necessary to effectuate the meaning of this section:
Chapter and Section Number Subject
Chapter and Section Number Subject
720 ILCS 5/11-30           Public Indecency
720 ILCS 5/12-1            Assault
720 ILCS 5/12-2            Aggravated Assault
720 ILCS 5/12-3            Battery
720 ILCS 5/12-5            Reckless Conduct
720 ILCS 5/16-1            Theft
720 I LCS 5/16-2           Theft of Lot or Mislaid Property
720 ILCS 5/16-3            Theft of Labor or Services
720 ILCS 5/16-5            Theft from Coin Operated Machines
720 ILCS 5/21-1            Criminal Damage to Property
720 ILCS 5/21-2            Criminal Trespass to Vehicle
720 ILCS 5/21-3            Criminal Trespass to Land
720 ILCS 5/24-1            Unlawful Use of Weapons
720 ILCS 5/24-2            U.U.W. Exemptions
720 ILCS 5/26-1            Disorderly Conduct
720 ILCS 5/31-1            Resisting a Police Officer
720 ILCS 5/31-3            Obstructing Service of Process
720 ILCS 5/31-4            Obstructing Justice
720 ILCS 5/31-6            Escape from Custody
720 ILCS 5/31-7            Aiding an Escape
720 ILCS 5/31-8            Refusing to Aid an Officer
720 ILCS 5/12C-30          Contributing to the Delinquency of a Minor
720 ILCS 5/12-7.1          Harassment by Telephone
720 ILCS 550/4             Possession of Cannabis
720 ILCS 550/5             Manufacture or Delivery of Cannabis
720 ILCS 550/8             Production of Cannabis Plant
720 ILCS 570/402           Possession of Controlled Substance
720 ILCS 635/1             Possession of Hypodermic Syringe and Needle
 
   (B)   Three copies of the above provisions shall have been on file in the
office of the Village Clerk and available for public use, inspection, and
examination for at least 30 days prior to the effective date hereof provided in
65 ILCS 5/1-3-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-1)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Discharge of firearms; hunting
Recreational Cannabis
   
131.15   Possession limit
   
131.16   Restrictions on personal use of cannabis
   
131.17   Persons under 21 years of age
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS; HUNTING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall discharge any firearms or do any hunting in the
village.
      (2)   This shall not apply to peace officers in the line of duty or any
person acting in self defense.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air gun, air
pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun, or any
implement that is not a firearm which entails a breakable paint ball containing
washable marking colors or a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead,
or other hard materials with a force that is reasonably expected to cause
bodily harm or property damage within the village.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-2) (Ord. 96-2, passed 8-6-1996) Penalty, see §
131.99
RECREATIONAL CANNABIS
§ 131.15 POSSESSION LIMIT.
   (A)   No person may possess cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis-infused
product, or cannabis concentrate in excess of the possession limits set forth
in § 10-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/10-10) also
known as the “Act.” For purposes of this subchapter, CANNABIS, CANNABIS FLOWER,
CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCT, and CANNABIS CONCENTRATE shall have the meanings set
forth in the Act.
   (B)   Except as may be authorized in the Act, for a person who is 21 years
of age or older and a resident of this state, the possession limit is as
follows:
      (1)   Thirty grams of cannabis flower;
      (2)   No more than 500 milligrams of THC contained in cannabis-infused
product;
      (3)   Five grams of cannabis concentrate; and
      (4)   For registered qualifying patients, any cannabis plants grown under
subsection (b) of § 10-5 of the Act, being 410 ILCS 705/10-5; provided, any
amount of cannabis produced in excess of 30 grams of raw cannabis or its
equivalent must remain secured within the residence or residential property in
which it was grown.
   (C)   For a person who is 21 years of age or older and who is not a resident
of this state, the possession limit is as follows:
      (1)   Fifteen grams of cannabis flower;
      (2)   Two and one-half grams of cannabis concentrate; and
      (3)   Two hundred fifty milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-infused
product.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly obtain, seek to obtain, or possess an amount
of cannabis from a dispensing organization that would cause him or her to
exceed the possession limits under this section, including cannabis that is
cultivated by a person under the Act or obtained under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
(Ord. 2019-6, passed 11-11-2019) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.16 RESTRICTIONS ON PERSONAL USE OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   No person may possess, use, or consume cannabis in such a manner as to
constitute a violation of § 10-5 of the Act, being 410 ILCS 705/10-5.
   (B)   Possession of cannabis is prohibited in the following described
locations:
      (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.;
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
      (3)   In any correctional facility;
      (4)   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
      (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or other similar social service are on the premises.
   (C)   Use or consumption of cannabis is prohibited in the following
described locations:
      (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act;
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
      (3)   In any correctional facility;
      (4)   In any motor vehicle;
      (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
      (6)   In a public place; or
      (7)   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under 21 years of
age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   (D)   Smoking cannabis is prohibited in any place where smoking is
prohibited under the Smoke Free Illinois Act, being 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.
   (E)   Operating, navigating, or being in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or snowmobile while using or under the
influence of cannabis in violation of §§ 11-501 or 11-502.1 of the State
Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-501 or 5/11-502.1, § 5-16 of the Boat
Registration and Safety Act, being 625 ILCS 45/5-16, or § 5-7 of the Snowmobile
Registration and Safety Act, being 625 ILCS 40/5-7, is prohibited.
   (F)   Facilitating the use of cannabis by any person who is not allowed to
use cannabis under the Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act is prohibited.
   (G)   Transferring cannabis to any person contrary to the Act or the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act is prohibited.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, a PUBLIC PLACE shall mean any place
where a person could reasonably be expected to be observed by others. PUBLIC
PLACE includes all parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by
the village, the state, or a unit of local government. PUBLIC PLACE does not
include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide
licensed child care, foster care, or similar social service care on the
premises.
(Ord. 2019-6, passed 11-11-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-13-2020)
§ 131.17 PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age, or to allow a person
under 21 years of age, to purchase, possess, use, process, transport, grow, or
consume cannabis except where authorized by the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq., or by the Community
College Cannabis Vocational Pilot Program.
(Ord. 2019-6, passed 11-11-2019) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §
131.01 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as provided in §
10.99(A) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-3)
CHAPTER 132: CURFEW FOR MINORS; LOITERING
Section
   
132.01   Loitering of minors; hours
§ 132.01 LOITERING OF MINORS; HOURS.
   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or
upon any public assembly, building, place, store or highway at the following
times unless accompanied by and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible companion at least 18 years of age approved by a parent or legal
guardian, or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of the
state authorize a person less than 18 years of age to perform:
   (A)   Between one minute past 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
   (B)   Between one minute past 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
   (C)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on
the following day.
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   MOBILE HOMES, PARKS
      
152.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
153.   TREES
      
154.   FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Regulations
   
150.01   Building permit required
   
150.02   Plans, specifications required
   
150.03   Compliance with codes; fees
   
150.04   Administration of provisions
   
150.05   Interpretation of building regulations
   
150.06   Stop work order
   
150.07   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.08   Use of property
   
150.09   Building Code; minimum regulations; amendments and revisions
   
150.10   Demolition permits
Fences
   
150.20   Height, location
   
150.21   Construction requirements
   
150.22   Fence permits
   
150.23   Specifications, conditions and types
   
150.24   Responsibility of owners and occupants; exemptions
Dangerous Buildings
   
150.35   Property Maintenance Code adopted
   
150.36   Nuisance declared
Moving Buildings
   
150.50   Permit required; application
   
150.51   Bond requirements
   
150.52   Approval of routes; fees, issuance of permit
   
150.53   Lights, warnings
   
150.54   Cutting of wires
Broadcast Receiving Antennas
   
150.65   Definitions
   
150.66   Permit required; plan approval; fee
 
   
150.99   Penalty
BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 150.01 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to construct or alter any building or structure in the
village where there are to be any changes in the height, outside dimensions, or
any structural changes, or where the bearing walls of any building or structure
are altered, or where a porch, breezeway, carport, or other roofed area is
enclosed, or construct a parking lot, without first securing a building permit.
No new building permit shall be issued unless the water connection charge,
water meter charge, and sewer connection charge are paid in full as set forth
in this code.
   (B)   (1)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk
and shall be accompanied by a completed permit application, two site plans and
two sets of building plans. The Building Inspector shall review the plans
within 14 days. Upon approval of the plans by the Building Inspector, the
Village Clerk will contact the applicant to pick up the permit. The applicant
must remit all permit fees, hookup fees, and impact fees prior to receiving the
approved building permit. All plans and papers shall be stamped “permit copy”.
The applicant shall sign the stamped required inspections sheet and stamped
electrical service handout. Upon payment of all fees, the applicant shall
receive a yellow copy and large hard copy of the permit to be posted. All plans
and papers shall be stamped “permit copy”.
      (2)   The following checklist shall facilitate application for a building
permit. This checklist does not supersede the above but shall be provided, upon
request, as a guide to the permit application process.
      (3)   Checklist for building permit application:
         (a)   Applicant completes building permit application;
         (b)   Applicant submits two site plans and two sets of building plans
along with a required fee as specified in the permit fee worksheet;
         (c)   The Village Clerk or designee creates a job file folder to be
kept on file at the Village Hall;
         (d)   The Village Clerk contacts the Building Inspector to review the
plans within 14 days and makes the required materials available to the Building
Inspector;
         (e)   At the completion of the review, the Building Inspector contacts
that Village Clerk when plans are ready to be issued;
         (f)   The Village Clerk contacts the applicant and notifies the
applicant that the plans are ready to be issued;
         (g)   All plans, required inspections, and the electrical service
handout must be stamped and signed prior to issuing the building permit;
         (h)   The applicant remits the permit fees, hookup fees and impact
fees prior to receiving the building permit;
         (i)   Upon payment of all outstanding fees, the Village Clerk issues a
yellow copy of the building permit and a large hard copy of the permit to be
posted; and
         (j)   All building permit application documents are to be kept in a
job folder and filed in the active file drawer.
   (C)   Such applications with the plans shall be referred to the Village
Building Inspector who shall examine the same to determine whether the proposed
preparations will comply with the ordinance provisions relating thereto. Upon
approval, one set of plans shall be returned by the Village Building Inspector
to the Village Clerk who shall issue a building permit. No permit shall be
issued except after approval of the plans and payment of the fee provided in
division (D) below.
   (D)   The fees for building permits shall be as set by the governing body.
When a building permit is required and work is started or proceeded with prior
to obtaining the same, the specified fee shall be doubled. The payment of such
double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the
requirements of this code, nor from the completion of any work, nor from any
penalties prescribed herein.
   (E)   It is unlawful to vary materially from the approved plans and
specifications deposited with and approved by the Village Building Inspector
unless amended plans and specifications showing such proposed alteration or
variation are first filed with and approved by the Village Building Inspector.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of the Village Building Inspector and any
lawfully appointed deputies to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Village Building Inspector is empowered to make such inspections as may be
necessary to see to the enforcement of these provisions, and to make any tests
or examinations of materials or methods to be used, for the purpose of
determining if they comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   The permit holder must provide his or her name, phone number, and
address (including city) when calling for an inspection. The Building Inspector
will contact the permittee within 24 hours of notification to schedule an
inspection. If the Building Inspector needs to return more than once for the
same phase of any required inspection, an additional $75 fee will be required
to be paid prior to continuing construction. Work shall not proceed until the
Building Inspector approves various stages of construction.
   (H)   If the permit holder does not call for required inspections, the
Building Inspector may require the permit holder or contractor to remove or
open any necessary materials for the inspections to be completed. This will be
at the permit holder’s expense.
   (I)   A permit is good for one year unless the permittee fails to start
within six months. If the permittee starts within six months, but does not
complete the job within one year, the permittee can only get a (one) permit
extension for six months.
   (J)   A permit which has been expired for six months or less, may be renewed
provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for
such work. The renewal fee shall be one-half of the amount required for a new
permit. Permits which have been expired for longer than six months require a
new application and payment of the full permit fee.
§ 150.02 PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure,
or for remodeling or repairing affecting bearing walls or roofs, other than
resurfacing, or chimneys or for moving a building onto the premises in the
village, unless the application is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the
proposed location showing lot boundaries and by plans and specifications
showing the work to be done.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-2) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.03 COMPLIANCE WITH CODES; FEES.
   (A)   All work done under any permit issued shall be in full compliance with
the water ordinance, ordinances pertaining to street excavations, and all other
ordinances pertaining thereto.
   (B)   In addition to the fees for permits hereinafter provided for, there
shall be paid the fees prescribed in such ordinances, including:
 
Charge                       Fee
Building permit              $10
Sewer connection charge      $250
Water tap and connection fee $250
 
(Prior Code, § 8-1-3)
§ 150.04 ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The proper village official shall have the power and duty to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, and all fees provided herein shall be paid to
the Village Clerk.
   (B)   All permits shall be issued by the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-4)
§ 150.05 INTERPRETATION OF BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   Wherever in the building regulations it is provided that anything must be
done to the approval of or subject to the direction of any officer of the
village, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of
determining whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have been
complied with, and no such provision shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what such regulations or standards shall be or power
to require conditions prescribed by ordinance or to enforce ordinance
provisions in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-5)
§ 150.06 STOP WORK ORDER.
   (A)   Order issued.
      (1)   Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of
this title, or in variance with the terms of any permit issued for such work,
the proper village official may order all work on the job stopped until such
violation or variance is eliminated and any work or installation made in
violation of this chapter corrected.
      (2)   Such stop order, if oral, shall be followed by a written stop order
within 24 hours (excluding Saturday, Sunday, or holidays).
   (B)   Performance of work after order. It shall be unlawful to do or perform
any work in violation of such stop order, except as may be necessary to prevent
injury or damage to persons or property.
   (C)   Revocation of order. Such stop order may be revoked by the Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-6) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.07 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered,
or repaired after the effective date hereof shall be issued unless such
building or structure was erected, altered, or repaired in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-7) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.08 USE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DWELLING. A building or portion of a building designed or used as the
living quarters of one or more families.
      LOT. A parcel of land intended to be separately owned, developed, and
otherwise used as a unit.
      MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling or group of dwellings on one lot
containing separate living units for two or more families, but which may have
joint services or facilities or both, but shall not include a hotel or motel.
   (B)   Prohibited. No building upon a lot contiguous to or adjacent to Main
Street within the village shall be used as a multi-family dwelling.
   (C)   Non-conforming uses. When the applicable provisions of this section do
not allow a use of part or all of a building lawfully existing as of the date
of adoption of this subchapter, such existing use may be continued so long as
otherwise lawful.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-8) (Ord. 2004-6, passed 11-5-2004) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.09 BUILDING CODE; MINIMUM REGULATIONS; AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.
   (A)   This code is supplemented by adoption of a building code establishing
minimum regulations, governing the design, construction, alteration,
enlargement, repair, demolition, removal, maintenance and use of all buildings
and structures defined by the 2006 International Code Council (ICC) books, 2006
International Property Maintenance Code book, 2000 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code
book and the 2005 NEC Handbook; providing for the issuance of permits,
collection of fees, making of inspections; providing penalties for the
violation thereof; to be known as the “building codes”; and repealing all
existing provisions of this code that are in conflict with the terms,
conditions and limitations of the 2006 ICC, 2000 NFPA and 2005 NEC Building
Codes. The following books have been adopted:
      (1)   2006 International Property Maintenance Code;
      (2)   2006 International Residential Code;
      (3)   2006 International Building Code;
      (4)   2006 International Plumbing Code;
      (5)   2006 International Fire Code;
      (6)   2006 International Mechanical Code;
      (7)   2000 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code; and
      (8)   2005 NEC Handbook.
   (B)   (1)   2006 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended
to delete sections: 107.2(5) and 107.2(6) regarding form of Notice; 108.3
regarding Notice; 110.1 through 110.3 regarding demolition; and 111 regarding
means of appeal. With regards to demolition of structures and notice of same,
the village shall comply with state statutes as amended.
      (2)   (a)   2006 International Residential Code is hereby amended to
delete Section R112 regarding Board of Appeals in its entirety.
         (b)   Section R105.2, “Work exempt from permit”, the first sentence of
same is hereby amended to read as follows, “Except where in conflict with the
Village Code of Ordinances, permits shall not be required for the following.”
The rest and remainder of Section R105.2 shall remain in full force and effect.
         (c)   Section 105.3.2, “Time limitation of application”, shall be
amended to delete the following language therein, “one or more extensions of
time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each” and insert the
following language, “one extension for an additional period not exceeding 90
days.”
         (d)   Section R105.5, “Expiration”, as currently written is hereby
deleted in its entirety and henceforth shall read as follows, “Every permit
issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced
within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time work is
commenced. The Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion, may grant one permit
extension for a period not more than 180 days. The extension shall be requested
in writing within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the initial permit and
justifiable cause demonstrated therein for the extension.”
         (e)   Section R113.2, “Notice of violation”, shall be amended to
provide that, “The building official and/or the municipal attorney are
authorized to serve notice of violation or order”. The rest of Section R113.2
shall remain in full force and effect.
      (3)   (a)   2006 International Building Code is hereby amended to delete
Sections 112 regarding Board of Appeals, and 115.4, “Method of Service” in
their entirety.
         (b)   Section 105.2, “Work exempt from permit”, the first sentence of
same is hereby amended to read as follows, “Except where in conflict with the
Village Code of Ordinances, permits shall not be required for the following.”
The rest and remainder of Section 105.2 shall remain in full force and effect.
         (c)   Section 105.3.2, “Time limitation of application”, shall be
amended to delete the following language therein, “one or more extensions of
time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each” and insert therein the
following language, “one extension for an additional period not exceeding 90
days.”
         (d)   Section 105.5, “Expiration”, as currently written is hereby
deleted in its entirety and henceforth shall read as follows, “Every permit
shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is
commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the
site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after
the time the work is commenced. The Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion,
may grant one (1) permit extension of for a period not more than 180 days. The
extension shall be requested in writing within thirty (30) days of the
expiration of the initial permit and justifiable cause demonstrated therein for
the extension.”
         (e)   Section 1156.3, “Notice”, shall be amended to provide that, “If
an unsafe condition is found, the building official or the municipal attorney
shall serve notice on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure”.
The rest and remainder of Section 115.3 shall remain in full force and effect.
      (4)   Electrical Code amendments.
         (a)   Amendments. The following amendments are made to the published
form of the National Electrical Code, 2005 edition.
            1.   Meter bases shall be installed at a minimum of four feet to a
maximum of five feet six inches to the center of the meter at the finish grade
from top of finished patio and deck in front of meter.
            2.   All meter bases shall be installed outside, accessible to
meter reader, subject to village Electrical Inspector’s approval.
            3.   All new or replacement service entrance conductors shall be
installed in rigid metal and/or nonmetallic conduit.
            4.   All electrical wiring in industrial structures shall be
installed in electrical metal tubing (EMT), rigid intermediate metal conduit
(IMC), or ridged metal conduit (RMC). All electrical wiring for commercial and
multi-family buildings having more than three stories plus an elevator shall be
installed in EMT, IMC, or RMC. Where conduit is required and where there will
be low voltage wiring then the low voltage wiring shall be installed in EMT,
IMC, or RMC if in concealed spaces.
            5.   Duplexes, apartment houses, other multiple use buildings shall
have banked meters.
            6.   The National Electrical Code, 2005 edition, as adopted by the
village is applicable to mobile homes located within the corporate boundaries
of the village.
      (b)   Electrical equipment defined. “Electrical equipment”, as used in
this section, shall be construed to mean and include conductors and equipment
installed for the use of electricity supplied for light, heat or power, but
does not include radio apparatus or equipment for the wireless reception of
sounds and signals, nor ordinary household appliances such as toasters, vacuum
cleaners, or washing machines; and does not include apparatus, conductors and
other equipment installed for and by public utilities, including common
carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission
for use in their operations as public utilities.
§ 150.10 DEMOLITION PERMITS.
   No building or part of a building or accessory structure shall be demolished
in the village without a demolition permit issued by the Village Clerk.
Application for a demolition permit shall be obtained from the Village Clerk.
The village may charge a permit fee which fee shall be set by the Village Board
from time to time. Violation of this section shall be subject to a fine as
provided in the general penalty provision of the village code.
FENCES
§ 150.20 HEIGHT, LOCATION.
   (A)   No person shall build, construct, use, or maintain any fence or
barrier within the village along the line of or in or upon or along any street,
alley, or public walk or drive of a greater height than six feet above the
sidewalk grade or six feet above the surface of the ground where no grade is
established in any side or rear yard; provided, that visibility at right angles
to any surface of such fence not be reduced by more than 40%.
   (B)   No fence shall be built or erected between the front setback line of
the building and the front lot line, except natural fences of hedges, trees,
and shrubbery which shall be limited to 24 inches in height.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-1) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.21 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Quality and materials generally. All fences constructed in the village
shall be constructed in a good and workmanlike manner and of suitable material
such as lumber, stone, cyclone fencing material, or other durable building
material.
   (B)   Restricted or prohibited materials.
      (1)   Flimsy or unsuitable materials. Fences shall not be constructed of
flimsy or unsuitable building material, such as barrel staves, utility poles,
chicken coop wire, or other thin wire material and crating material.
      (2)   Barbed wire or injurious materials. Except as permitted in division
(B)(3) below, no person shall maintain or construct any fence composed, in
whole or in part, of barbed wire or with any similar material designed to cause
injury to any person or any wire charged with electric current anywhere within
three feet of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public way or
place.
      (3)   Location of injurious fence restricted. Except for fences around
industrial property, no person being the owner, lessee, or agent of any real
estate in the village shall erect, maintain, or permit to be erected or
maintained on or about the exterior building line of the real estate or upon
any portion of the sidewalk adjacent to such real estate any railing, fence,
guard, or protection of any kind of barbed wire, or upon which railing, fence,
guard, or other protection there shall be affixed or placed, or in any manner
attached, any spike, nail, or pointed instrument of any kind or description.
Each and every day such person shall fail or neglect to remove from such
railing, fence, or other protection any such spike, nail, or other pointed
instrument after notice, in writing, from the Police Department or other
village official to do so, he or she shall be deemed guilty of a new, separate,
and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-2) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.22 FENCE PERMITS.
   (A)   No fence shall be erected or placed upon any property without first
obtaining a permit from the village.
   (B)   There is a $10 charge for a fence permit.
   (C)   Fences constructed prior to the adoption hereof, which do not conform
to the provisions of this subchapter, shall be considered legal nonconforming
structures. An existing fence may be maintained, repaired or structurally
altered, however, no such repair or structural alteration shall create an
additional nonconformity or increase the degree of nonconformity.
§ 150.23 SPECIFICATIONS, CONDITIONS AND TYPES.
   (A)   (1)   A fence, including all posts, bases and other structural parts,
shall be located completely within the boundaries of the lot on which it is
located. No fence shall be located closer than 24 inches to a public sidewalk.
The construction of all fences shall comply with all applicable covenants and
restrictions. No fence shall be constructed if prohibited by private covenants
or restrictions. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant, not the
village, to ascertain the existence of applicable covenants and restrictions.
The issuance of a fence permit and/or the subsequent construction of fences in
violation of applicable covenants and restrictions shall not stop the village
or other parties from bringing suit for injunction seeking removal of said
fence.
      (2)   Fences shall be designed and constructed to resist a horizontal
wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot.
      (3)   All fences shall be constructed with the finished surface facing
neighboring property with support posts placed to the inside, except in cases
where the posts are an integral part of the fence design which enhances the
aesthetic appearance of the fence.
      (4)   Except for corner lots and the rear yard of a through lot, every
fence which creates a wholly enclosed area and adjoins an existing or proposed
street right of way, shall include a gate to provide access to the right-of-
way. Corner lots and rear yards of through lots shall provide a point of
ingress and egress to the property.
      (5)   No fence shall be erected in such a manner as to limit or obstruct
the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving an intersection or alley.
      (6)   Decorative fences (i.e., one- or two-split rail type) shall be
allowed in front yards, provided the fence is not on village right-of-way and
does not exceed four feet in height.
      (7)   The maximum height for side yard or back yard fences shall not
exceed six feet, in addition to an opening between the bottom of the fence and
grade not to exceed six inches.
      (8)   Barbed wire, razor wire, concertina wire or electrification of
fences is prohibited.
      (9)   Fences for lots with swimming pools shall conform to the
regulations hereof governing private swimming pools.
   (B)   The minimum setback for privacy and chain link fences shall be 18
inches from the adjoining property line, sidewalk, or street or alley way when
no sidewalk is present, and shall not be placed so as to block the view of
oncoming traffic at a corner lot or lot adjacent to an alleyway.
§ 150.24 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of
the property where a fence is erected to maintain the structure in good repair
at all times.
      (2)   If a fence is found to be in a deteriorated condition and/or in
need of repair, including, but not limited to, broken or missing structural
components, and/or the fence is substantially less than perpendicular to grade,
the village after consulting with the Building Inspector, may order the fencing
to be repaired, replaced or removed depending on the condition of the fence.
      (3)   Such order shall be in writing.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to fences, walls or
shrubbery owned or maintained by the village, or to fences constructed or
maintained by any other governmental body or agency for which the principal
purpose is inherent to public safety.
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 150.35 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The chapters of the most current edition of the ICC Property
Maintenance Code Book (2006) are hereby adopted by the village to establish
minimum standards for the maintenance of all buildings within the village
regardless of the date of their construction. Where the Property Maintenance
Code Book and the village ordinances conflict, the Property Maintenance Code
Book shall control.
   (B)   Three copies of the said ICC Property Maintenance Code Book (2006),
marked as Exhibits A, B, and C, are incorporated herein by reference and will
remain on file in the office of the Village Clerk for public inspection.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 8-5-2014)
§ 150.36 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   (A)   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be a
dangerous building, as defined herein, and which constitute a hazard to the
public health, safety, and welfare are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in
accordance with the procedures specified in §§
90.01 through
90.05.
   (B)   The village may require the vacating or relocation of occupants of any
such dangerous building and securing thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-2)
MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 150.50 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person shall move any building from one lot to another lot, or on
or over any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place or way in the
village without a permit for the same from the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Applications for permits shall be made, in writing, to the Clerk and
shall state thereon the proposed route and the number of days it is intended
that the building shall occupy any public way or place.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-1)
§ 150.51 BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person applying for a permit under this subchapter shall submit with
his or her application a bond with corporate sureties to be approved by the
President and Board of Trustees, conditioned on compliance with all the
provisions of this subchapter and agreeing to pay and hold the village harmless
from any claim which may be made against it by reason of the occupation, by the
building or structure moved, of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
place or way.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-2)
§ 150.52 APPROVAL OF ROUTES; FEES, ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon approval of the intended route by the Committee on Streets and
Alleys, a fee of $50 plus $100 for each day it is intended that such building
shall occupy such portion of any public way or place, shall be paid to the
Village Clerk and a permit issued.
   (B)   An additional fee of $100 for each day, or fraction thereof, over and
above the time stated in the application, shall be paid for occupying such way
or place.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-3)
§ 150.53 LIGHTS, WARNINGS.
   (A)   Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which is
being moved, warnings to the effect shall be placed by the contractor so as to
warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the street which is so
blocked.
   (B)   The person moving any building through the streets shall keep warning
signs and lights at night on the building or structure so as to guard against
any person or vehicle colliding with it.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-4)
§ 150.54 CUTTING OF WIRES.
   (A)   Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with the wires or cables
of a public utility in moving a building, the terms of any special franchise
ordinance shall apply and the bond specified therein given.
   (B)   If no such terms apply, then the President and Board of Trustees shall
estimate the expense of replacing the wires, and the bond to be given to the
village shall cover such expense.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-5)
BROADCAST RECEIVING ANTENNAS
§ 150.65 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BROADCAST RECEIVING ANTENNA. An outside satellite dish used for the
reception of signals transmitted by stations licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission and the Radio Broadcast Services, including A.M.,
F.M., and television.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS. Any building or premises located in the commercial
district of the village.
   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. The use, operation, or maintenance of any broadcast
receiving antenna for the purpose of advertising any business or any services,
or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising
for or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show,
entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating any
such broadcast receiving antenna.
   FRONT YARD. The area required between the street and the front of the home
or other building on the property having a depth of not less than 15% of the
lot depth.
   LOT CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets.
   NON-COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. The use, operation, or maintenance of any broadcast
receiving antenna for other than a commercial purpose.
   SIDE YARD. The area required on each side of the buildings located on the
lot with a width of not less than 10% of the lot width.
(Prior Code, § 8-5-1) (Ord. passed 5-7-1985)
§ 150.66 PERMIT REQUIRED; PLAN APPROVAL; FEE.
   (A)   Purpose. The permit procedure shall be for the purpose of ensuring
that an antenna is installed in conformance to the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Submittal of plans; permit issuance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to erect or cause to be erected within the village any broadcast
receiving antenna without first submitting plans for such antenna to the
Village Board for approval, and it shall issue a permit for the erection of an
antenna complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Permit fee. The permit fee shall be $10.
   (D)   Standards for approval. The Village Board shall be guided by the
following standards in the approval of the antenna plans.
      (1)   No part of the broadcast receiving antenna structure shall extend
to a height of more than 15 feet above ground level.
      (2)   No part of the broadcast receiving antenna structure shall be
located in the front yard nor on any easements.
      (3)   Where a broadcast receiving antenna is to be placed on a lot
corner, no part of the broadcast receiving antenna structure shall be placed in
the side yard.
      (4)   A broadcast receiving antenna to be placed in a commercial district
may be placed on the roof of the commercial business.
      (5)   A broadcast receiving antenna to be placed in a residential
district shall only be installed for a non-commercial purpose and serve only
the property on which installation is located and contiguous property.
(Prior Code, § 8-5-2) (Ord. passed 5-7-1985) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Upon conviction of an offense alleging a violation of §§
150.35 and
150.36, a person is subject to a penalty as provided in §
10.99(A).
(Prior Code, § 8-3-3)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
150.50 through
150.54 shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99(A).
(Prior Code, § 8-4-6)
CHAPTER 151: MOBILE HOMES, PARKS
Section
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Licensing requirements for mobile home parks
   
151.03   Site requirements
   
151.04   Operation of parks
   
151.05   Removal of wheels
   
151.06   Parking, storage of mobile home outside park
   
151.07   Right of access
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle or similar portable structure constructed so as to
permit its being used as a conveyance on a public street and so as to permit
the occupancy thereof as a dwelling by one or more persons.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land on which two or more occupied mobile homes
are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue, together with any building,
structure, or enclosure used as part of the equipment of such park.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-1)
§ 151.02 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain, or
operate any mobile home park in the village without first having obtained a
license therefor.
   (B)   Application for license.
      (1)   Application for such license shall contain the name of the
applicant, the location of the proposed park, and the number of mobile homes to
be accommodated.
      (2)   Each such application shall be accompanied by a plat or sketch
showing the size and location of all buildings and structures.
   (C)   License fee. The license fee is $50 per year. Whenever the number of
such accommodations is increased, this shall be reported to the Village Clerk,
and the additional fee, if any, necessitated by such increase, shall be paid
before the additional spaces are put to use. When a license is applied for or
accommodations are increased during the license year, the fee shall be prorated
on the basis of the number of months remaining in the license year.
   (D)   Restrictions on issuance of license. No such license shall be issued
to any but a person of good character, nor to any corporation if any officer
thereof is not a person of good character.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.03 SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each mobile home shall be allotted a site of not less than 2,500
square feet, exclusive of common driveways. No mobile home shall be parked
closer than seven and one-half feet to the side lot lines of a mobile home park
if the abutting property is improved property or closer than 15 feet to a
public street, alley, or building. Each individual mobile home site shall abut
or face on a common driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than 22 feet
in width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a public highway.
   (B)   There shall be an open space of not less than 15 feet between the
sides of every mobile home and at least ten feet between the ends of every
mobile home. No mobile home shall occupy more than 25% of the mobile home site.
Parking for private automobiles shall be limited to a central parking area.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.04 OPERATION OF PARKS.
   (A)   Compliance with state regulations. It shall be the duty of the
licensee and person in charge of a mobile home park to comply with the
provisions of the State Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Act, being 210 ILCS
115/1 et seq., and the regulations of the State Department of Health.
   (B)   Park manager. It shall be unlawful to hire or keep as manager,
superintendent, or person in charge of a mobile home park any person who is not
a person of good character or any person who has
been convicted of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
§ 151.05 REMOVAL OF WHEELS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other
transporting device from any mobile home or otherwise to affix a mobile home
permanently to the ground so as to prevent ready removal of such mobile home
unless a permit to do so is obtained as required for the construction of a new
building. Any such alteration shall be construed as converting the mobile home
into a building and subject to the requirements of the building ordinances of
the village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to occupy for sleeping or other residence
purposes any mobile home which has been rendered immobile by the removal of
wheels or placing the same on a foundation or on the ground unless such mobile
home, in construction and location, complies with the ordinances of the village
relating to the construction, wiring, plumbing, sewer facilities, and other
regulations applicable to single-family dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.06 PARKING, STORAGE OF MOBILE HOME OUTSIDE PARK.
   (A)   Parking outside park. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain
any mobile home used for human habitation upon any plot of ground in the
village, except in a licensed mobile home park.
   (B)   Storage of mobile homes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit the storage of any mobile home for any length of time when the mobile
home is not used for living or sleeping purposes.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.07 RIGHT OF ACCESS.
   The members of the Police Department and other village officials shall have
access at any time to all parts of a mobile home park to ascertain compliance
with all village ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-7)
CHAPTER 152: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Supervision and enforcement
   
152.02   Construction requirements
   
152.03   Barricades and warning lights
   
152.04   Responsibility for sidewalks
   
152.05   Erection of poles and wires
   
152.06   Openings in public ways
   
152.07   Prohibited acts and conditions
Driveways
   
152.20   Permit required; fees
   
152.21   Application for permit; issuance
   
152.22   Construction specifications
   
152.23   Repairs and maintenance
Excavations
   
152.35   Permit required; fees
   
152.36   Application for permit; bond, issuance
   
152.37   Repair, restoration of street surface
   
152.38   Liability for damages
Overhanging Signs, Awnings on Streets, Sidewalks
   
152.50   Permits, fees
   
152.51   Construction requirements
   
152.52   Height above walk
   
152.53   Inspections
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 SUPERVISION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public ways in the village
shall be under the supervision of the Committee on Streets and Alleys. It shall
have the supervision over all the work thereon and the cleaning thereof and
shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to
such public places (except traffic ordinances of the village) and is hereby
authorized to enforce such village ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)
Cross-reference:
   Traffic code, see Title VII
§ 152.02 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required; application.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way or to repair the same without
having first secured a permit therefor.
      (2)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk
and shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the extent
thereof, and the person who is to do the actual construction work. It shall be
the duty of the Village Clerk to issue the necessary permit if it appears that
the terms of this chapter are being complied with.
   (B)   Bond requirements. Each applicant shall furnish a cash bond or a bond
with a corporate surety in such amount not less than $1,000 nor more than
$100,000, as may be determined and approved by the Chairperson of the Committee
on Streets and Alleys or by the President and Board of Trustees, conditioned to
indemnify the village for any liability, loss, or damage resulting from the
work undertaken or the manner of doing same, and shall furnish evidence
acceptable to the Chairperson of the Committee on Streets and Alleys or the
President and Board of Trustees that the person who is to do the actual
construction work has in force satisfactory public liability and property
damage insurance in limits of at least $300,000 for injuries to each person,
$1,000,000 for injuries in each accident, and $100,000 for damage to property
in each accident covering all damages occasioned by or in any manner resulting
from such construction work.
   (C)   Conformance with specifications. All street and sidewalk pavements
shall be made in conformity with the specifications then currently on file in
the office of the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.03 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Barricades and lights required.
      (1)   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk,
or other public place, or making an excavation in any such place, shall
maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by
reason of such work; such barricades shall be protected by lights at nighttime.
      (2)   Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent
injury, and any person properly maintaining any such opening or excavation
while the same remains open shall guard it by proper barricades and lights.
   (B)   Disturbing barricades or lights. It shall be unlawful to disturb or
interfere with any barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any
new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley, or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Construction. It shall be the responsibility of the lot owner to
construct the initial sidewalk across his or her property.
   (B)   Maintenance and repairs. It shall be the responsibility of the village
to maintain, repair, and replace said sidewalks when deemed necessary by the
Chairperson of the Committee on Streets and Alleys, except those sidewalks that
are part of the lot owners’ driveways.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-4)
§ 152.05 ERECTION OF POLES AND WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or to maintain any poles or
wires on or over any public street, alley, or other public place without having
first secured a permit therefor from the President and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.06 OPENINGS IN PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway
in any public street, sidewalk, or alley without a permit therefor from the
President and Board of Trustees.
   (B)   All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable
strong cover or railing or such construction as will meet the approval of the
Committee on Streets and Alleys.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.07 PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Damage to pavement. It shall be unlawful to damage any sidewalk,
street, or alley pavement.
   (B)   Obstructions; encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause, create, or maintain any obstruction to any street, alley, sidewalk, or
other public way, except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by
the Committee on Streets and Alleys when necessary in an emergency or in
connection with any lawful construction, repair, or removal work. It shall
further be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
DRIVEWAYS
§ 152.20 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.
   No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across any
sidewalk or parkway in the village without first having obtained a permit
therefor, and the fee for such construction permits shall be $5.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.21 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ISSUANCE.
   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall
be accompanied by the required fee. It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk
to issue the necessary permit for construction of a driveway.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-2)
§ 152.22 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Grade surface. No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to
leave a step, sharp depression, or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade
shall be nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It
shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where the same
crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it slippery or
dangerous or hazardous to pedestrians or to have the grade of such portion vary
from the grade of the sidewalk or be other than level.
   (B)   Conformance to specifications. Driveways shall be constructed as per
specifications on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.23 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   It shall be the duty of the person maintaining a driveway to keep the same
in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free from obstructions and
openings.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-4)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 152.35 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made any excavation in or
across or to tunnel under the curb, gutter, or roadway of any street or any
village property within the corporate limits of the village without having
first secured a permit therefor from the Village Clerk.
   (B)   A fee for such permit shall, in all cases, be $25 and shall be payable
with the application required by §
152.36.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.36 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; BOND, ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Application required. Prior to doing any work involving an excavation
in or across or tunneling under the curb, guitar, or roadway of any street or
any village property, the person desiring to do the same shall file or cause to
be filed with the Village Clerk an application for a permit therefor.
   (B)   Contents of application. The application shall state who the applicant
is and where he or she resides, on whose behalf the work is to be done, the
nature of the work that is desired to be done, and the reason therefor, the
size and location of the street surface or other improvement to be injured or
torn up, and the exact location where the work is to be done.
   (C)   Review of application; issuance. Thereupon, the Village Clerk shall
transmit such application to the Chairperson of the Committee on Streets and
Alleys, and said Committee shall, without delay, investigate the propriety of
the applicant, and if it finds that a permit for such work should be issued, it
shall direct the Village Clerk to issue said permit on payment of required
fees.
   (D)   Bond requirements. The applicant shall be required to enter into a
cash bond or a bond with a corporate surety in such amount not less than $1,000
nor more than $10,000, conditioned that the applicant will do the work for
which he or she has applied for a permit in a proper and workmanlike manner,
and in accordance with the specifications set forth in §
152.37, that the applicant will pay any and all damages to the street surface
or improvement that may arise due to operations of the applicant and that the
applicant will pay any and all damages that may be recovered against the
village to any person or property occasioned by or in any manner resulting from
the operations of the applicant on public property, such bond to be effective
for a duration of one year after the date on which the applicant has ceased his
or her operations.
   (E)   Liability insurance. The person who is to do the actual construction
work will have in force satisfactory public liability and property damage
insurance in limits of at least $300,000 for injuries to each person,
$1,000,000 for injuries in each accident, and $100,000 for damage to property
in each accident, covering all damages occasioned by or in any manner resulting
from such construction work.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-2)
§ 152.37 REPAIR, RESTORATION OF STREET SURFACE.
   Any person doing any work involving an excavation in or across, or the
tunneling under, the curb, gutter, or roadway of any street or any village
property, pursuant to the permit referred to in §§
152.35 and
152.36 shall promptly restore any street surface or other improvement which he
or she may injure or tear up. Street surfaces so injured or torn up shall be
restored in accordance with the specifications currently on file in the office
of the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-3)
§ 152.38 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   Whoever shall injure or tear up, for any purpose whatsoever, any pavement of
any street, alley, sidewalk, curb, or gutter, or any part thereof or dig any
hole, trench, ditch, or drain, or dig or remove any sod, stone, curb, earth,
sand, or gravel from any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other public
property, shall be responsible and liable to the village for all damages to
persons or property in consequence thereof which the village shall suffer or be
adjudged to pay.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-4)
OVERHANGING SIGNS, AWNINGS ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS
§ 152.50 PERMITS, FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall erect or maintain any sign or
signboard or rigid canopy over any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way
in the village without having first obtained a permit therefor as is herein
provided. Permits for such signs or canopies shall be issued by the Village
Clerk upon the payment of a fee of $10 and shall designate the location of the
proposed sign or canopy.
   (B)   Temporary permit. Temporary permits may be issued for the maintenance
of a temporary sign or canopy for a short time, upon the payment of a fee of $5
for each day or fraction thereof that such sign or canopy may be maintained.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.51 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   All signs and canopies extending over any sidewalk, street, alley, or other
public place shall be securely fastened and constructed.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-2)
§ 152.52 HEIGHT ABOVE WALK.
   The lowest part of any sign or canopy or of any non-rigid awning or support
thereof which extends over any public way shall be at least eight feet above
the level of the walk or public way over which it extends, but no such sign
shall be maintained over any public way used by vehicles if any part of it or
of its support is less than 15 feet above the level of such public way.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-3)
§ 152.53 INSPECTIONS.
   The Committee on Streets and Alleys may inspect, at regular intervals, every
sign, canopy, or awning which extends over any sidewalk, street, alley, or
other public way. If any such sign or canopy is found to be insecurely
fastened, the member of such Committee making such inspection shall report this
fact to the owner of the sign, canopy, or awning or to the owner or occupant of
the premises on which it is fastened, and such owner or occupant shall either
repair or remove such sign, canopy, or awning within ten days thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-4)
CHAPTER 153: TREES
Section
   
153.01   Nuisance trees
   
153.02   Removal of village-owned trees
§ 153.01 NUISANCE TREES.
   (A)   Dutch Elm diseased trees. Trees of all species and varieties of ulmus
(elm) and zelkova infected with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi, as determined
by laboratory analysis, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
be removed and burned within ten days following notification of the discovery
of such infection. It shall be unlawful for any person owning property whereon
such a tree is situated to possess or keep such a tree after the expiration of
ten days following notification of the discovery of said infection.
   (B)   Elm Bark Beetle breeding places. Trees or parts thereof of ulmus (elm)
or zelkova in a dead or dying condition that may serve as a breeding place for
the European elm bark beetle, Scolytus multistristus, are hereby declared to be
public nuisances, and it shall be unlawful for the person owning property
whereon the same is situated to possess or keep the same.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.02 REMOVAL OF VILLAGE-OWNED TREES.
   Trees on village-owned property requiring removal shall be removed at the
expense of the village.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-2)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Administration and enforcement
   
154.04   Base flood elevations
   
154.05   Permit provisions
   
154.06   Permit fees
   
154.07   Inspection of work; interference with official prohibited
   
154.08   Completion of work heretofore authorized
   
154.09   Flood hazard development requirements
   
154.10   Preventing increased damages
   
154.11   Protection of buildings
   
154.12   Variances
   
154.13   Disclaimer of liability
   
154.14   Violations
   
154.15   Abrogation and greater restrictions
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
village by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2 in
order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise development from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities, and utilities and flood rescue and
relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating flood blighted areas; and
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-1) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
154.04.
   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than 180 days.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate, including:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building, or any
addition to a building valued at more than $1,000;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, construction of roads, or similar
projects;
         (d)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, bridges, or
culverts;
         (e)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, or
other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface;
         (f)   Storage of materials; or
         (g)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as re-roofing, re-surfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and
similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or
construction of levees.
   FPE or FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot at any given location in the SFHA.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation or the runoff of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODWAY. The portion of the SFHA required to store and convey the base
flood. The FLOODWAY for each of the SFHAs of the village shall be according to
the best data available to the State Water Survey Floodplain Information
Repository.
   RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified channel. This term does not
include areas subject to flooding from lakes (except public bodies of water),
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   SFHA or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
      (1)   Those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject
to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally
identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the village prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated June 18, 1987.
      (2)   The SFHAs of those parts of the unincorporated county that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed
into the village are generally identified as such on the flood map prepared for
the county by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated March 10, 1978.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-2) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The proper village official shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
the following duties:
   (A)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this chapter;
   (B)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (C)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the State
Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources, for all development
projects subject to §
154.10 and maintain a record of such authorization;
   (D)   Maintain a record of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all buildings, subject to §
154.11;
   (E)   Maintain a record of the engineer’s certificate and the as-built
floodproofed elevation of all buildings, subject to §
154.11(B)(4);
   (F)   Inspect all development projects to ensure they comply with the
provisions of this chapter;
   (G)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this
chapter. Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program;
and
   (H)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood
data, SFHA maps, copies of federal or state permit documents and as-built
elevation, and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed subject to this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-3) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.04 BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party may finance the detailed engineering study needed to
replace existing data with better data and submit it to the State Water Survey
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for each of the SFHAs delineated as an
unnumbered “A Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the village shall be
according to the best data available to the State Water Survey Floodplain
Information Repository. When no base flood elevation exists, the base flood
elevation shall be the 100-year flood depth calculated according to the
formulas presented in “Depth and Frequency of Floods in Illinois” published by
the U.S. Geological Survey, 1976.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of the
unincorporated county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village or that may be annexed into the village shall be according to the best
data available to the State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-4) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.05 PERMIT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Development permit. No person not exempted by state law shall commence
any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from
the proper village official. The proper village official shall not issue a
development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
      (1)   Application and drawings. The application for a development permit
shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property
line dimensions, existing grade elevations, and all changes in grade resulting
from excavation or filling, the location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings, and the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings, subject to the requirements of §
154.11.
      (2)   Analyses of base flood elevation data. Upon receipt of an
application for a development permit, the proper village official shall compare
the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located
on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as
of June 18, 1987, is not located in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter. The proper village official shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to June 18, 1987.
      (3)   Compliance with federal and state provisions required. The proper
village official shall inform the applicant of any and all other local, state,
and federal permits that may be required for this type of development activity.
The proper village official shall not issue the development permit unless all
required federal and state permits have been obtained.
      (4)   Conditions of permit; expiration.
         (a)   All work performed under a development permit shall conform to
the approved application and plans, and approved amendments thereto.
         (b)   A copy of the development permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises, in plain view from a public road, during the
execution of the work and until completion of the same.
         (c)   A development permit under which no work is commenced within six
months after issuance shall expire by limitation and a new development permit
shall be secured before work is started.
   (B)   Use permits. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any buildings or
any development site or any part thereof hereafter constructed in the SFHA
without first making application for obtaining a use permit from the proper
village official. Request for a use permit shall be submitted to the proper
village official upon completion of the work authorized in the development
permit issued for the project in question. If, upon final inspection of a
building or development site, the proper village official finds that the work
has been performed in accordance with the approved application and plans of the
development permit, a use permit may be issued. If final inspection reveals
otherwise, a use permit may not be issued until all deficiencies are corrected.
   (C)   Review of applications for permits; issuance or rejection. The proper
village official shall examine each application for a permit within three days’
time after filing. If, after examination, it appears that the proposed
development or use of the site will be in compliance with this chapter and such
other ordinances and resolutions passed by the Board of Trustees applicable
thereto, the proper village official shall approve such application and issue
the appropriate permit as soon as practicable. If the examination reveals
otherwise, the application shall be rejected and the proper village official’s
findings shall be noted in a written report to be attached to the application.
A copy of the report shall be provided to the applicant upon request.
   (D)   Revocation of permit.
      (1)   The proper village official may revoke a permit in case there has
been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit was based.
      (2)   The proper village official shall inform the permittee, in writing,
of the specific steps the permittee must take in order to have the permit
reissued. It shall be unlawful to continue any work authorized by a permit
after revocation of that permit and until the permit is reissued or until a new
permit is issued.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-5) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.06 PERMIT FEES.
   Fees for permits shall be as follows.
   (A)   For a use permit: No fee.
   (B)   For a development permit for clearing debris, demolishing buildings,
or removing buildings out of the SFHA: No fee.
   (C)   For construction of a building valued at more than $100,000: $100.
   (D)   For construction or reconstruction of a building valued at less than
$100,000 and for any other development project that requires site inspections
by the proper village official: $75.
   (E)   For improvements made to an existing building, for installing a
manufactured home on a permanent site, and for any other development project:
$50.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-6) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.07 INSPECTION OF WORK; INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL PROHIBITED.
   All work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by
the proper village official or duly authorized representative. It shall be
unlawful to refuse to permit the proper village official or the representative
to enter such premises or structure at any reasonable time to make an
inspection. It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder the proper village
official or the representative when in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-7) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.08 COMPLETION OF WORK HERETOFORE AUTHORIZED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall require changes in the plans, construction, or
designated use of a building or other development project, or portion thereof,
which has been otherwise lawfully authorized, or the construction of which
shall have been actually begun and which entire building or development project
shall be completed within one year of the effective date hereof.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-8) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.09 FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent
that they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use,
and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks,
annexation agreements, planned unit developments (PUDs), and additions to
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the requirements of §§
154.10 and
154.11. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, and
planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plan accounts for changes in
the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/
1 et seq.).
   (B)   (1)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel
trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs), and additions to manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall include base flood elevation data and
floodway delineations.
      (2)   Where this information is not available from an existing study
filed with the State Water Survey, the applicant shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood elevation and the floodway delineation and
submitting it to the State Water Survey for review and approval as best
available regulatory data.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-9) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.10 PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.
   No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health and safety.
   (A)   Riverine SFHAs. Within all riverine SFHAs, the following standards
shall apply,
      (1)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway (or in a riverine SFHA
where no floodway has been identified) shall not be issued unless the applicant
first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required
from the State Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources,
issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
      (2)   The following activities may be constructed without the individual
permit required in division (A)(1) above in accordance with statewide permits
issued by the State Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources;
provided, the activities do not involve placement of fill, change of grade or
construction in the normal channel. Such activities must still meet the other
requirements of this chapter:
         (a)   The construction of wells, septic tanks, and underground utility
lines not crossing a lake or stream;
         (b)   The construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar
structures;
         (c)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar surfaces which are built at grade;
         (d)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports;
         (e)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70
square feet in size, nor ten feet in any dimension (for example, animal
shelters and tool sheds); and
         (f)   The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not
increase the first floor area by more than 20%, which are located on the
upstream or downstream side of the existing building and which do not extend
beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of
flood water.
      (3)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the base flood elevation more than one foot for the affected hydraulic reach of
the stream and will not increase flood damage or potential flood damage.
   (B)   Public health standards in all SFHAs.
      (1)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE unless such materials are
stored in a storage tank or floodproofed building constructed according to the
requirements of §
154.11(B)(4).
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal
systems may be permitted, providing all manholes or other above-ground openings
located below the FPE are watertight.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-10) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.11 PROTECTION OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Protection required. In addition to the damage prevention requirements
of §
154.10, all buildings to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPE. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than
$1,000;
      (2)   Structural alterations made to an existing building that increase
the floor area by more than 20% or the market value of the building by more
than 50%;
      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building that are
valued at more than 50% of the markd value of the building before the damage
occurred;
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning a
manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed
to avoid flood damage; and
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days.
   (B)   Methods of protection. This building protection requirement may be met
by one of the following methods. The proper village official shall maintain a
record of compliance with these building protection standards as required in §
154.03.
      (1)   A residential or non-residential building may be constructed on
permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compaction;
         (b)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
FPE. The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of the
building before sloping below the FPE;
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during the
flooding by vegetative cover, rip rap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical; and
         (d)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (2)   A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
walls, stilts, piles, or other foundation, provided:
            1.   The walls have permanent openings no more than one foot above
grade; and
            2.   The walls and floor are not subject to damage by hydrostatic
pressures associated with the base flood.
         (b)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjacent structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as currents, waves, ice, and
floating debris; and
         (c)   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of materials
resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) and all
electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the FPE.
      (3)   Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days shall be:
         (a)   Elevated at or above the FPE in accordance with divisions (B)(1)
or (B)(2) above; and
         (b)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the State
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
      (4)   Only a non-residential building may be floodproofed in accordance
with the following.
         (a)   A registered professional engineer shall certify that the
building has been designed so that below the FPE, and the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the base flood. The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.
         (b)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-11) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.12 VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village for a variance.
The village shall review the applicant’s request for a variance and shall
submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may
attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to
further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   Criteria for variance. No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates that:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      (6)   The provisions of §
154.05(A)(3) are met; and
      (7)   The provisions of §
154.10(A) are met.
   (B)   Notification to applicant of consequences. The village shall notify an
applicant, in writing, that a variance from the requirements of §
154.11 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
that may be as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge, in writing, the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic places. Variances to the building protection requirements of
§
154.11 requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair, or alteration
of a site or building included on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Register of Historic Places may be granted using criteria more
permissive than the requirements of divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) above.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-12) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.13 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside
of the SFHA will be free from flooding or damage.
   (C)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the village or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-13) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.14 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violations; notice.
      (1)   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the SFHA or failure
to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance
resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
      (2)   Upon due investigation, the Village Attorney may determine that a
violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The Village Attorney
shall notify the owner, in writing, of such violation.
   (B)   Suspension of insurance. The Village Attorney shall inform the owner
that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages
and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
   (C)   Additional remedies; costs. Nothing herein shall prevent the village
from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All
costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person responsible.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-14) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.15 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Board of
Trustees to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the Program. Nor does this chapter repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-15) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If such owner of a permit fails, after ten days’ notice, to correct
the violation, as stated in §
154.14:
      (1)   The village may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter;
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $200; and
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-14) (Ord. passed 5-5-1987)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   [Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
Illinois Compiled Statutes Code Section
Illinois Compiled Statutes            Code Section
5 ILCS 120/2.02                       30.17
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.                  34.17
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.                34.15
5 ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.              31.08
5 ILCS 430/70-5                       34.15
5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)                    34.15
5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)                    34.15
35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.                 110.04
35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.                 110.04
35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.                 110.04
50 ILCS 105/4.1                       34.16
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                       10.99;
                                      154.01
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1                     10.99
65 ILCS 5/1-3-2                       70.01;
                                      130.01
                                      30.01;
                                      30.02;
                                      30.15;
                                      30.16;
                                      30.17;
65 ILCS 5/3.1 10-5 et seq.            31.02;
                                      31.20;
                                      31.21;
                                      31.23;
                                      31.35;
                                      31.37
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1                      32.16
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2                      32.16;
                                      32.99
65 ILCS 5/11 et seq.                  31.37
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12                    154.01
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7                     90.05
65 ILCS 5/11-20-8                     90.05
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12                    90.05
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13                    53.06
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2                     154.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8                     154.01
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1                     90.05
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2                     154.01
65 ILCS 5/11-60-2                     90.01
65 ILCS 5/11-80-5                     32.15
210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.                151.04
210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.                154.11
220 ILCS 5/16-104                     32.16
230 ILCS 15/2                         112.51
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.                 116.01
                                      111.02;
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.                111.21;
                                      111.99
235 ILCS 5/1-3 et seq.                111.02
235 ILCS 5/1-3.05                     111.17
235 ILCS 5/1-3.25                     111.02
235 ILCS 5/4-2                        111.03
235 ILCS 5/6-6                        111.05
235 ILCS 5/7-5                        111.21
235 ILCS 5/7-9                        111.21
410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.                 131.16
410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.              115.01;
                                      131.15
410 ILCS 705/10-5                     131.15;
                                      131.16
410 ILCS 705/10-10                    131.15
                                      131.15;
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.                131.16;
                                      131.17
615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.                  154.10
625 ILCS                              70.01
625 ILCS 5/7                          72.18
625 ILCS 5/11                         72.17
625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 5/11-502    72.17
625 ILCS 5/11-501                     131.16
625 ILCS 5/11-502.1                   131.16
625 ILCS 5/12-201                     72.17
625 ILCS 5/12-709                     72.17
625 ILCS 40/5-7                       131.16
625 ILCS 45/5-16                      131.16
720 ILCS 5/11-30                      130.02
720 ILCS 5/12-1                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/12-2                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/12-3                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/12-5                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/12-7.1                     130.02
720 ILCS 5/12C-30                     130.02
720 ILCS 5/16-1                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/16-2                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/16-3                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/16-5                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/21-1                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/21-2                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/21-3                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/24-1                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/26-1                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3) through (a)(10) 111.06
720 ILCS 5/28-3                       111.06
720 ILCS 5/31-1                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/31-3                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/31-4                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/31-6                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/31-7                       130.02
720 ILCS 5/31-8                       130.02
720 ILCS 550/4                        130.02
720 ILCS 550/5                        130.02
720 ILCS 550/8                        130.02
720 ILCS 570/402                      130.02
720 ILCS 635/1                        130.02
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.              111.21
765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.                154.09;
                                      154.11
805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.               111.05;
                                      111.06
820 ILCS 192/1 et seq.                31.09
                                      
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2026 Code
Prior Code 2026 Code
1-1-3      10.01
1-1-4      10.02
1-1-5      10.03
1-1-6      10.04
1-2-1      10.05
1-2-2      10.05
1-2-3      10.06
1-2-4      10.07
1-3-1      10.08
1-3-2      10.09
1-3-3      10.10
1-4-1      10.99
1-4-2      10.99
1-4-3      10.99
1-5-1      30.01
1-5-2      30.02
1-5-3      30.03
1-5-4      30.04
1-6-1      30.15
1-6-2      30.16
1-6-3      30.17
1-7-1      31.01
1-7-2      31.02
1-7-3      31.03
1-7-4      31.04
1-7-5      31.05
1-7-6      31.06
1-7-7      31.07
1-8-1      31.20
1-8-2      31.21
1-8-3      31.22
1-8-4      31.23
1-9-1      31.35
1-9-2      31.36
1-9-3      31.37
1-10-1     31.50
1-10-2     31.51
1-10-3     31.52
1-11-1     32.15
1-11-2     32.01
1-11-3     32.02
1-11-4     30.18
1-11-5     32.16;
           32.99
1-11-6     32.17
1-12-1     31.08
1-12-2     31.08
1-12-3     31.08
1-13-1     34.01
1-13-2     34.02
1-13-3     34.03
1-13-4     34.04
3-1-1      110.01
3-1-2      110.02
3-1-3      110.03
3-1-4      110.04
3-1-5      110.05
3-1-6      110.06
3-1-7      110.07
3-1-8      110.08
3-1-9      110.09
3-1-10     110.10
3-1-11     110.11
3-1-12     110.12
3-1-13     110.13
3-1-14     110.14
3-1-15     110.15
3-2-1      111.01
3-2-2      111.02
3-2-3      111.03
3-2-4      111.04
3-2-5      111.05
3-2-6      111.06
3-2-7      111.07
3-2-8      111.08
3-2-9      111.09
3-2-10     111.10
3-2-11     111.11
3-2-12     111.12
3-2-13     111.13
3-2-14     111.14
3-2-15     111.15
3-2-16     111.16
3-2-17     111.17;
           111.99
3-2-18     111.18
3-2-19     111.19
3-2-20     111.20
3-2-21     111.21
3-2-22     111.22
3-2-23     111.99
3-3-1      112.01
3-3-2      112.02
3-3-3      112.03
3-3-4      112.04
3-3-5      112.05
3-4-1      112.20
3-4-2      112.21
3-4-3      112.22
3-4-4      112.23
3-4-5      112.24
3-5-1      112.35
3-5-2      112.36
3-5-3      112.37
3-6-1      112.50
3-6-2      112.51
3-6-3      112.52
3-6-4      112.53
3-6-5      112.54
3-6-6      112.55
3-6-7      112.56
3-6-8      112.57
3-6-9      112.58
3-6-10     112.59
3-6-11     112.99
3-7-1      113.01
3-7-2      113.02
3-7-3      113.03
3-7-4      113.04
3-7-5      113.05
3-7-6      113.06
3-7-7      113.07
3-7-8      113.08
3-7-9      113.09
3-7-10     113.10
3-7-11     113.11
3-8-1      114.01
3-8-2      114.02
3-8-3      114.03
3-8-4      114.04
4-2-1      90.01
4-2-2      90.02
4-2-3      90.03
4-2-4      90.04
4-2-5      90.05
4-2-6      90.99
4-3-1      90.20
4-3-2      90.21
4-3-3      90.99
4-4-1      153.01
4-4-2      153.02
4-6-1      92.01
4-6-2      92.02
4-6-3      92.99
4-7-1      90.50
4-7-2      90.50
4-7-3      90.99
5-4-1      130.01;
           130.02
5-4-2      131.01
5-4-3      131.99
6-1-1      70.01
6-2-1      71.02
6-2-2      71.03
6-2-3      71.04
6-2-4      71.05
6-2-5      71.06
6-2-6      71.07
6-2-7      71.08
6-2-8      71.01;
           Ch. 74, Schd. I
6-3-1      Ch. 73, Schd. I
6-4-1      72.01;
           Ch. 73, Schd. II
7-1-1      152.01
7-1-2      152.02
7-1-3      152.03
7-1-4      152.04
7-1-5      152.05
7-1-6      152.06
7-1-7      152.07
7-2-1      152.20
7-2-2      152.21
7-2-3      152.22
7-2-4      152.23
7-3-1      152.35
7-3-2      152.36
7-3-3      152.37
7-3-4      152.38
7-4-1      152.50
7-4-2      152.51
7-4-3      152.52
7-4-4      152.53
7-7-1      50.01
7-7-2      50.02
7-7-3      50.03
7-7-4      50.04
8-1-1      150.01
8-1-2      150.02
8-1-3      150.03
8-1-4      150.04
8-1-5      150.05
8-1-6      150.06
8-1-7      150.07
8-1-8      150.08
8-2-1      150.20
8-2-2      150.21
8-3-2      150.36
8-3-3      150.99
8-4-1      150.50
8-4-2      150.51
8-4-3      150.52
8-4-4      150.53
8-4-5      150.54
8-4-6      150.99
8-5-1      150.65
8-5-2      150.66
8-6-1      151.01
8-6-2      151.02
8-6-3      151.03
8-6-4      151.04
8-6-5      151.05
8-6-6      151.06
8-6-7      151.07
8-7-1      93.01
8-7-2      93.02
8-7-3      93.03
8-7-5      93.04
8-7-6-1    93.25
8-7-6-2    93.26
8-7-6-3    93.27
8-7-6-4    93.28
8-7-6-5    93.29
8-7-6-6    93.30
8-7-6-7    93.31
8-7-7-1    93.45
8-7-7-2    93.46
8-7-7-3    93.47
8-7-7-4    93.48
8-7-7-5    93.49
8-7-7-6    93.50
8-7-7-7    93.51
8-7-8      93.05
8-7-9      93.06
8-7-10     93.07
8-7-11     93.08
8-7-12     93.09
8-7-13     93.10
8-7-14     93.99
9-1-1      154.01
9-1-2      154.02
9-1-3      154.03
9-1-4      154.04
9-1-5      154.05
9-1-6      154.06
9-1-7      154.07
9-1-8      154.08
9-1-9      154.09
9-1-10     154.10
9-1-11     154.11
9-1-12     154.12
9-1-13     154.13
9-1-14     154.14
9-1-15     154.15
9-1-14     154.99
           
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1984     - -         10.99
                     50.01;
1990     - -         50.02;
                     50.04
-        11-1-1977   71.02 -
                     71.08
-        5-7-1985    150.65;
                     150.66
                     154.01 -
-        5-5-1987    154.15;
                     154.99
-        4-30-1990   32.15
-        10-10-1992  90.50;
                     90.99
-        12-1-1992   111.08;
                     111.09
95-3     12-5-1995   111.13
96-2     8-6-1996    131.01
96-4     10-1-1996   111.08
98-5     7-7-1998    32.16;
                     32.99
98-11    10-6-1998   32.16
99-1     1-5-1999    Ch. 73, Schd. I
99-2     6-1-1999    31.08
2000-1   10-3-2000   50.01
2000-2   10-3-2000   30.17
2001-4   12-5-2001   50.01;
                     50.02
2002-1   4-2-2002    71.05
2002-3   9-3-2002    32.17
                     111.08;
2003-1   2-18-2003   111.09;
                     111.13
2003-2   3-4-2003    34.01 -
                     34.04
                     93.01 -
                     93.10;
                     93.25 -
2003-5   8-5-2003    93.31;
                     93.45 
                     93.51;
                     93.99
2004-2   2-3-2004    72.01;
                     Ch. 73, Schd. II
2004-6   11-5-2004   150.08
12-4     8-7-2012    116.01;
                     116.02
2014-2   8-5-2014    150.35
                     72.15 -
2018-2   4-9-2018    72.20;
                     72.99
                     115.01 -
2019-5   11-11-2019  115.03;
                     115.99
2019-6   11-11-2019  131.15 -
                     131.17
2020-01  1-13-2020   131.16
2023-2   12-18-2023  31.09
                    
 
 
