TOWN CODE
of
LEYDEN, ILLINOIS
1992
Code current through:
Ord. TO-2025-6, passed June 10, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This town code of the Town of Leyden, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance TO-2025-6, passed June 10, 2025.
Ordinances of the Town adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Town office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL TOWNSHIP CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
   Upon adoption by the Town Board of Trustees, this Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereinafter constitute the official Code of the Town of Leyden.
This Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the LEYDEN TOWN CODE, and
it is hereby published by authority of the Town Board and shall be kept up to
date as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number
of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of
the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general
penalty clause, relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when
reference is made to this Town Code by title in any legal documents. (1992
Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
   The Town Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Township of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1992 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
   Any ordinance amending the Town Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Town Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Town Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Town Code. (1992 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any page of this Town Code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement
pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the Town Board of Trustees. The Town Clerk shall see that the replacement
pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of
the Clerk. Any person having custody of an official copy of the Town Code shall
make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner,
and shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered or made available to said person by the Town Clerk. Said Code
books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons,
shall be and remain the property of the Township and shall be returned to the
office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the Town Board of
Trustees. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   All general ordinances of the Township passed prior to the adoption of this
Town Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Town Code or
are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; budget and
appropriation ordinances; ordinances dealing with the transfer and expenditure
of funds; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances
relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the Township;
and all special ordinances. (1992 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding. So far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   Nothing contained in this Title shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Title be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying
or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of
any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Township under
any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this
Town Code. (1992 Code)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Town Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Town Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Intent
1-3-4: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   Whenever any word in any section of this Town Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Town Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females
as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
Town Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Township has been
changed in the content of this Town Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the Township's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1992 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
   Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
   BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the Board of Trustees of Leyden Township.
   CODE: The Town Code of Leyden Township.
   COUNTY: Cook County, Illinois.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Township employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of Leyden
Township".
   FEE: A sum of money charged by the Township for the carrying on of a
business, profession or occupation.
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Township; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Township officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of Leyden
Township".
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any natural person, public or private corporation, firm,
partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as
a unit, as well as any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative
thereof.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall include
all chattels affixed or annexed to land.
   STATE: The State of Illinois.
   STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place open
to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel
including alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares,
public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
   TOWNSHIP or TOWN: Leyden Township, County of Cook, State of Illinois. (1992
Code)
1-3-3: INTENT:
   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this
Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent of the Town
Board may be carried out. (1992 Code)
1-3-4: CATCHLINES:
   The catchlines of the several sections of the Town Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers And Employees; Indemnification
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this
Code, where no other penalty is set forth, shall be punished by a fine not less
than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. TO-2019-1, 1-8-2019)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section unless otherwise indicated. Any person convicted of a
violation of any section of this Code where a duty is prescribed or obligation
imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is
declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a petty offense unless
otherwise indicated. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
   B.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
   C.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes
a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (1992 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Liability: No provision of this Code designating the duties of any
officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee
liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Town Board of Trustees to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in
the section creating the duty.
   B.   Insurance: To the extent authorized by law, the Board may purchase
insurance indemnifying its officers, employees or agents against loss or
liability resulting from their alleged wrongful or negligent acts while acting
within the scope of their official duties and functions, including wrongful or
negligent acts while discharging or engaging in official duties and functions,
and wrongful or negligent omissions or failures to act within the scope of
their official duties and functions.
   C.   Defense And Indemnification:
      1.   If any claim or action is instituted against a present or former
officer, employee or agent of the Town based on an injury arising out of an act
or omission occurring within the scope of such person’s official duties or
functions, such person shall immediately report the claim or action to the Town
Supervisor, and to the Board in the case of claims or actions against the
Supervisor.
      2.   In the event that a claim or action is instituted against an
officer, employee or agent of the Town which is based on an injury arising out
of an act or omission occurring within the scope of their official duties or
functions, except where the injury results from intentional or wilful
misconduct, the Town shall through its insurance carrier or independently if
there is not insurance coverage:
         a.   Appear and defend against the claim or action.
         b.   Pay or indemnify the officer, agent or employee for court costs
incurred in the defense of such claim or action.
         c.   Pay or indemnify the officer, agent or employee for a judgment
based on such claim or action.
         d.   Pay or indemnify the officer, agent or employee for a compromise
or settlement of such claim or action.
      3.   All present or former officers, employees or agents are required to
cooperate fully with the Town, its insurance carrier and its officers, agents
or employees in the defense of any such claim or action. The Town’s obligation
to defend and/or indemnify is specifically conditioned upon such good faith
cooperation.
      4.   The Town shall have no duty to independently defend or indemnify the
persons described above to the extent that insurance coverage is available to
defend and indemnify such present or former officers, agents or employees.
Nothing contained herein is intended or shall be construed to waive, release or
modify any rights or claims which the Town may have under any policies of
insurance now or hereafter obtained by the Town or to create or confer any
rights, benefits, claims or actions upon persons who had, have or may have
claims against the Town or its officers, agents or employees.
      5.   It is intended that the officers, agents or employees of the Town
shall be provided with a defense against and indemnification for all claims or
actions which may now or hereafter be asserted or instituted against them for
actions or omissions occurring within the scope of their official duties or
functions, but only to the extent not inconsistent with the statutes or public
policy of the State. To the extent insurance coverage is unavailable, the Town
may decline to defend and indemnify present or former officers, agents or
employees against claims or actions based on reckless, wilful or intentional
violations of clearly established duties or rights; however, the Town shall, to
the extent insurance coverage is unavailable, indemnify such persons for their
court costs in successfully defending such claims or actions.
      6.   Nothing contained herein is intended or shall be construed to waive,
relinquish, modify or release any rights of contribution, indemnity or
subrogation which the Town may have. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-
2022)
CHAPTER 5
TOWN BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Meetings Of The Town Board
1-5-2: Special Meetings
1-5-3: Chair
1-5-4: Proceedings Before The Town Board
1-5-5: Officers And Employees
1-5-6: Personnel Policies
1-5-1: MEETINGS OF THE TOWN BOARD:
The Town Board of Trustees may meet for the purpose of discussing public
business at such times and places as may be determined by the Board from time
to time.
   A.   Regular meetings of the Town Board of Trustees shall be held on the
second Tuesday of each month at six o’clock (6:00) P.M. for discussing and
conducting all public business.
   B.   Any regular or financial meetings of the Town Board of Trustees may be
adjourned to a later date. Any subject may be considered at an adjourned
meeting that might have been discussed at the original meeting.
   C.   Financial meetings of the Town Board of Trustees shall be held on the
second Tuesday of each month at five thirty o’clock (5:30) P.M. for the purpose
of approving bills and payables and for discussing public business concerning
the expenditures of public funds.
   D.   If the regular meeting of the Town Board of Trustees falls on a legal
holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the next Tuesday that is not a
legal holiday. (Ord. TO-95-1, 3-28-1995; amd. Ord. TO-2021-4, 6-24-2021; Ord.
TO-2022-15, 10-11-2022)
1-5-2: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
   Upon request of the Supervisor or any two (2) members of the Board, the Town
Clerk shall call a special meeting of the Town Board at the time requested and
shall furnish to the members of the Board at least forty eight (48) hours'
notice thereof. The Town Clerk shall also give public notice of any special
meeting at least twenty four (24) hours before such meeting, which notice shall
also include the agenda for the meeting, by posting a copy of the notice at the
Town Hall. The Town Clerk shall also give notice to any news medium which has
filed an annual request for notice of the Town's meetings in the same manner in
which members of the Town Board were notified of the meeting. In the event of a
bona fide emergency, notice of an emergency special meeting shall be given as
soon as practicable to any news medium which has filed an annual request for
notice, but in no event later than the time at which the meeting is scheduled
to begin. (1992 Code)
1-5-3: CHAIR:
   The Supervisor shall be the Chair of the Board and shall preside at all
regular and special meetings of the Town Board. In the absence of the
Supervisor, the Town Clerk shall call for a motion to appoint a Chair Pro Tem
and shall record the vote of all Trustees. The Chair Pro Tem shall preside at
such regular or special meeting in the absence of the Supervisor. (1992 Code;
amd. Ord. TO-2022-15, 10-11-2022)
1-5-4: PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE TOWN BOARD:
   Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the proceedings of the Town Board where
applicable and when not in conflict with federal or Illinois statutes or this
Code; provided, however, the Town Board may adopt rules of order revising,
repealing, amending, suspending, supplementing or supplanting, in whole or in
part, Robert’s Rules of Order.
   A.   Public Participation Rules at Meetings of the Town Board:
      1.   Purpose. The Town Board encourages public participation at its
meetings. All regular and special meetings are conducted in compliance with the
Illinois Open Meetings Act, and are therefore open for public observation.
Pursuant to Sections 2.05 and 2.06(g) of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS
120/2.05 and 120/2.06(g), respectively), the Town Board establishes the
following Rules to govern public comment and recording of meetings during
regular and special Board meetings.
      2.   Rules:
         a.   Public comments are permitted during the Public Comments segments
of regular and special Board meetings as noted on the agendas of such meetings.
         b.   Public comments shall be limited to a total of five (5) minutes
per person unless the Supervisor grants additional time as needed and within
reasonable time limits.
         c.   Persons wishing to speak must be present at the meeting. Public
comment by use of any telecommunication device, unless otherwise provided by
the Illinois Open Meetings Act, will not be permitted except in the case of
individuals with disabilities that prevent them from attending in person.
Individuals who cannot attend due to disability or who require disability
related accommodations to allow them to observe and/or participate are
requested to contact the Town Clerk in advance, if possible, to allow the
Township to arrange reasonable accommodations, if feasible.
         d.   If a group with similar views on an issue wishes to speak during
the public comment period, the Board requests that a spokesperson be selected
to address the Board. Redundancy and repetition does not facilitate an orderly
and efficient meeting. If additional matters are to be presented by any other
members of the group, the Supervisor may limit the number of such persons and
limit the presentation to information not already presented by the group’s
spokesperson.
         e.   At the beginning of the Public Comments segment of the meeting,
the Supervisor will ask if anyone wishes to address the Board and will
determine the order in which speakers will be recognized. No person shall
address the Board without first being recognized by the Supervisor.
         f.   Each person desiring to address the Board shall first state his/
her name for the record, state the subject, and state whom he/she is
representing if he/she represents an organization or other persons.
         g.   An individual will not be allowed to speak a second time until
the Board has heard from all members of the public who wish to speak and only
upon the majority vote of the Board.
         h.   Public comments must pertain to an item on the agenda or to an
issue/matter relating to the Township. The Supervisor retains the right to stop
any speaker who raises issues that are not on the agenda or are not germane to
the Township.
         i.   Public comment is not intended to require Board members or
Township staff to provide any answer to the speaker. Discussions between
speakers and members of the audience will not be allowed. The Board will not
necessarily respond to comment provided at the public meeting at the same time
comment is given. Consideration will be given to the public comment and further
research may be required before the Board takes any action regarding the public
comment. Although questions may be asked of a Board member or a member of the
Township’s staff, those individuals may decline to answer when a complete
answer requires research or deliberate consideration.
         j.   Comments shall be presented in a respectful manner, and
participants shall conduct themselves in an orderly and civil manner which
displays mutual respect. Use of profanity, inappropriate language, innuendos,
or other offensive actions and gestures shall not be permitted.
         k.   Public comments are not a forum to be used by political
candidates to advance their candidacy for any public office.
         l.   The Board reserves the right to remove anyone who becomes
hostile, argumentative, threatens the public’s or an individual’s safety or is
disruptive to the meeting. If the party being asked to leave does not
voluntarily leave or cease the behavior, law enforcement will be called to
remove the person.
         m.   Questions regarding specific elected officials, officers, agents
or employees of the Township will not be entertained. Questions of this type
may be addressed, in writing, to the Supervisor, who shall determine the
appropriate method of response.
         n.   Members of the audience will not engage in conversation while the
meeting of the Town Board is in session.
         o.   Members of the audience will not be permitted free movement about
the meeting room while the meeting of the Town Board is in session. Members of
the audience may enter and leave the board room at any time, provided such
entrance or exit is made quietly and in an orderly fashion.
         p.   Individuals who appear to be visibly intoxicated shall not be
allowed to attend a Town Board meeting or address the Town Board.
         q.   The consumption of any solid or liquid food or the smoking of any
tobacco product or consumption of cannabis is prohibited at any meeting of the
Town Board.
   B.   Recording Meetings:
      1.   Cameras. Cameras, including still cameras, move cameras, and
television cameras, using flashlights or lighting equipment other than the
normal light furnished in the board room, will not be allowed while meetings of
the Town Board are in session unless otherwise permitted by the Supervisor.
      2.   Battery operated recording equipment is permitted, provided the
operation thereof is silent. The microphone or pick up shall not be placed in
the section of the board room designated for the Town Board unless otherwise
permitted by the Supervisor.
      3.   No equipment may be set up or used in any manner so as to obstruct
the view of any person in the audience.
   C.   The Supervisor or his/her designee shall be responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of this Section and shall be empowered to
reprimand and/or eject any and all persons violating the provisions of this
Section. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. 2019-5, 5-14-2019; Ord. TO-2022-7, 5-10-2022)
1-5-5: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
   In accordance with chapter 6 of this title and as provided by law, the board
may create, eliminate, consolidate or combine the offices, positions,
departments or units of the administrative and executive departments of the
town. (1992 Code)
1-5-6: PERSONNEL POLICIES:
   The board may adopt, amend or repeal such employment policies or guidelines
as it may deem appropriate to promote efficiency and economy in operation of
the township government and to maintain and stimulate high morale among
township employees. However, such policies or guidelines are a statement of
current intent only and, unless expressly provided otherwise, shall not be
construed as creating any contractual employment rights. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 6
TOWNSHIP OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Town Supervisor
1-6-2: Township Administrator
1-6-3: Township Attorney
1-6-4: Township Engineer
1-6-5: Other Professionals
1-6-6: Salaries Of Officers
1-6-7: Township Clerk
1-6-8: Deputy Clerk
1-6-1: TOWN SUPERVISOR:
   A.   Bond Requirements: The Town Supervisor shall give bond to the Town in
such amount and with such sureties as is provided by law.
   B.   Chief Executive Officer: The Town Supervisor is the Chief Executive
Officer of the Town as provided by law and is authorized and empowered to:
      1.   Enforce all laws and ordinances of the Town.
      2.   Recommend to the Board such measures that the Town Supervisor deems
to be in the best interest of the Town.
      3.   Exercise control of all administrative departments and divisions of
the Town (excepting the Highway Department and the assessor’s office) now in
existence or that may hereafter be created by the Board.
      4.   Make recommendations to the Board concerning compensation for each
appointive office or position in the Town.
      5.   Make recommendations to the Board concerning the creation,
elimination, consolidation or combination of offices, positions, depart ments
or units of the administrative and executive department of the Town.
      6.   Subject to prior appropriation of the Board, appoint, suspend,
remove or transfer officers and employees of the Town based upon the merit and
fitness of such officer or employee.
      7.   Serve as Purchasing Agent for the Town if no Township Administrator
is appointed and acting.
      8.   Perform such other lawful duties as may be provided by law. (1992
Code; amd. Ord. TO-2022-11, 8-9-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
1-6-2: TOWNSHIP ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Office Created: The office of Township Administrator is hereby created,
subject to the provisions of this section. The Township Administrator, under
the direction of the Township Supervisor, serves as the Chief Administrative
Officer of the Township.
   B.   Qualifications Of Township Administrator: The Township Administrator
shall be chosen by the Township Supervisor and Leyden Town Board ("Town Board")
solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special
reference to specific professional education for, actual experience in, and
knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the administration of local
government and the duties of the office as specified in subsection E, below.
   C.   Appointment And Relationship To Elected Officials: The Township
Administrator shall be appointed by the Township Supervisor, with the advice
and consent of a majority vote of the Town Board, for a term of employment
which shall not exceed the term of office of the Township Supervisor and
Township Board of Trustees. The Township Administrator shall, at all times, be
subject to the authority and direction of the Township Supervisor and Town
Board.
   D.   Compensation: The rate of compensation of the Township Administrator
shall be set by the Town Board and may be adjusted from time to time as the
Board deems appropriate.
   E.   Removal From Office: The Township Administrator shall, at all times, be
subject to removal from office by a majority vote of the Town Board.
   F.   Powers And Duties: The Township Administrator shall be responsible for
the proper administration of all affairs of the Township and for planning and
developing Township programs, policies and activities. In discharging these
responsibilities, the Township Administrator shall:
      1.   Direct, supervise, evaluate and coordinate the administration of all
departments, staff, and programs of the Township and make recommendations on
staffing requirements, except as otherwise provided by law.
      2.   Appoint, and when necessary for the effective execution of Township
services, suspend or remove any employee and appointive officer, except as
otherwise provided by law, subject to applicable ordinances and/or policies
adopted by the Town Board. All appointments and removals shall be based solely
upon merit and the qualifications or disqualifications of the individual
involved, without regard to race, religion, color, age, sex, national origin,
ancestry, order of protection status, marital status, disability, military
status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, unfavorable discharge from military
service, or conviction record, or as otherwise in violation of any applicable
federal or state law.
      3.   Recommend appointment, and when necessary for the effective
execution of Township services, suspension or removal, of any department head
to the Town Board, except when otherwise provided by law. All recommended
appointments and removals shall be based solely upon merit and the
qualifications or disqualifications of the individual involved, without regard
to race, religion, color, age, sex, national origin, ancestry, order of
protection status, marital status, disability, military status, sexual
orientation, pregnancy, unfavorable discharge from military service, or
conviction record, or as otherwise in violation of any applicable federal or
state law.
      4.   Attend all Town Board meetings. The Township Administrator shall
have the right to take part in all discussions, unless otherwise directed by a
majority vote of the Town Code; but shall not vote.
      5.   Provide for the enforcement of all Township laws, ordinances and
policies within the Township, subject to applicable federal, state and county
laws.
      6.   Subject to the applicable provisions of the Township Code and
Illinois Municipal Budget Law, serve as the Township Budget Officer, and
prepare and submit to the Town Board, in coordination with the Township
Supervisor and the Highway Commissioner, a recommended annual budget for
Township operations, property tax levy, and capital improvement programs. When
the annual budget or the capital improvement program(s) have been approved by
the Town Board, the Township Administrator shall be responsible for the
administration of said budget and capital improvement program(s).
      7.   Prepare and submit written reports to the Town Board at the monthly
Town Board meeting, and as the Town Board may require, concerning the
administrative activities and operations of Township departments, offices and
agencies.
      8.   Advise the Town Board on a regular basis, or as requested by the
Board, of the present financial condition and future needs of the Township.
      9.   Advise the Town Board on pending public policy proposals and
recommend to the Town Board the adoption of such measures as the Township
Administrator may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety and
welfare of the community or the improvement of administrative services.
      10.   Be responsible for the procurement of commodities and services for
all Township departments, offices and agencies, and promulgate purchasing rules
and regulations to be followed by Township employees in the procurement of
goods and services.
      11.   Propose to the Town Board personnel rules, regulations and policies
as required by state and federal law and as the Township Administrator deems
necessary to manage the personnel policies of the Township.
      12.   Responsible for researching, initiating action for, applying for
and supervising the implementation of funding grants from various sources for
the improvement and development of Township capital improvement projects, as
well as for services to the Township and its residents.
      13.   Keep Township staff fully informed of all policies and decisions of
the Township Board, as well as other Township activities, by holding monthly
staff meetings and as needed.
      14.   Act as intermediary/liaison between various Township boards,
commissions, committees, agencies and departments and their professional
advisors to facilitate communication with the local government framework.
      15.   Establish a long-term plan in conjunction with the Township Board
to meet the changing governmental needs of Township citizens.
      16.   Provide administrative support to the Highway Commissioner and
assist the Highway Commissioner in the preparation of the annual road and
budget and property tax levy.
      17.   Perform such other duties as may be required by law or Township
ordinance or as may, from time to time, be requested by the Township
Supervisor, Highway Commissioner or Town Board.
   G.   Acting Township Administrator: If, because of temporary absence,
disability or illness, the Township Administrator is unable to carry out the
functions of this office, the Township Supervisor may appoint an individual to
serve as Acting Township Administrator to carry out the duties of the Township
Administrator during the Township Administrator's absence.
   H.   Authority Of Elected Officials: Nothing in this section shall be deemed
to diminish or detract from the statutory powers and authority of the
Township's elected officials and Town Board.
   I.   At-Will Employee: Nothing herein shall be construed as changing the
"at-will" status of any Township employee, including but not limited to the
Township Administrator. (Ord. TO-2021-5, 6-24-2021)
1-6-3: TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY:
   The Board may employ and fix the compensation of a Township Attorney to
advise the Board and serve as attorney for the Town. The Board may engage
additional counsel whenever in its opinion additional counsel is necessary.
(1992 Code)
1-6-4: TOWNSHIP ENGINEER:
   The Board may employ and fix the compensation of an Illinois registered
professional engineer to provide professional engineering services for the
Town. The Board may employ additional engineers whenever in its opinion
additional engineers are necessary. (1992 Code)
1-6-5: OTHER PROFESSIONALS:
   Whenever it is necessary in the board's opinion to employ individuals
possessing a high degree of professional skill where the ability or fitness of
the individual plays an important part, the board may contract for such
services without competitive bidding. (1992 Code)
1-6-6: SALARIES OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Township Supervisor: The salary and compensation of the supervisor,
whose term of office will commence on or after the third Monday of May 2025, is
established as follows:
      1.   An annual salary of forty-four thousand dollars ($44,000.00) for
services as supervisor, treasurer of the township road district, ex officio
treasurer of combined waterworks and sewerage system, and as the ex-officio
supervisor of general assistance, payable from the following funds:
         a.   General town fund: twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
         b.   Road and bridge fund: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
         c.   Sewer and water fund: twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
         d.   General assistance fund: three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
   B.   Township Trustees: The salary and compensation of each township
trustee, whose term of office will commence on or after the third Monday of May
2025, is established as follows:
      1.   An annual salary of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) for
services as township trustee.
   C.   Township Clerk: The salary and compensation of the Township Clerk,
whose term of office will commence on or after the third Monday of May 2025, is
established as follows:
      1.   An annual salary of seventy-eight thousand dollars ($78,000.00) for
services as the town clerk.
      2.   Health, hospitalization, and accident insurance benefits based upon
established township policy.
      3.   Membership in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund and the
benefits pertaining thereto as provided by law.
   D.   Township Highway Commissioner: The salary and compensation of the
highway commissioner, whose term of office will commence on or after the third
Monday of May 2025, is established as follows:
      1.   An annual salary of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for
services as the township highway commissioner.
   E.   Township Assessor: The annual salary and compensation of the township
assessor, whose term of office will commence on January 1, 2026, is established
as follows:
      1.   An annual salary of thirty-one thousand dollars ($31,000.00) for
services as the township assessor.
      2.   Health, hospitalization, and accident insurance benefits based upon
established township policy.
      3.   Membership in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund and the
benefits pertaining thereto as provided by law.
   F.   Expense Reimbursement: The persons duly elected or appointed to the
offices provided herein shall be reimbursed for all properly audited out of
pocket expenses necessarily incurred in the conduct of the official business
for the town and in the fulfillment of the duties of such person's office.
(Ord. TO-2012-6, 11-13-2012; amd. Ord. TO-2016-3, 9-13-2016; Ord. TO 2020-3,
11-10-2020; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022; Ord. TO-2024-16, 11-12-2024)
1-6-7: TOWNSHIP CLERK:
   A.   Township Meetings: The Township Clerk is the clerk of all Town meetings
and shall give notice of the annual town meeting and regular and special
Township board meetings.
   B.   Custodian Of Records And Administration Of Oaths:
      1.   The Township Clerk shall have the custody of all records, books, and
papers of the Township and shall duly file all certificates or oaths and other
papers required by law to be filed in the Clerk's office.
      2.   The Township Clerk shall record in the books of records of the
Township the minutes of the proceedings of every Township meeting held in the
Township and shall enter in the books every order or direction and all by-laws,
rules, and regulations made by the electors at any Township meeting.
      3.   The Township Clerk may administer oaths and take affidavits as
required by law to be administered and taken by Township officers and
administer oaths for absentee voters as required by the Illinois general
election law.
   C.   Road District Clerk: The Township Clerk shall be ex officio clerk for
the Highway Commissioner and shall have the powers and duties as provided in
Article 6 of the Illinois Highway Code.
   D.   Freedom Of Information Officer:
      1.   The Township Clerk shall be designated as the Freedom of Information
Officer for the Township and Road District pursuant to the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act ("FOIA"), 5 ILCS 140/3.5.
      2.   The Town Board may appoint such additional FOIA officers as it deems
necessary.
   E.   Senior Citizens Services: The Township Clerk shall serve as a liaison
to the Township Committee for Senior Services and ex officio member of the
committee and shall coordinate all senior citizen programs of the Township.
   F.   The Township Clerk shall perform such other duties as provided in
Article 75 of the Illinois Town Code, 60 ILCS 1/75 et seq. (Ord. TO-2021-12,
10-12-2021)
1-6-8: DEPUTY CLERK:
   A.   The Township Clerk, when authorized by the Town Board, may appoint one
(1) deputy clerk.
   B.   The deputy clerk has the power and duty to do the following:
      1.   Execute all documents required by law to be executed by the Township
Clerk and affix the Township Clerk's seal to those documents when required by
law. In signing a document, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the Clerk
followed with the word "By" and the deputy clerk's own name and the words
"Deputy Clerk".
      2.   Attend bid openings with respect to the sale, purchase, or lease of
goods or services by the Township or the Road District.
      3.   Attend Township meetings and Township Board meetings and take
minutes of those meetings.
   C.   The deputy clerk shall exercise the powers authorized under this
section only in the absence of the Township Clerk from the Township offices
only when: (i) the Clerk has directed the deputy clerk, in writing, to exercise
that power; or (ii) the Township board has determined by resolution that the
Township Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform that
function. (Ord. TO-2019-3, 2-12-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-12, 10-12-2021)
CHAPTER 7
TOWNSHIP FINANCES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Fiscal Year
1-7-2: Preparation and Submission of Budget
1-7-3: Adoption of Annual Budget
1-7-4: Filing Budget Ordinance
1-7-5: Budget Transfers
1-7-6: Budget Amendments
1-7-7: Failure to Adopt Budget
1-7-8: Expenditures Prohibited
1-7-9: Deposit and Investment of Funds
1-7-10: Depositories
1-7-11: Investment of Funds
1-7-12: Annual Town Financial Statement
1-7-13: Supervisor's Annual Road District Report
1-7-14: Annual Report to Town Board
1-7-15: Annual Audit
1-7-16: Treasurer's Annual Statement
1-7-1: FISCAL YEAR:
   The fiscal year for the Town shall begin on April 1 of each year and end on
March 31 of the following year. (1992 Code)
1-7-2: PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF BUDGET:
   At least sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the
Supervisor or an officer designated by the Supervisor shall obtain from each
department or office head a detailed estimate of all necessary expenses and
liabilities to be incurred for the fiscal year by the department, agency or
fund, specifying the objects or purposes for which such appropriations are made
and the amount proposed to be appropriated for each object or purpose. The
Supervisor or an officer designated by the Supervisor shall also obtain
estimates of anticipated revenues to be received during such fiscal year from
all sources and an estimate of cash on hand at the beginning of the fiscal
year. The Town Board shall prepare a tentative budget and appropriation
ordinance at least thirty (30) days before the beginning of each fiscal year in
accordance with the Illinois Municipal Budget Law. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-
2022-13, 9-13-2022)
1-7-3: ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
   A.   Tentative budget and appropriation ordinances shall be made
conveniently available for public inspection at least thirty (30) days prior to
final action thereon.
   B.   At least one public hearing shall be held as to any tentative budget
and appropriation ordinance prior to final action thereon. Notice of the date,
time and place of the public hearing shall be given by publication in a
newspaper published in the Township at least thirty (30) days prior to the time
of the hearing. Such notice shall also state the place where copies of the
tentative budget and appropriation ordinance are available for public
inspection and the times when the public may inspect such copies.
   C.   The annual budget and appropriation ordinance shall be adopted by the
favorable vote of a majority of the Town Board within or before the first
quarter of each fiscal year. (1992 Code)
1-7-4: FILING BUDGET ORDINANCE:
   The Town Clerk shall cause a certified copy of the annual budget and
appropriation ordinance to be filed with the Clerk of Cook County, Illinois,
within thirty (30) days after its adoption. (1992 Code)
1-7-5: BUDGET TRANSFERS:
   The Board of Trustees, by the favorable vote of a majority, may transfer any
unexpended balance of an appropriated budget line item to any other
appropriated budget line item within the same fund; provided, however, no
transfers shall be made within a fund which exceed in the aggregate ten percent
(10%) of the total amount appropriated in and for such fund. (1992 Code)
1-7-6: BUDGET AMENDMENTS:
   In accordance with the Illinois Municipal Budget Law, the Town Board may
amend the annual budget and appropriation ordinance by the same procedure as is
provided herein for its original adoption. (1992 Code)
1-7-7: FAILURE TO ADOPT BUDGET:
   Should the Town Board fail to approve the annual budget and appropriation
ordinance prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, no expenditure shall be
made for any purpose except for 1) prior year appropriations lawfully
encumbered; 2) for salaries at the current year rates; 3) payroll taxes; and 4)
general assistance payments, until the annual budget and appropriation
ordinance has been finally adopted by the Town Board. (1992 Code)
1-7-8: EXPENDITURES PROHIBITED:
   No office, department or agency shall, during any fiscal year, expend or
contract to expend any money or incur any liability for any purpose in excess
of the amounts appropriated for that classification of expenditure pursuant to
this Chapter. Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this
Chapter shall be null and void. (1992 Code)
1-7-9: DEPOSIT AND INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
   A.   The Supervisor, in the Supervisor’s capacity as Treasurer of all Town
funds and as ex officio Treasurer of the Road and Bridge Funds, shall perform
all statutorily required duties. The Supervisor shall receive all money paid to
the Town, either directly from the person paying it or from other officers who
may receive it, and the Supervisor shall pay out only on accounts or claims
approved by the Town Board.
   B.   The Supervisor shall deposit the Town funds in such depositories as may
be selected by the Town Board from time to time as provided by statute. The
Supervisor shall keep the Town money separate and distinct from the
Supervisor’s personal money, and the Supervisor shall not intermingle the
Supervisor’s own money with the Town funds or make personal use of the Town
funds.
   C.   The Supervisor shall keep such books and accounts as may be required
and shall keep them in the manner required by law.
   D.   The Supervisor shall, upon allowance of any account or claims by the
Town Board, draw a warrant therefor upon the Town Treasury payable to the order
of the claim out. The Supervisor shall keep in a suitable book an accurate list
of all warrants filed with the Supervisor or paid by the Supervisor stating the
date, number, amount thereof and name of the person in whose favor it is drawn.
(1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
1-7-10: DEPOSITORIES:
   The Town Board shall, from time to time, when requested by the Supervisor,
designate one or more banks or savings and loan associations in which the funds
or monies of the Town shall be kept. When a new depository is designated, the
Town Board shall notify the sureties of the Supervisor of that fact at least
five (5) days before the transfer of funds. No bank or savings and loan
association shall receive Town funds unless it has complied with the
requirements of "An Act relating to certain investments of public funds by
public agencies", Illinois Revised Statutes, ch. 85, §901, et seq., as now or
hereafter amended. (1992 Code)
1-7-11: INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by statute, ordinances of the Town, or
this Code, the Supervisor is authorized to pool any and all moneys held by the
Town for purposes of investment. Interest from the investment pool shall be
allocated to the various funds of the Town in direct proportion to the amount
of money each fund has contributed to the investment pool.
   B.   The Supervisor is authorized to transfer Town moneys between the Town’s
demand accounts and the investment pools in order to maximize interest in the
Town’s monies and to have sufficient funds in demand accounts to meet the
current obligations of the Town.
   C.   Nothing in this Section shall be construed to authorize the Supervisor
to commingle Road and Bridge funds, funds of the Combined Sewer and Water
System and General Assistance Funds with each other or with Town funds.
   D.   Nothing in this Section shall be construed to relieve the Supervisor of
the obligation to separately account for each fund of the Town, irrespective of
whether the monies of such funds have been pooled. Furthermore, the moneys of
one fund shall not be used to pay the obligations or expenditures of another
fund except as may be provided by statute. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2022-15,
10-11-2022)
1-7-12: ANNUAL TOWN FINANCIAL STATEMENT:
   In accordance with section 11-3 of the Township Law of 1874, as amended, the
Supervisor shall, on or before the Tuesday next preceding the annual town
meeting, prepare and file with the Town Clerk a full statement of the financial
affairs of the Town showing:
   A.   Funds on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year.
   B.   The amount received from all sources.
   C.   The amount expended for all purposes.
   D.   Funds on hand at the end of the fiscal year.
   E.   The amount of property tax levied the preceding year.
   F.   The amount of tax collected during the fiscal year.
   G.   The amount paid out on Town indebtedness, specifying the amounts paid
on principal and interest.
   H.   A detailed statement as to all amounts paid out by the Supervisor, on
what account and to whom.
   I.   The amount of unpaid indebtedness or liabilities.
   The Town Clerk shall record the Supervisor's annual financial statement in
the Town's record books as soon as it is filed and shall post a copy of the
same at the place where the annual Town meeting is to be held two (2) days
before the meeting. The Clerk shall read the statement aloud to the electors at
the annual Town meeting. (1992 Code)
1-7-13: SUPERVISOR'S ANNUAL ROAD DISTRICT REPORT:
   In accordance with section 6-205 of the Illinois Highway Code, as amended,
the Supervisor shall, within thirty (30) days after the end of the Road
District's fiscal year, present to the Highway Commissioner a sworn and
itemized statement of receipts and disbursements of the district during the
fiscal year just ended showing:
   A.   Funds on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year.
   B.   Total amounts received during the fiscal year and the sources of such
amounts.
   C.   Total amounts expended during the fiscal year and the purpose of such
expenditures.
   D.   Funds on hand at the end of the fiscal year.
   The Supervisor shall keep an account of all monies received, and all monies
paid out, showing in detail to whom and on what account paid. (1992 Code)
1-7-14: ANNUAL REPORT TO TOWN BOARD:
   A.   In accordance with sections 11-6 and 11-7 of the Township Law of 1874,
as amended, the Supervisor shall account to the Town Board of Trustees for all
moneys received and disbursed by the Supervisor in the Supervisor’s official
capacity on the Wednesday preceding the annual Town meeting. The members of the
Town Board, other than the Supervisor, shall then and there enter a certificate
in the Supervisor’s official book of accounts showing the state of the
Supervisor’s accounts at the date of the certificate.
   B.   In accordance with section 6-201.15 of the Illinois Highway Code, as
amended, the Highway Commissioner shall make a written report to the Town Board
of Trustees on the Wednesday preceding the annual Town meeting showing:
      1.   Funds on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year.
      2.   The amounts received by the district from all sources.
      3.   The amounts expended by the district for all purposes.
      4.   A detailed statement as to all amounts paid out by the district, on
what account and to whom.
      5.   Funds on hand at the end of the fiscal year.
      6.   The amount of incurred but unpaid liabilities.
      7.   The estimated amount of undetermined and unpaid liabilities, listing
each creditor and the estimated amount owing to each.
      8.   An inventory of all tools having a value in excess of two hundred
dollars ($200.00), machinery and equipment owned by the district, and the
condition of such equipment.
      9.   Any additional matter concerning the roads of the district which the
Highway Commissioner deems expedient and proper to report. (1992 Code; amd.
Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022; Ord. TO-2022-15, 10-11-2022)
1-7-15: ANNUAL AUDIT:
   Within six (6) months after the close of the fiscal year, the Board shall
cause an audit to be made covering the immediately preceding fiscal year of all
Township funds and accounts by an Illinois certified public accountant in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Copies of the
audit report shall be filed with the Comptroller of the State of Illinois and
the Cook County Clerk within six (6) months after the close of the fiscal year.
(1992 Code)
1-7-16: TREASURER'S ANNUAL STATEMENT:
   A.   Preparation: The Supervisor, as Treasurer of all town funds and ex
officio Treasurer of all road funds, shall, at the close of the fiscal year,
prepare a written statement for all town and road funds:
      1.   Of all monies received and from what sources received, giving items,
particulars and details.
      2.   Of all monies paid out, giving the name of each individual to whom
paid and the amount paid where the total amount paid such individual exceeds
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in the aggregate.
      3.   Of all monies paid out as compensation for personal services, giving
the name of each individual to whom paid and the total amount paid to each such
person.
      4.   Summarizing operations for all funds and account groups, as
excerpted from the annual audit report filed with the Comptroller of the State
of Illinois and the Cook County Clerk.
   B.   Filing and Publication: Within six (6) months of the close of the
fiscal year, such statement shall be subscribed and sworn to by the Supervisor
and filed in the office of the Cook County Clerk. A true, correct and complete
copy of this statement shall be published in an English language newspaper
published in the Township, or if no newspaper is published in the Township,
then in an English language newspaper published in Cook County. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 8
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
(Rep. by Ord. TO-2022-15, 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 9
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Annual Town Meeting
1-9-2: Office Hours
1-9-3: Official Newspapers
1-9-1: ANNUAL TOWN MEETING:
   The annual town meeting shall be held at the Leyden township hall, 2501
North Mannheim Road, Franklin Park, Illinois, on the statutory date as set for
same and at the hour determined by the Leyden town board. (Ord. TO-2004-4, 5-
11-2004)
1-9-2: OFFICE HOURS:
   All offices of the Town of Leyden, including offices of the combined
waterworks and sewer system, shall be open between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., daily, Monday through Friday, except
when the Town Supervisor determines that said office hours need to be adjusted
due to special circumstances (i.e., weather, public health and other
emergencies). The office shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays and all legal
holidays. (Ord. TO-2004-4, 5-11-2004; amd. Ord. TO-2021-7, 9-14-2021)
1-9-3: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPERS:
   The town clerk is authorized and directed to place all notices required to
be published by the town clerk or ex officio clerk for the township highway
commissioner in the manner provided by law. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13,
9-13-2022; Ord. TO-2022-15, 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 10
PURCHASING POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Town Purchasing
1-10-2: Sewer And Water Purchasing
1-10-3: General Bidding Provisions
1-10-4: Prohibited Acts Or Conditions
1-10-5: Nondisclosure Of Bid Information
1-10-6: Influencing Bids
1-10-7: Additional Bid Information
1-10-8: Change Orders
1-10-9: Highway Commissioner Purchasing
1-10-1: TOWN PURCHASING:
   A.   Purchases Over Thirty Thousand Dollars: All purchase orders or
contracts of whatever nature for services, materials, equipment or supplies for
Town purposes involving amounts in excess of Thirty Thousand Dollars
($30,000.00) shall be let by free and open competitive bidding, after
advertising for bids in the manner provided by law not less than ten (10) days
prior to the date set for receiving bids, to the lowest responsible bidder.
   B.   Purchases Under Thirty Thousand Dollars: Except as otherwise provided
by direction of the Board of Trustees or state law, the Board of Trustees may
let purchase orders or contracts of whatever nature for services, materials,
equipment or supplies involving amounts of Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000.00)
or less, without competitive bidding or the bidder the Board of Trustees
determines will best serve the interest of the Town.
   C.   Emergencies: If authorized by the township board, contracts for the
purchase of services, materials, equipment or supplies may be let without
advertising for bids in the case of an emergency.
(Ord. TO-2014-1, 3-11-2014; amd. Ord. TO 2022-12, 8-9-2022)
1-10-2: SEWER AND WATER PURCHASING:
   A.   Construction Work and Equipment: All contracts for construction or the
purchase of equipment for sewer and water purposes, where the estimated cost
exceeds Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000.00), shall be let by free and open
competitive bidding, after advertising for bids in a newspaper published in the
Township not less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for receiving bids,
to the lowest responsible bidder.
   B.   Waiver Of Equipment Bids: Advertising for bids for equipment shall be
dispensed with if the board of trustees, by resolution adopted by a three-
fourths (3/4) vote, determine that it is in the best interests of the township
to dispense with advertising for bids.
   C.   Bid Opening Procedure: All sealed bids shall be publicly opened at the
time and place stated in the bid notice in the presence of witnesses.
   D.   Time Of Awarding Bids: An award shall be made to the lowest responsible
bidder within fifteen (15) days after receipt and opening of the bids, provided
said time shall be extended if the bid notice or specifications so provide.
(1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2014-1, 3-11-2014; Ord. TO 2022-12, 8-9-2022)
1-10-3: GENERAL BIDDING PROVISIONS:
   The following bidding requirements, guidelines and provisions shall be
applicable to purchasing for town purposes and sewer and water purposes.
   A.   Bid Specifications And Instructions: Bid specifications shall include
the following information:
      1.   A general statement describing the nature of the purchase or
contract.
      2.   General instructions for submitting a bid or proposal.
      3.   General requirements for performing the business transaction.
      4.   Method of payment.
      5.   Technical specifications including a description of materials to be
used and/or a detailed explanation of services to be provided.
   B.   Lowest Responsible Bidder: The following nonexclusive list of factors
shall be considered in recommending the lowest responsible bidder to the board
of trustees from among those bidders who submit bids responsive to the bid
notice and specifications.
      1.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required.
      2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference.
      3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
      4.   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
      5.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service.
      6.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service.
      7.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required.
      8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract.
      9.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
      10.   Bidder's record of experience in constructing improvements of the
size and type required in the bid specifications.
      11.   Lowest bids received.
      12.   Bidder's record as to the percentage of work sublet on previous
contracts.
   C.   Lowest Responsible Bidder For Public Works Projects: In determining
whether a bidder is a "responsible bidder" for the award of a public works
contract, the bidder must submit the following information and supporting
documentation verified under oath on a form acceptable to the Town Supervisor
in order for the bid to be accepted:
      1.   A copy of the Illinois Secretary of State's Department of Business
Services online records evidencing that the bidder has a current corporate
annual report on file. If the bidder is an individual, sole proprietor, or
partnership, this subsection shall not apply.
      2.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois
Department of Revenue if bidder has employees (e.g., document with account
number, Illinois Business Tax number).
      3.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois
Department of Employment Security if bidder has employees (e.g., document with
UI account number).
      4.   Disclosure of any federal, state, or local tax liens or tax
delinquencies against the contractor or any officers of the contractor in the
last five (5) years.
      5.   A statement that all employees are: (i) covered under a current
workers' compensation insurance policy; and (ii) properly classified under such
policy. If the bidder is not insured with a carrier, the evidence of workers'
compensation insurance shall be a copy of the "Information Page" of the
bidder's workers' compensation policy and any continuation of that Information
Page which include the name and address of the insured, as well as the class
codes the compensation premium is based on and the total estimated renumeration
per class code.
      6.   Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act,
820 ILCS 130/1, et seq., including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance
and retirement for those trades covered in the act.
      7.   A statement of compliance with all provisions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act and all applicable rules and regulations for the past five
(5) years. Such statement(s) shall also provide that the contractor has
reviewed the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act or federal Davis-Bacon and Related
Act, has reviewed, and agrees to pay the applicable prevailing wage rates
attached to the bid specifications, and will strictly comply with the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act or federal Davis-Bacon and Related requirements. A
contractor who has been found by the Illinois Department of Labor to be in
violation of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act twice within a three (3) year
period shall be deemed not to be a Responsible Bidder for two (2) years from
the date of the latest finding.
      8.   A copy of the written program for the prevention of substance abuse
to be filed with a public body pursuant to the Substance Abuse Prevention on
Public Works Projects Act, 820 ILCS 265/1, et seq.
      9.   A statement that individuals who will perform work on the public
works project on behalf of the contractor are properly classified as either:
         a.   An employee; or
         b.   An independent contractor under all applicable state and Federal
laws and local ordinances.
      10.   Documents evidencing any professional or trade license required by
law or local ordinance for any trade or specialty area in which the contractor
is seeking a contract award. Additionally, the contractor must disclose any
suspension or revocation of such license held by the company, or of any
director, or manager of the company.
      11.   Documentation evidencing the bidder actively participates, and has
actively participated for at least twelve (12) months before the date of the
bid opening, in apprenticeship training programs applicable to the work to be
performed on the project, which are approved by and registered with the United
States Department of Labor's Office of Apprenticeship, or its successor
organization; and evidence that any applicable apprenticeship program has
graduated at least five (5) apprentices in each of the past five (5) years for
each of the construction crafts the bidder will perform on the project.
Evidence of graduation rates are not required for apprenticeable crafts
dedicated exclusively to the transportation of material and equipment to and
from the public works project. The required evidence includes, but is not
limited to: a copy of all applicable apprenticeship standards and
Apprenticeship Agreement(s) for any apprentice(s) who will perform work on the
public works project; documentation from each applicable apprenticeship program
certifying that it has graduated at least five (5) apprentices in each of the
past five (5) years for each construction craft the bidder will perform on the
project; and additional evidence of participation and graduation requirements
as may be requested by the Town at its discretion.
      12.   Bidder shall certify that all employees expected to perform work on
the project have completed a ten (10)-hour or greater OSHA safety program. Only
workers that have satisfactorily completed a ten (10)-hour or greater OSHA
safety program will be allowed to participate on the project. The bidder must
have copies of the employee OSHA cards on file, and the Town may request the
bidder provide copies of employee's OSHA cards; failure to produce an
employee's OSHA card may result in a determination that the bidder is not a
responsible bidder.
      13.   All contractors and sub-contractors are required to turn in
certified payrolls pursuant to Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, and comply with
all provisions of the Employee Classification Act, 820 ILCS 185/1, et seq.
      14.   Documentation of the name and address of each subcontractor from
whom the contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of
the project. Further, each such subcontractor shall be required to adhere to
the requirements as though it were bidding directly to the Town. Each
contractor shall submit all subcontractor information and supporting
documentation to the Town prior to the subcontractor commencing work on the
project.
      15.   Disclosure of any determinations by a court or governmental agency
for violations of federal, state, or local laws, including but not limited to
serious, willful, or repeated violations of the Occupations Safety and Health
Act (OSHA), violations of contracting or antitrust laws, tax or licensing laws,
environmental laws, or the Federal Davis-Bacon and Related Acts.
      16.   Statements as to past performance, which shall give an accurate and
complete record of all public works projects completed in the past three (3)
years by the contractor. Such statements shall include the name of the public
body and the project, original contract price, final contract price, the names
of all subcontractors used, if applicable, and a statement as to compliance
with completion deadlines.
      Upon designation by the Town that a contractor's or subcontractor's
submission in anticipation of a bid is complete and timely, and upon any
further consideration deemed necessary by the Town, the contractor or
subcontractor may be pre-qualified for future Town public works projects. A
contractor's classification as "qualified" shall exempt the contractor or sub-
contractor from the comprehensive submission requirements for a period of
twelve (12) months. Thereafter, contractors or subcontractors who are pre-
qualified must submit a complete application for continuation of "pre-
qualified" standing, on a form provided by the Town (also referred to as the
"short form") by December 31 for the upcoming calendar year. Failure by any
pre-qualified contractor or subcontractor to timely submit its complete
application for continuation of "pre-qualified" standing shall result in
automatic removal of the designation, effective January 1 of the upcoming year.
However, the "removed" contractor or subcontractor shall still be permitted to
bid on Town public works projects. The pre-qualification designation is solely
within the discretion of the Town and the Town specifically reserves the right
to change or revoke the designation for a stated written reason(s). Denial of
pre-qualification shall be in writing and shall be forwarded to the contractor
within seven (7) working days of such decision. Any contractor denied or losing
pre-qualification status may request reconsideration of the decision by
submitting such request in writing to the Town Supervisor within five (5)
business days of receipt of notice of denial.
      All material changes to the contractor's status, at any time, must be
reported in writing within fourteen (14) days of its occurrence. Failure to
comply with this requirement is grounds for the contractor to be deemed a non-
responsible bidder.
      For the purpose of this subsection, the term "public works" shall have
the same meaning as the definition of "Public works" provided by the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act as may be amended from time-to-time.
   D.   Incomplete Submissions. It is the bidder's sole responsibility to
comply with all submission requirements at the time it submits its bid to the
Town. Bidder submissions deemed inadequate or incomplete may result in a
determination that the bidder in not a responsible bidder. The submission
requirements also apply to all subcontractors, except that the successful
bidder shall submit all subcontractor submissions to the Town prior to the
subcontractor commencing work on the project. Failure of a subcontractor to
submit the required information shall not disqualify the successful bidder from
performing work on the project and shall not constitute a contractual default
and/or breach by the successful bidder. However, the Town may withhold all
payments otherwise due for work performed by a subcontractor until the
subcontractor submits the required submission to the Town. If a subcontractor
fails to submit the required information, the Town may require that the
successful bidder remove the subcontractor from the project and replace it with
a responsive and responsible contractor.
   E.   Rejection Of Bids: The board of trustees has exclusive responsibility
and discretion to reject any or all bids.
   F.   Performance And Payment Bonds: Whenever required by the terms of the
bid or by state law, successful bidders shall be required to submit performance
and payment bonds with sufficient sureties to ensure performance of the
contract and to save the town harmless from the wage and material payment
claims of laborers, subcontractors and material men.
   G.   Assignment Of Contracts: No contract shall be assignable or sublet by
the successful bidder without the written consent of the board of trustees.
   H.   Competitive Bidding Exception: Contracts which by their nature are not
adapted to award by competitive bidding, such as contracts for the services of
individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill where the ability or
fitness of the individual plays an important part and contracts for utility
service such as water, electricity, gas or telephone, shall not be subject to
the competitive bidding requirements of this chapter.
   I.   Emergency Contracts: In case of an emergency, the Board of Trustees may
authorize purchase orders or contracts for services, materials, equipment or
supplies reasonably required to address the emergency without advertising for
bids.
   J.   Budget Approval: No purchase orders or contracts shall be approved or
awarded unless funds are budgeted and available in excess of all unpaid
obligations to pay the amount to be obligated thereby.
   K.   Encumbrance Of Funds: All financial obligations incurred by a purchase
order or contract shall be recorded in the town's budget accounting system and
shall be an encumbrance on funds then budgeted and available to pay the amount
obligated.
(1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2024-4, 2-13-2024)
1-10-4: PROHIBITED ACTS OR CONDITIONS:
   All collusive bidding practices described in article 33E of the Illinois
criminal code of 1961 are strictly prohibited. (1992 Code)
1-10-5: NONDISCLOSURE OF BID INFORMATION:
   No officer, employee or agent of the town shall disclose any information
relating to the terms of a sealed bid except as provided by law or as is
necessary to the performance of official responsibilities relating to the bid
until the sealed bids are publicly opened as provided herein and the contents
thereof are made generally available to the public. (1992 Code)
1-10-6: INFLUENCING BIDS:
   No officer, employee or agent of the town shall knowingly convey, directly
or indirectly, any information concerning the specifications of a contract or
the identity of particular potential subcontractors, except by means of a
publicly available official invitation to bid or a prebid conference, when such
information would influence the likelihood of acceptance of a bid or contract.
(1992 Code)
1-10-7: ADDITIONAL BID INFORMATION:
   Additional information intended to clarify plans or specifications regarding
a contract, or acceptable alternatives or substitutes to plans or
specifications, may be provided outside of publicly available official
invitation to bid or a prebid conference, if such information is written,
mailed to any person who has submitted a bid or requested plans or
specifications regarding an invitation to bid, and made generally available to
the public. (1992 Code)
1-10-8: CHANGE ORDERS:
   No officer, employee or agent of the town shall approve any change to a
contract without first obtaining a written determination from the board of
trustees or its authorized designee that:
   A.   The circumstances said to necessitate the change in performance of the
contract were not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was signed;
or
   B.   The changed performance was not within the contemplation of the
contract as signed; or
   C.   The change in performance is in the best interest of the town.
   This section shall only apply to change orders which authorize or
necessitate an increase or decrease of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or
more in the cost of the contract or an increase or decrease of thirty (30) days
or more for the time of completion. (1992 Code)
1-10-9: HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER PURCHASING:
   The Highway Commissioner is authorized to let contracts, employ labor, and
purchase material and equipment for the construction, maintenance and repair of
roads within the Township Road District as provided by, and subject to the
limitations of article 6 of the Illinois Highway Code and other applicable
provisions of state law.
   A.   District Clerk: The town clerk, as ex officio district clerk of the
township road district, shall place advertisements for all highway bids and
shall be present when such bids are opened. The clerk shall also countersign
and keep a complete record of all warrants issued by the highway commissioner
for budgeted road district purposes.
   B.   District Treasurer: The Supervisor, as ex officio District Treasurer,
shall pay district monies in payment of the Highway Commissioner's contracts
upon warrant of the Highway Commissioner provided the warrant is countersigned
by the Town Clerk.
   C.   The District Treasurer shall present, within thirty (30) days of the
end of each fiscal year, a sworn itemized statement of receipts and
disbursements of the district during the fiscal year just ended .
   D.   Lowest Bidder: Except for professional services, and in the case of
emergencies, when contracts for the cost of construction, materials, supplies,
machinery or equipment exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), said
contracts shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for
bids at least once, and at least ten (10) days prior to the time set for the
opening of such bids. For purposes of this subsection, "new machinery or
equipment" is defined as that which has been previously untitled or that which
shows fewer than two hundred (200) hours on its operating clock and that is
accompanied by a new equipment manufacturer's warranty.
   E.   Bid Specifications And Instructions: Bid specifications shall include
the following information:
      1.   A general statement describing the nature of the purchase or
contract.
      2.   General instructions for submitting a bid or proposal.
      3.   General requirements for performing the business transaction.
      4.   Method of payment.
      5.   Technical specifications including a description of materials to be
used and/or a detailed explanation of services to be provided.
   F.   Lowest Responsible Bidder: The following nonexclusive list of factors
shall be considered in recommending the lowest responsible bidder to the
Highway Commissioner from among those bidders who submit bids responsive to the
bid notice and specifications.
      1.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required.
      2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference.
      3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
      4.   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
      5.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service.
      6.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service.
      7.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required.
      8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract.
      9.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
      10.   Bidder's record of experience in constructing improvements of the
size and type required in the bid specifications.
      11.   Lowest bids received.
      12.   Bidder's record as to the percentage of work sublet on previous
contracts.
   G.   Lowest Responsible Bidder For Public Works Projects: In determining
whether a bidder is a "responsible bidder" for the award of a public works
contract, the bidder must submit the following information and supporting
documentation verified under oath on a form acceptable to the Highway
Commissioner in order for the bid to be accepted:
      1.   A copy of the Illinois Secretary of State's Department of Business
Services online records evidencing that the bidder has a current corporate
annual report on file. If the bidder is an individual, sole proprietor, or
partnership, this subsection shall not apply.
      2.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois
Department of Revenue if bidder has employees (e.g., document with account
number, Illinois Business Tax number).
      3.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois
Department of Employment Security if bidder has employees (e.g., document with
UI account number).
      4.   Disclosure of any federal, state, or local tax liens or tax
delinquencies against the contractor or any officers of the contractor in the
last five (5) years.
      5.   A statement that all employees are:
         a.   Covered under a current workers' compensation insurance policy;
and
         b.   Properly classified under such policy.
      If the bidder is not insured with a carrier, the evidence of workers'
compensation insurance shall be a copy of the "Information Page" of the
bidder's workers' compensation policy and any continuation of that Information
Page which include the name and address of the insured, as well as the class
codes the compensation premium is based on and the total estimated renumeration
per class code.
      6.   Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act,
820 ILCS 130/1, et seq., including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance
and retirement for those trades covered in the act.
      7.   A statement of compliance with all provisions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act and all applicable rules and regulations for the past five
(5) years. Such statement(s) shall also provide that the contractor has
reviewed the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act or federal Davis-Bacon and Related
Act, has reviewed, and agrees to pay the applicable prevailing wage rates
attached to the bid specifications, and will strictly comply with the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act or federal Davis-Bacon and Related requirements. A
contractor who has been found by the Illinois Department of Labor to be in
violation of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act twice within a three (3) year
period shall be deemed not to be a Responsible Bidder for two (2) years from
the date of the latest finding.
      8.   A copy of the written program for the prevention of substance abuse
to be filed with a public body pursuant to the Substance Abuse Prevention on
Public Works Projects Act, 820 ILCS 265/1, et seq.
      9.   A statement that individuals who will perform work on the public
works project on behalf of the contractor are properly classified as either:
         a.   An employee; or
         b.   An independent contractor under all applicable state and Federal
laws and local ordinances.
      10.   Documents evidencing any professional or trade license required by
law or local ordinance for any trade or specialty area in which the contractor
is seeking a contract award. Additionally, the contractor must disclose any
suspension or revocation of such license held by the company, or of any
director, or manager of the company.
      11.   Documentation evidencing the bidder actively participates, and has
actively participated for at least twelve (12) months before the date of the
bid opening, in apprenticeship training programs applicable to the work to be
performed on the project, which are approved by and registered with the United
States Department of Labor's Office of Apprenticeship, or its successor
organization; and evidence that any applicable apprenticeship program has
graduated at least five (5) apprentices in each of the past five (5) years for
each of the construction crafts the bidder will perform on the project.
Evidence of graduation rates are not required for apprenticeable crafts
dedicated exclusively to the transportation of material and equipment to and
from the public works project. The required evidence includes, but is not
limited to: a copy of all applicable apprenticeship standards and
Apprenticeship Agreement(s) for any apprentice(s) who will perform work on the
public works project; documentation from each applicable apprenticeship program
certifying that it has graduated at least five (5) apprentices in each of the
past five (5) years for each construction craft the bidder will perform on the
project; and additional evidence of participation and graduation requirements
as may be requested by the Highway Commissioner at its discretion.
      12.   Bidder shall certify that all employees expected to perform work on
the project have completed a ten (10)-hour or greater OSHA safety program. Only
workers that have satisfactorily completed a ten (10)-hour or greater OSHA
safety program will be allowed to participate on the project. The bidder must
have copies of the employee OSHA cards on file, and the Highway Commissioner
may request the bidder provide copies of employee's OSHA cards; failure to
produce an employee's OSHA card may result in a determination that the bidder
is not a responsible bidder.
      13.   All contractors and sub-contractors are required to turn in
certified payrolls pursuant to Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, and comply with
all provisions of the Employee Classification Act, 820 ILCS 185/1, et seq.
      14.   Documentation of the name and address of each subcontractor from
whom the contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of
the project. Further, each such subcontractor shall be required to adhere to
the requirements as though it were bidding directly to the Highway
Commissioner. Each contractor shall submit all subcontractor information and
supporting documentation to the Highway Commissioner prior to the subcontractor
commencing work on the project.
      15.   Disclosure of any determinations by a court or governmental agency
for violations of federal, state, or local laws, including but not limited to
serious, willful, or repeated violations of the Occupations Safety and Health
Act (OSHA), violations of contracting or antitrust laws, tax or licensing laws,
environmental laws, or the Federal Davis-Bacon and Related Acts.
      16.   Statements as to past performance, which shall give an accurate and
complete record of all public works projects completed in the past three (3)
years by the contractor. Such statements shall include the name of the public
body and the project, original contract price, final contract price, the names
of all subcontractors used, if applicable, and a statement as to compliance
with completion deadlines.
      Upon designation by the Highway Commissioner that a contractor's or
subcontractor's submission in anticipation of a bid is complete and timely, and
upon any further consideration deemed necessary by the Highway Commissioner,
the contractor or subcontractor may be pre-qualified for future Highway
Commissioner public works projects. A contractor's classification as
"qualified" shall exempt the contractor or sub-contractor from the
comprehensive submission requirements for a period of twelve (12) months.
Thereafter, contractors or subcontractors who are prequalified must submit a
complete application for continuation of "pre-qualified" standing, on a form
provided by the Highway Commissioner (also referred to as the "short form") by
December 31 for the upcoming calendar year. Failure by any pre-qualified
contractor or subcontractor to timely submit its complete application for
continuation of "pre-qualified" standing shall result in automatic removal of
the designation, effective January 1 of the upcoming year. However, the
"removed" contractor or subcontractor shall still be permitted to bid on
Highway Commissioner public works projects. The pre-qualification designation
is solely within the discretion of the Highway Commissioner and the Highway
Commissioner specifically reserves the right to change or revoke the
designation for a stated written reason(s). Denial of pre-qualification shall
be in writing and shall be forwarded to the contractor within seven (7) working
days of such decision. Any contractor denied or losing pre-qualification status
may request reconsideration of the decision by submitting such request in
writing to the Highway Commissioner within five (5) business days of receipt of
notice of denial.
         All material changes to the contractor's status, at any time, must be
reported in writing within fourteen (14) days of its occurrence. Failure to
comply with this requirement is grounds for the contractor to be deemed a non-
responsible bidder.
         For the purpose of this subsection, the term "public works" shall have
the same meaning as the definition of "Public works" provided by the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act as may be amended from time-to-time.
   H.   Incomplete Submissions. It is the bidder's sole responsibility to
comply with all submission requirements at the time it submits its bid to the
Highway Commissioner. Bidder submissions deemed inadequate or incomplete may
result in a determination that the bidder is not a responsible bidder. The
submission requirements also apply to all subcontractors, except that the
successful bidder shall submit all subcontractor submissions to the Highway
Commissioner prior to the subcontractor commencing work on the project. Failure
of a subcontractor to submit the required information shall not disqualify the
successful bidder from performing work on the project and shall not constitute
a contractual default and/or breach by the successful bidder. However, the
Highway Commissioner may withhold all payments otherwise due for work performed
by a subcontractor until the subcontractor submits the required submission to
the Highway Commissioner. If a subcontractor fails to submit the required
information, the Highway Commissioner may require that the successful bidder
remove the subcontractor from the project and replace it with a responsive and
responsible contractor.
   I.   Rejection Of Bids: The Highway Commissioner has exclusive
responsibility and discretion to reject any or all bids.
   J.   Performance And Payment Bonds: Whenever required by the terms of the
bid or by state law, successful bidders shall be required to submit performance
and payment bonds with sufficient sureties to ensure performance of the
contract and to save the Leyden Township Road District and the Town harmless
from the wage and material payment claims of laborers, subcontractors and
material men.
   K.   Assignment Of Contracts: No contract shall be assignable or sublet by
the successful bidder without the written consent of the Board of Trustees.
(1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2014-1, 3-11-2014; Ord. HO-2022-3, 4-12-2022; Ord. TO
2022-12, 8-9-2022; Ord. TO-2024-3, 2-13-2024; Ord. HO-2024-2, 2-13-2024)
CHAPTER 11
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Definitions
1-11-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-11-3: Gift Ban
1-11-4: Penalties
1-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
   CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in
section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
   COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, “compensated
time” includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing their official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of employment.
   CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4
of the Illinois election code 1 .
   EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the township, whether on a full time or part
time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction
and control of the township with regard to the material details of how the work
is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
   EMPLOYER: The township.
   GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER: Parents, spouse, brothers, sisters, children,
grandparents, grandchildren, parents-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law,
and legal guardians.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, a township office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in the officer’s official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the Illinois election code 2 , but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county
clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) in the case of an
employee, by the employee or by the officer or other employee directing that
employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) in the
case of an employee, with the employee, or with officer or other employee
directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) in the case of
an employee, by the employee or by the officer or other employee directing that
employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. TO-
2004-3, 5-11-2004; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
2 2. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-11-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Employees shall not intentionally perform any prohibited political
activity during any compensated time. Employees shall not intentionally
misappropriate any property or resources of the township by engaging in any
prohibited political activity for the benefit of any campaign for elective
office or any political organization.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally misappropriate
the services of any employee by requiring that employee to perform any
prohibited political activity: 1) as part of that employee’s duties, 2) as a
condition of employment, or 3) during any compensated time off.
   C.   No officer or employee shall require an employee at any time to
participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that
employee being awarded any additional compensation or employee benefit, whether
in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued
employment or otherwise, nor shall any employee be awarded any additional
compensation or employee benefit in consideration for the employee’s
participation in any prohibited political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are otherwise
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of their official
duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a
voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because the person is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. TO-2004-3, 5-11-
2004; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
1-11-3: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Soliciting: Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as “recipients”), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any “prohibited source”, as
defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
section.
   B.   Exceptions: Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the
following exceptions. Each of the exceptions listed below is mutually exclusive
and independent of every other:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
      2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or their spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials and missions.
      5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancee.
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or the recipient’s spouse or immediate family
member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a
gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall
consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the
history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the
recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those
individuals; b) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual
who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of
the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the
same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or
immediate family members.
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, “catered” means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this act, “intragovernmental gift” means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and “intergovernmental gift” means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   C.   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, their spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source, or gives the gift or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. TO-2004-3, 5-11-2004; amd. Ord. TO-
2022-13, 9-13-2022)
1-11-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-11-2 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-11-3 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   C.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   D.   A violation of section
1-11-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the township by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn
complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to
the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of
the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
   A violation of section
1-11-3 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney for the township, or, if a township ethics commission has been
created, by the commission through its designated administrative procedure.
   E.   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section 1-11-2 or 1-11-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline
or discharge. (Ord. TO-2004-3, 5-11-2004)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
JUNK DEALERS AND PEDDLERS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Definitions
2-1-2: Licenses Required
2-1-3: Application for License
2-1-4: License Fees
2-1-5: Conditions of License
2-1-6: Location and Premises Regulations
2-1-7: Junk Vehicles
2-1-8: Inspections
2-1-9: Revocation of License
2-1-10: Penalties
2-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following word or words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
JUNK: Old iron, chain, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old rope,
bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens, clips, bagging,
rubber and glass, and empty bottles; and all articles and things discarded or
no longer used as manufactured articles composed of any one or more of the
articles herein mentioned.
JUNK DEALERS: Every person engaged in the business of wholesale junk dealer,
retail junk dealer or junk peddler.
JUNK PEDDLER: Any person who uses a junk wagon for the purpose of buying,
selling or bartering in junk.
JUNK STORE: Any premises, shop, warehouse or building occupied for the conduct
of the business of wholesale or retail junk dealer.
JUNK WAGON: Every junk wagon, truck, automobile, pushcart or other vehicle used
in the conduct of the business of a junk dealer.
JUNK YARD: Any yard, place or enclosure, other than a junk store, occupied for
the conduct of the business of wholesale or retail junk dealer.
RETAIL JUNK DEALER: Every person engaged in buying, selling or bartering junk
in quantities of less than the amounts dealt in by wholesale junk dealers at
premises leased or purchased especially for the purpose of conducting such
business.
WHOLESALE JUNK DEALER: Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling
or bartering junk in quantities of ten (10) tons or more of metal junk; or ten
(10) bales or more of rags or paper; or correspondingly large lots of any other
junk at premises leased or purchased especially for the purpose of conducting
such business.
(Ord., 1962; amd. Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A person who has obtained and possesses a valid license from the County of
Cook to be engaged in the business of a junk dealer shall be deemed to have
satisfied the licensing requirement of this Chapter. No other person shall be
engaged in the business of a junk dealer without first obtaining a license from
the Supervisor.
(1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   Application for a license under this Chapter shall be made in conformity
with general requirements specified by the Town Supervisor, and shall include
but shall not be limited to the following items:
   A.   Type of business.
   B.   Location of business.
   C.   Statement by applicant that the applicant has not been convicted of
receiving stolen property in violation of the laws of the State of Illinois; or
if applicant is a corporation, a statement by an officer of the corporation
that none of applicant’s officers, stockholders or employees has been convicted
of receiving stolen property in violation of the laws of the State of Illinois.
   The Supervisor shall direct the issuance of licenses only to such persons as
shall produce satisfactory evidence of good character and responsible standing.
(Ord., 1962; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022; Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023; amd.
Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Retail Junk Dealers: The annual fee for a retail junk dealer’s license
shall be as follows:
 
3,200 sq. ft. or less                            $100.00
Over 3,200 sq. ft. but less than 6,400 sq. ft.   $150.00
Over 6,400 sq. ft. but less than 9,600 sq. ft.   $200.00
Over 9,600 sq. ft. but less than 12,800 sq. ft.  �$300.00
Over 12,000 sq. ft. but less than 16,000 sq. ft.  $400.00
Over 16,000 sq. ft.                              $500.00
 
      Where the business is conducted upon more than one floor, the total
square foot area shall be based upon the area of each floor.
   B.   Wholesale Junk Dealers: The annual fee for a wholesale junk dealer’s
license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   C.   Junk Vehicles: A separate license shall be obtained for each junk wagon
at an annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) each.
(Ord., 1962; amd. Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   License to be Displayed: The Town Clerk shall issue an appropriate
insignia designating the type of license issued to applicant which shall be
prominently displayed on the premises of the junk store or junk yard, or upon
the junk wagon of any such junk dealer or junk peddler.
   B.   Hours of Operation: No junk dealer shall receive junk from any person
between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o’clock(7:00) A.M.,
nor shall he sell, purchase or collect any junk in any public alley between the
hours of five o’clock (5:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M.
   C.   Purchase from Other Junk Dealers: No person licensed as a retail junk
dealer shall be permitted under a retail junk dealer’s license to purchase junk
from another retail junk dealer.
   D.   Receipt of Junk, Holding Period:
      1.   Every wholesale junk dealer who is also a retail junk dealer shall
keep all junk purchased in retail quantities separate and distinct from
wholesale junk for a period of two (2) days during which time said retail junk
shall be open to inspection of any member of the Township’s law enforcing
authorities, and no such junk shall be melted, vulcanized or otherwise changed
in form or its identity destroyed within such time.
      2.   No junk dealer shall sell or dispose of any junk within two (2) days
of the time of collecting, receiving or purchasing same, excepting, however,
sales of a junk peddler to a retail junk dealer whose duty it shall be to hold
such purchases for the two (2) days as herein provided.
   E.   Purchase from Minors: No junk dealer shall purchase any articles
whatsoever from any minor without the written consent of the minor’s parent or
guardian. The penalty for such violation shall be a fine of not less than one
dollar ($1.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
(Ord., 1962; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022; Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-6: LOCATION AND PREMISES REGULATIONS:
   A.   Location Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person:
      1.   To locate any junk store or junk yard within four hundred feet
(400') of a church, hospital, public or parochial school measured by the
shortest straight line between the junk store or junk yard and any such
building.
      2.   To locate any junk store or junk yard in any block in which two-
thirds (2/3) of the buildings on both sides of the street on such block are
used exclusively for residence purposes or for wholesale or retail store
purposes, without the written consents of a majority of the property owners
according to frontage on both sides of the street, including buildings located
upon the corner lots of said street regardless of where they front; provided
however, that the word “block” means only that part of the street in question
which lies between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets on either side of
the street on which said junk store or junk yard is to be located.
      3.   To locate, conduct or operate any junk store or junk yard upon any
street in the Town upon which is located a bus line.
   B.   Junk Yards to be Fenced: Every junk yard shall be surrounded by a solid
fence, eight feet (8') high, which is so constructed as to completely obscure
the area enclosed and the materials stored therein. Such fence shall be located
at least eight feet (8') from all public ways surrounding the property and none
of said materials shall be piled nearer than six inches (6") to nor higher than
such fence.
(Ord., 1962; amd. Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-7: JUNK VEHICLES:
   Each junk wagon shall be prominently marked with the name of the junk dealer
using such junk wagon together with the street and number of the junk dealer’s
place of business.
(Ord., 1962; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022; Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-8: INSPECTIONS:
   The place of business and the junk wagons of all junk dealers shall at all
reasonable times be open to the inspection of any member of the Township law
enforcing authorities.
(Ord., 1962; amd. Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   The license of any person licensed as a junk dealer who is convicted of
receiving stolen goods or property shall, upon conviction, be immediately
revoked.
(Ord., 1962; amd. Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
2-1-10: PENALTIES:
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and every day on which such violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord., 1962; 1992 Code; Ord. TO-2025-6, 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 2
GARAGE SALES AND DEALERS IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES
SECTION:
2-2-1: Definitions
2-2-2: Permitted Locations For Garage Sales
2-2-3: Permitted Locations For Dealing In Secondhand Articles
2-2-4: Garage Sale License Required
2-2-5: License Fee
2-2-6: Limit On Length And Frequency Of Garage Sales
2-2-7: Maintenance Of Order; Compliance With Other Laws
2-2-8: Signs; Other Items Prohibited
2-2-9: Violation; Penalty
2-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
   As used in this Chapter, the following word or words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
 
DEALING IN All general sales open to the public conducted for the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading,
SECONDHAND dealing or otherwise disposing of “secondhand property” as defined herein.
PROPERTY:
           Shall mean and include all general sales open to the public and conducted by the owner or occupant
           of a residential premises for the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading, dealing or otherwise
GARAGE     disposing of “personal property” as defined herein. As used herein, the phrase “garage sale”
SALE:      includes, but is not limited to, any and all such sales of personal property whether entitled
           “garage sale”, “lawn sale”, “yard sale”, “attic sale”, “room sale”, “backyard sale”, “moving sale”,
           “flea market”, “basement sale”, “rummage sale”, “estate sale” or any similar name.
           Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of their residence and
PERSONAL   acquired in the normal course of living or in maintaining a residence. It does not include
PROPERTY:  merchandise which was purchased for resale, bulk sales, the sale of multiple new items of the same
           description, and the sale of consigned merchandise, merchandise brought to the premises for resale
           or for reconditioning for resale (see definition of “secondhand property”).
           Any used or secondhand items or articles of personal property customarily owned, utilized and
SECONDHAND maintained in a family household however acquired, including any items or articles of property
PROPERTY:  which were purchased for resale, acquired in a bulk sale, or which are consigned for sale.
           Secondhand property does not include motor vehicles. (Ord. TO-99-8, 6-8-1999; amd. Ord. 2019-7, 5-
           14-2019; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
 
2-2-2: PERMITTED LOCATIONS FOR GARAGE SALES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any individual to conduct a garage sale in the
Township except from a residential premises owned or occupied by the individual
conducting the garage sale.
   B.   A garage sale license under this Chapter is not required for any garage
sale conducted within the corporate limits of a city or village within Leyden
Township that regulates garage sales. (Ord. TO-99-8, 6-8-1999)
2-2-3: PERMITTED LOCATIONS FOR DEALING IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to conduct the business of dealing in secondhand
property in the Township except from premises for which dealing in secondhand
property is a permitted retail business use under the Cook County Zoning
Ordinance, for which a special use permit has been issued under the Cook County
Zoning Ordinance for dealing in secondhand property as a retail business use.
   B.   An estate sale may be conducted by a business that regularly conducts
estate sales as a business entity.
   C.   A garage sale license under this Chapter is not required for any garage
sale conducted within the corporate limits of a city or village within Leyden
Township that regulates garage sales. (Ord. TO-99-8, 6-8-1999; amd. Ord. 2019-
7, 5-14-2019)
2-2-4: GARAGE SALE LICENSE REQUIRED:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or to allow the conducting of
a garage sale on the person’s premises without having applied for and received
from the township clerk a license to conduct such sale. Each license shall be
prominently displayed on the residence or garage covered by the license in such
a manner that it is easily visible to persons passing by the premises. (Ord.
TO-99-8, 6-8-1999; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
2-2-5: LICENSE FEE:
   A license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for each license
issued. (Ord. TO-2012-4, 3-13-2012; amd. Ord. 2019-7, 5-14-2019; Ord. TO-2021-
9, 9-14-2021; Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-2-6: LIMIT ON LENGTH AND FREQUENCY OF GARAGE SALES:
   Licenses for garage sales shall be valid for not more than two (2)
consecutive days, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. No more than two (2) garage sales shall be conducted or
permitted on the same premises within a calendar year. (Ord. TO-99-8, 6-8-1999)
2-2-7: MAINTENANCE OF ORDER; COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
   The individual conducting the garage sale and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall maintain the
premises in a neat, clean and presentable condition before, during and after
such sale. In the event good order is not maintained, or the sale is conducted
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, such individual(s) shall
be subject to the penalties provided in
2-2-9 of this chapter.
   All persons conducting garage sales shall comply with all other applicable
federal, state and local laws, including zoning and traffic laws. (Ord. TO-99-
8, 6-8-1999)
2-2-8: SIGNS; OTHER ITEMS PROHIBITED:
   A.   On-Sale Signage: Only one sign shall be permitted on the premises where
the garage sale is taking place, unless such property has frontage on two (2)
public streets, in which case two (2) signs are permitted, one at each
frontage. Each sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, shall not
exceed a height of four feet (4'), and shall not be located on any portion of
the township's right of way. Such signs shall not be erected more than twenty
four (24) hours prior to the permitted start of the garage sale. Such signs
shall be removed within two (2) hours after the completion of the sale but in
no event no later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the day the license
expires.
   B.   Off-Site Directional Signage: Three (3) temporary directional signs may
be permitted on the public right-of-way. Each sign shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in area, shall not exceed a height of three feet (3'), shall not be
placed within five feet (5') of the paved portion of the township's right-of-
way, and shall only be erected during the permitted hours of the garage sale as
stated on the license. No signs (other than the 3 permitted in this
subsection), banners, balloons, flags, streamers or other advertising devices
shall be erected or placed in the public right-of-way or affixed to a utility
pole, street sign, traffic control sign or any other structure, wire, cable or
other device located on, over or above any public right-of-way, street or road.
   C.   Garage sale signs shall not be displayed on or within vehicles, or be
placed in a location, or in a manner which would cause an obstruction to the
clear view of traffic or pose a hazard. Any other advertising devices intended
to draw attention to this sale, including, but not limited to, banners,
balloons, flags, streamers, and loudspeakers, are prohibited.
   D.   Garage sale signage must display the address (house number and street
name) of the location for the garage sale and the garage sale permit number.
   E.   The individual conducting the garage sale and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall not suffer or
permit any garage sale signs, banners, balloons, flags, streamers or other such
device to be posted or erected in violation of this section, and they shall
immediately remove any such signs posted or erected in violation of this
section. (Ord. TO-2010-5, 4-13-2010; amd. Ord. 2019-7, 5-14-2019)
2-2-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) nor more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) for each offense. Each day a violation is found to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. The owner of the property for which a garage
sale license is obtained shall be responsible for all posting of all
advertising devices relating to such garage sale and shall be responsible for
any unlawful posting. (Ord. TO-2010-5, 4-13-2010)
CHAPTER 3
COMMERCIAL FILM PRODUCTION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose And Intent
2-3-2: Definitions
2-3-3: Permit Required
2-3-4: Exceptions
2-3-5: Deadline For Filing Applications
2-3-6: Permit Application
2-3-7: Processing Permit Applications
2-3-8: Permit Approval/Denial
2-3-9: Permit Conditions
2-3-10: Fees/Charges
2-3-11: Duties Of Permittee
2-3-12: Pyrotechnics
2-3-13: Permit Revocation/Suspension
2-3-14: Appeals
2-3-15: Permit Duration And Extensions
2-3-16: Hours Of Production
2-3-17: Vehicle And Equipment Parking
2-3-18: Violations And Penalties
2-3-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide specific rules governing the
audio recording and/or the filming or taping of movies, TV programs,
commercials or training films, and related activities on locations within the
unincorporated areas of Leyden Township. This chapter is intended to ensure
that filming/taping/recording is done consistent with public health and safety
and the protection of property so as to:
   A.   Provide for adequate protection for the personal and property rights of
affected residents, schools and businesses;
   B.   Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;
   C.   Prevent unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicle traffic, including ingress to or egress from any residence, school or
place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or
entering parked or standing vehicles and to generally protect the rights of the
public to the safe and normal use of the public streets, rights-of-way and
property;
   D.   Maintain and protect the value of surrounding properties;
   E.   Reduce exposure of the Township to personal injury and/or property
damage, claims and litigation;
   F.   Streamline the audio and/or film permit process and facilitate issuance
of a permit for audio and/or film production activities;
   G.   Ensure the public health, safety and welfare and to avoid unreasonable
and unnecessary disruptions to the community;
   H.   Establish standards and procedures for evaluating requests for audio
and/or film production permits;
   I.   Assure that requests for audio and/or film production permits are
evaluated on a case-by-case basis so as to recognize that each permit
application presents a unique set of circumstances; and
   J.   Assure that the Township will be adequately compensated both for the
direct use of Township resources and for the effects on Township resources and
operations arising from audio and/or film production activities through a
permit application process. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings given in this section, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning:
   APPLICANT: The person, organization, corporation, association or other
entity applying for a permit to audio record or film in the unincorporated
areas of Leyden Township.
   AUDIO AND FILM PRODUCTION: The process of recording live action on film,
digital recording, magnetic tape or any other medium, for later commercial sale
or distribution as a movie, television show, radio show, music video,
advertising commercial, training film or educational program.
   AUDIO RECORDING AND FILM PRODUCTION ACTIVITY: Any and all activities related
to audio recording and film production, including, but not limited to the
staging, set-up, shooting, site restoration, using audio and film production
equipment, gatherings of persons involved in the audio and film production,
filming, recording, videotaping, photographing, or other similar process
conducted for the making of still photographs, motion pictures, television
programs, video games, commercial and nontheatrical audio and film productions.
   AUDIO RECORDING AND FILM PRODUCTION ACTIVITY CHARGES: The charges
established by the Township to compensate the Township both for the direct use
of Township resources and for the effects on Township resources and operations
arising from audio and film production activities pursuant to an audio and/or
film production permit.
   AUDIO RECORDING AND FILM PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT: Any object used in audio and
film production, including but not limited to lighting equipment, sound
equipment, cameras, dressing rooms, trailers, props, furnishings and vehicles.
   AUDIO RECORDING AND FILM PRODUCTION PERMIT: A permit issued in accordance
with the procedures and provisions of this chapter.
   ISSUING AUTHORITY: The Township Supervisor and duly authorized designee.
   NEWS PURPOSE: An audio and/or film production activity conducted for the
purpose of reporting on persons, events, or scenes which are in the news for
newspapers, television news and other news media.
   PERMITTEE: The person, organization, corporation, association or other
entity issued an audio or film production permit.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any property not owned by Leyden Township, and on which
filming would not interfere with public rights-of-way, access or safety.
   PUBLIC STREET: Any street or road maintained by Leyden Township and located
within the unincorporated areas of the Township.
   STUDENT FILM: The staging, shooting, making, capturing, taking or recording
of images for purposes resulting from enrollment in or in connection with high
school, junior college, college, university, specialty education institutions
such as trade schools, film schools or art schools or any other educational
program.
   STUDIO: A fixed place of business where audio and/or filming activities are
regularly conducted upon the premises.
   TOWNSHIP: The Town of Leyden/Leyden Township as a governmental corporation
and existing pursuant to the laws of the State of Illinois.
   TOWNSHIP RESOURCES: Township resources means and includes any and all of the
following: a) elected and appointed Township officials; b) Township employees
and personnel; c) operating and administrative departments of the Township; d)
vehicles, equipment, personal property and real estate owned, leased or
operated by or on behalf of the Township; e) streets, sidewalks, parkways,
parking lots, and public rights-of-way located within the Township; and f)
services provided by, on behalf of or under the auspices of the Township,
regardless of the nature of the services, and regardless of whether or not such
services are provided or made available to the citizens, schools and businesses
located in the Township. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-
2022; Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   Except as provided in section
2-3-4 of this chapter, no person shall engage in, participate in or start any
audio recording or film production activity anywhere within the unincorporated
areas of the Township without first applying and obtaining an audio recording
permit or film production permit from the Township Supervisor in accordance
with the procedures established in this chapter. This permit must be in the
possession of the permittee at all times while on location in the
unincorporated areas of the Township.
   This permit does not constitute or grant permission to use or occupy
property not owned, leased or controlled by the Township. An applicant for a
permit shall obtain the private property’s written permission, consent, and/or
lease for use of the property not owned or controlled by the Township as a
condition for obtaining an audio recording permit or film production permit.
(Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-4: EXCEPTIONS:
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following
activities provided that the activity will not require the closure of a public
street, or substantially impede traffic thereon:
   A.   Audio or film production activities conducted for news purposes;
   B.   Audio or film production activities conducted at studios;
   C.   Audio or film production activities conducted for use in a criminal
investigation or Civil or Criminal Court proceeding;
   D.   Audio or film production activities conducted for student films as
defined in
2-3-2 of this chapter or at an adult education program conducted under the
auspices of a school district, park district, or community organization that is
either located in Leyden Township or is supported by taxes paid in whole or in
part by residents of Leyden Township;
   E.   Noncommercial audio recording or filming activities conducted solely
for private or family use; or
   F.   Audio or filming production activities conducted by or for Leyden
Township. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019)
2-3-5: DEADLINE FOR FILING APPLICATIONS:
   Applications for an audio production permit or film production permit must
be filed with the Township Clerk not less than fifteen (15) business days prior
to the date the audio production activity or film production activity is to
begin on a form furnished by the Township. No late applications will be
processed by the Township unless the Township Supervisor determines that
special circumstances exist relative to the application which would have
precluded its application on a timely basis. Upon a showing of good cause, the
Township Supervisor shall consider applications which are filed after the
filing deadline if there is sufficient time to process and investigate the
application, and for Township staff to prepare for the audio and/or filming
production activity. An additional fee may be imposed for applications filed
less than fifteen (15) business days prior to the audio or film production
activity. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-6: PERMIT APPLICATION:
   The permit application shall be on a form furnished by the Township Clerk
and signed by the applicant or authorized agent thereof. No application is
considered submitted unless it is accompanied with the required fee(s) as set
forth in subsection
2-3-10A of this chapter and payment of all outstanding debts owed the Township.
   A.   Contents Of Application: The application shall contain all information
and statements, and shall be accompanied by all documentation required by this
section, plus such other information as may be required by this chapter for the
type of audio or film production activities proposed, and such other
information as the Township Supervisor may reasonably deem necessary to
complete the review of the application.
   B.   Signature Under Oath: The application shall be signed under oath by the
applicant or an authorized representative of the applicant.
   C.   Required Information: The applicant shall provide at least the
following information:
      1.   Type of production (radio, motion picture, television production,
training film, etc.);
      2.   Current name, address and telephone number of applicant and the
production company, if any;
      3.   Name, address, telephone number and an email address of person in
charge of day-to-day operations of the recording and/or film production
(project producer, director, location manager);
      4.   A statement that the person signing the application is authorized to
do so;
      5.   Complete production schedule including dates and times of audio and/
or film production activity and the approximate time when such activity will
begin and end;
      6.   Proposed location(s), including street names, direction, addresses
of location(s), whether public or private, within the unincorporated areas of
the Township where the audio and/or film production activity will take place
and/or for staging and/or storage of audio and/or film production equipment;
      7.   If any of the audio production activity and/or film production
activity is to take place on private property, a letter or statement of
approval, in the form provided in subsection D2 of this section, signed by the
owner(s) and occupant(s) of each private location described pursuant to the
preceding paragraph;
      8.   The description of and approximate number of personnel who will
engage in such activity;
      9.   Description of type of audio and/or film (e.g., commercial, feature
film, film scene, training film, etc.) and description of scenes to be audio
recorded and/or filmed including details of any hazardous activity employing
firearms, explosives, the use of open flame, other pyrotechnical effects,
animals, stunts, filming of moving motor vehicles or aircraft;
      10.   If the audio production activity and/or filming production activity
include special effects which include incendiary or explosive devices, proof of
no less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) liability insurance therefor,
along with the name and qualifications of the person in charge of such special
effects, and proof of licensing by the applicable Federal, State and local
agencies. The certificate of insurance shall name Leyden Township as an
additional insured. The insurance required by this subsection shall be in
addition to the general liability insurance coverage required by subsection D3
of this section;
      11.   The proposed name of the film/series, subject matter and primary
actors;
      12.   Description of the types and number of vehicles and equipment to be
on location for the audio and/or film production activities, including, but not
limited to trucks, trailers, buses, limousines and cameras;
      13.   Description of the number of personnel and equipment applicant
proposes to have on the audio and/or film production and staging location(s) to
provide emergency medical treatment for persons involved in the audio and/or
film production activity;
      14.   Description of the types and number of vehicles which will be
parked on public streets, and description of any equipment to be placed on
public property;
      15.   Description of the method and procedures to be used for food
service and health and sanitation on the audio and/or film production location
(s) whether located in unincorporated Leyden Township or within a neighboring
municipality;
      16.   Description of the method and procedures for the removal of garbage
and other waste from the audio and/or film production location(s);
      17.   Description of the types of Township services/resources applicant
anticipates using, such as water, electricity, map cooperation, recycling,
garbage collection and disposal, lighting, Township personnel, property and/or
rights-of-way;
      18.   Evidence of adequate insurance certification as set forth in
subsections C10 and D3 of this section;
      19.   An agreement to pay the Township for all Township audio and film
production activity charges;
      20.   An agreement to pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice,
the cost of repair for any and all damage to public property of any kind,
resulting from or in connection with, the audio and/or film production, and to
restore such property to the condition it was in immediately prior to the audio
and/or film production;
      21.   Hold Harmless Agreement;
      22.   Other information as deemed necessary by the Township Supervisor;
and
      23.   Draft notification as required in subsection D1 of this section for
the approval of the Township Supervisor.
   D.   Required Attachments: In addition to the information required in
subsection C of this section, the following documents shall be submitted prior
to the issuance of a permit.
      1.   Notification To Neighbors: Upon the Township Supervisor’s approval
of a draft Notification to Neighbors, proof that applicant has initiated
notification to all owners of record and occupants of all property situated
within eight hundred (800) linear feet, in each direction and on both sides of
the street or streets of the location(s) upon which audio recording, filming
and staging is expected to occur, not less than ten (10) business days prior to
the first day of the proposed audio and/or film production schedule. The notice
to owners of record and occupants may be delivered personally or sent by U.S.
mail. Additionally, applicant shall post signs at the location(s) upon which
the audio recording, filming and staging of equipment is expected to occur. The
notices shall be in a form approved by the Township Supervisor and shall
contain a written description of the proposed audio and/or film production,
including the proposed production schedule and the type of audio and/or film
production activities, including, but not limited to, employing firearms,
explosives, the use of open flame, other pyrotechnical effects, animals,
stunts, filming of moving motor vehicles or aircraft and other noise-creating
or hazardous devices which disturb the peace, audio and/or film production
equipment applicant proposes to use and location(s) upon which the audio
recording, filming and staging of equipment is to occur. The notice shall state
that the owner(s) of record and the properties’ occupants may submit any
written comments and objections to the Township Supervisor within five (5) days
from receipt of the notice. The notice shall also clearly state that the audio
and/or film production and staging of equipment will be permitted.
      2.   Property Owner Letter Of Approval: The letter or statement required
by subsection C7 of this section shall state the approval and consent of the
owner(s) and, where applicable, of the lessee(s)/occupant(s) of the property,
to the properties’ use as a location for audio and/or film production or
staging of equipment. The signature(s) on the letter shall be notarized. The
letter of approval shall also contain the following statement:
      I hereby certify that I am the owner of record [or, where applicable, the
occupant] of the property located at [street address], which will be used for
audio and/or film production or staging of production equipment. I hereby waive
any claim against Leyden Township, its elected officials, officers, employees
and agents arising out of or in connection with the issuance of the audio and/
or film production permit and will indemnify and hold harmless Leyden Township
for and from any loss, damage, expense, claims and costs of every nature and
kind, including attorneys’ fees, that I may incur as a result of or in
connection with the audio and/or film production activities pursuant to said
permit.
      3.   Certificate Of Insurance: A certificate of insurance, issued by a
company acceptable to the Township Supervisor and authorized to do business in
the State of Illinois. The certificate of insurance shall be in an amount of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for general liability
coverage, including bodily injury, property damage and automobile liability.
The certificate of insurance shall name Leyden Township as an additional
insured, using language acceptable to the Township Supervisor, and shall
contain a provision prohibiting the cancellation or termination of the policy
without providing at least thirty (30) days’ written notice to the Township.
In addition, if the audio and/or film production includes special effects as
set forth in subsection C10 of this section, a certificate of insurance for no
less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00), as provided therein.
      4.   Worker’s Compensation And Employer’s Liability Insurance: Proof
acceptable to the Township Supervisor that applicant has provided worker’s
compensation insurance, employer’s liability insurance and all other insurance
required by law to be provided for the employees of applicant.
      5.   Indemnification And Hold Harmless Agreement: An indemnification
agreement whereby applicant agrees to defend and hold the Township, its
officers, employees and agents, harmless from any loss, damage, expense, claim
and cost of every nature and kind whatsoever, including attorney’s fees,
arising out of or in connection with the audio and/or film production
authorized under the permit, including without limitation, applicant’s use of
the public resources specified in the audio and/or film production permit.
(Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-7: PROCESSING PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Authority Of Township Supervisor: The Township Supervisor shall review
each audio and/or film production permit application to determine whether the
application is complete and whether the application meets the standards
established by this chapter. The Township Supervisor shall also establish the
applicable audio and/or film production and equipment staging activities fees
as provided in section
2-3-10 of this chapter.
   B.   Review Of Application: In reviewing the application, the Township
Supervisor shall review all documents submitted with the application and all
additional documentation required by the Township Supervisor pursuant to
section
2-3-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Standards Of Review: In reviewing each application, the Township
Supervisor shall consider the totality of the circumstances of the proposed
audio and/or film production, as described in all of the application materials,
as well as all impacts, whether direct or indirect, that the proposed audio
and/or film production activities may have on Township resources and
operations. The review of the application shall include, but not limited to a
consideration of the following factors:
      1.   The nature of the Township resources the Township Supervisor has
determined should be assigned to the audio and/or film production activities;
      2.   The nature of additional Township resources the Township Supervisor
has determined should be assigned to the audio and/or film production
activities;
      3.   The extent to which personal and property rights of residents,
schools and businesses are affected and whether such rights can be adequately
protected;
      4.   The nature and extent of any disruptions to the day-to-day
activities of the Township’s residents, schools and businesses, and whether
such disruptions can be adequately minimized;
      5.   The nature and extent of the impact of the proposed audio and/or
film production activities on the right of the public to the safe and normal
use of the Township’s streets, rights-of-way and public property, and whether
such use can be adequately protected;
      6.   The nature and extent of the impact of the proposed audio and/or
film production activities on the right of the public to the orderly
functioning of local government and to the provision of public services, and
whether such governmental functions and public services can be adequately
provided;
      7.   Whether the public health, safety and welfare can be adequately
protected during the audio and/or film production activities;
      8.   Whether the Township can be adequately compensated both for the
direct use of Township resources in the course of the proposed audio and/or
film production activities and for all other effects or impacts on Township
resources and operations that may arise from the proposed audio and/or film
production activities;
      9.   Consideration of any objections received; and
      10.   The experience of the Township and/or neighboring governmental
entities in prior dealings with applicant.
   D.   Setting Application Processing Fees, Audio Production Activity Charges
And/or Film Production Activity Charges: The permit application review process
shall include setting the audio and/or film production activity charges, as
provided in section
2-3-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-8: PERMIT APPROVAL/DENIAL:
   A.   The application shall be approved or denied not less than three (3)
business days of the proposed start date unless the proposed audio and/or film
production activity requires extensive review by other Township departments due
to fire, traffic or public safety or audio and/or film production. The permit
shall be approved by the Township Supervisor unless determined from
consideration of the application or other pertinent information that any of the
following conditions exist:
      1.   The audio and/or film production activities will have substantial
negative impact on any of the standards of review set forth in section
2-3-7 of this chapter;
      2.   The audio and/or film production activities will substantially
disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic
congestion, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles in the
proposed permit area(s);
      3.   The location(s) of the audio and/or film production activities will
substantially interfere with street maintenance work, or a previously
authorized work permit;
      4.   The proposed permit location is on Township property and the audio
and/or film production activities will substantially interfere with other
previously authorized activities, contracts or safety of the public or
residents while on Township property;
      5.   The proposed permit location is on Township property and the audio
and/or film production activities will substantially interfere with Township
functions or the scheduled maintenance of Township buildings or grounds;
      6.   The audio and/or film production activities create a substantial
risk of injury to persons or damage to property;
      7.   Applicant failed to complete the application or the information
contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail; or
      8.   The Township is in emergency status and/or experiencing a shortage
of qualified staff to adequately process the application and/or staff oversight
of the production schedule; or
      9.   The particular audio and/or film production activity would violate
Federal, State, or local law including licensing or permit requirements.
   B.   When the grounds for permit denial can be corrected by imposing
reasonable permit conditions, the Township may impose such conditions rather
than denying the permit. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-
2023)
2-3-9: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
   A.   If approved, the permit shall contain the following standard
conditions:
      1.   Permittee shall, at its own cost and expense, comply with all
statutes, ordinances, regulations and requirements of all governmental
entities, including Federal, State, County, Township, local or Municipal,
whether now in force or hereinafter enacted.
      2.   The permit shall not be transferred to any other person or entity.
      3.   In addition to the fees and charges set forth in section
2-3-10 of this chapter, permittee shall reimburse the Township for any
additional costs incurred by the Township upon receipt of receiving notice from
the Township of any additional costs.
      4.   Security in all public locations in unincorporated Leyden and on
Leyden Township property shall be by the Cook County Sheriff’s Office. The
number of required Sheriff Officers shall be coordinated and approved by the
Cook County Sheriff’s Office and the Township Supervisor. Permittee shall
contract directly with the Cook County Sheriff’s Office.
   B.   In addition to the conditions set forth above, the Township may
condition the issuance of a permit by imposing reasonable requirements
concerning the time, place, manner and duration of the audio and/or film
production activities as referenced on any terms and conditions that may be
attached to the permit, including but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Requirements for the presence of employees and equipment of the
Township at applicant’s expense when required for the particular audio and/or
film production activity;
      2.   Requirements concerning posting of no parking signs, placement of
traffic control devices, and employment of traffic and crowd control monitors
at applicant’s expense;
      3.   Requirements concerning the posting of the outer boundaries of the
audio and/or film production activities, and providing advance notice and
reasonable compensation to affected property owners and businesses;
      4.   Requirements concerning the cleanup and restoration of public
streets and Township property employed in the audio and/or film production
activities;
      5.   Restrictions concerning the use of Township employee services,
vehicles, and other equipment in the audio and/or film production activities;
      6.   Requirements that applicant pay all fees, deposits and obtain all
permits and licenses required for the audio and/or film production activities
under local, State and Federal law;
      7.   Restrictions on the use of firearms, explosions, and other noise-
creating or hazardous devices which disturb the peace;
      8.   Restrictions on the use of stunts involving pyrotechnics, open
flame, vehicle crashes, or other hazardous materials;
      9.   Requirements concerning cover-up of police, fire and other official
uniforms worn by actors, when the actors are not on camera;
      10.   Restrictions concerning the use of Township logos, insignias,
badges, or decals for filming purposes;
      11.   Restrictions on the daily hours the audio and/or film production
activities may be conducted in unincorporated areas of Leyden Township;
      12.   Requirements concerning the Township’s receipt of proper
acknowledgment for any assistance provided in making feature, television, or
commercial productions; and
      13.   Requirements concerning nondiscriminatory practices for employment;
and
      14.   Requirements for security and first aid. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019;
amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-10: FEES/CHARGES:
   A.   Permit Fee: Applicant shall pay a non-refundable permit fee of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) with the submittal of an application for an audio
production permit and/or film production permit.
   B.   Charges For Use Of Township Property And Personnel:
      1.   Township Property: The cost to use any building or site other than a
Township right-of-way for any use shall be one thousand seven hundred fifty
dollars ($1,750.00) per day.
      2.   Township Personnel: The cost of Township labor shall equal one and
one-half (11/2) times the hourly rate of pay for each Township employee
assigned at a two (2) hour minimum, including any overtime plus an
administrative charge equal to ten percent (10%) of total labor costs.
      3.   Public Streets Or Rights-Of-Way: For partial closure or obstruction
of any public street or right-of-way, including parking and the use of
sidewalks, the cost shall be three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) per
street block per day.
      4.   Equipment: The cost of Township equipment shall be calculated at the
current FEMA reimbursement rate plus an administrative charge of ten percent
(10%). Time used shall be equal to that of the operator of the equipment.
      5.   Submitting Payment: Applicant shall submit payment for all
anticipated costs of Township personnel and equipment prior to the issuance of
a permit.
   C.   Cost Of Repair And Restoration: Applicant agrees to pay in full the
cost of repair of any and all damage to public property resulting from or in
connection with the audio and/or film production activities and to restore any
area used to the same condition it was in prior to use by applicant.
   D.   Cancellation Penalties: Permittee shall pay cancellation fees as set
forth below, unless permittee gives reasonable written notice to the Township
Supervisor in advance of the proposed date of the commencement of the audio
and/or film production activities that the date of commencement needs to be
changed. In such case, the Township Supervisor is authorized to change the date
for which the audio production permit and/or film production permit has been
issued without requiring a new application or permit. The following penalties
shall otherwise be imposed for cancellation:
      1.   Four (4) business days’ or more notice - no penalty.
      2.   Three (3) business days’ notice - fifty percent (50%) of the agreed
upon cost of personnel.
      3.   Two (2) business days’ notice - seventy five percent (75%) of the
agreed upon cost of personnel.
      4.   Less than two (2) business days’ notice - one hundred percent (100%)
of the agreed upon cost of personnel.
      5.   One hundred percent (100%) of cost for any production materials
created or other Township resources used regardless of advanced notice.
   E.   Forms Of Payment: Payment may be by cashier’s check, corporate check,
money order or cash. Credit card or personal checks are not acceptable. (Ord.
TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-11: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
   Permittee, and all its agents, employees and contractors at the audio and/or
film production site(s) within unincorporated Leyden Township, shall comply
with the following requirements:
   A.   Permittee shall comply in writing with all terms and conditions of the
audio production permit and/or film production permit.
   B.   Permittee shall not conduct an audio or film production activity within
the unincorporated areas of Leyden Township not authorized by the audio
production permit and/or film production permit.
   C.   Permittee shall comply with instructions of the Township regarding
audio and/or film production activities.
   D.   Permittee shall comply with instructions made by Township employees
assigned to regulate the audio and/or film production activities site(s).
   E.   Permittee shall clean and restore Township-owned, leased or controlled
property utilized during the audio and/or film production activity to the same
condition as existed prior to the film production activities.
   F.   Permittee shall comply with this chapter and all other policies and
ordinances of the Township and State, County and Federal law. (Ord. TO-2019-2,
1-8-2019)
2-3-12: PYROTECHNICS:
   In addition to the audio production permit and/or film production permit,
applicant must obtain a fire permit if the audio and/or film production
activities include any special effect or stunt requiring the use of
pyrotechnics or any material deemed hazardous, including but not limited to,
fireworks, open flames, or explosives. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019)
2-3-13: PERMIT REVOCATION/SUSPENSION:
   A.   Permit Revocation: The Township may revoke the audio production permit
and/or film production permit if the permittee, or any of its agents,
employees, or contractors fail to comply with the requirements set forth in
this chapter, or if the Township determines after the permit is issued that the
permit application was false in any material detail.
      1.   Notice of the grounds for revocation of the audio production permit
and/or film production permit shall be provided in writing by the Township to
permittee or person in charge at the location of the audio and/or film
production activity.
      2.   Appeal of the permit revocation shall be conducted in the manner
provided in section
2-3-14 of this chapter.
      3.   There shall be no refundable amount due permittee under this
subsection A.
   B.   Permit Suspension: The Township may suspend the audio production permit
and/or film production permit in the event the Township Supervisor determines
either that any of the terms and conditions upon which the audio production
permit and/or film production permit was issued have been violated or that the
audio and/or film production activities pose an immediate hazard to persons or
property and permittee will not, or cannot, prevent the hazard after being
instructed to do so.
      1.   The grounds for suspension of the permit shall be provided in
writing by the Township to permittee within one business day of the suspension.
      2.   Appeal of the permit suspension shall be conducted in the manner
provided in section
2-3-14 of this chapter. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-
2023)
2-3-14: APPEALS:
   The permit applicant or permittee may appeal the denial of the audio and/or
film production permit application, revocation, suspension, permit condition,
insurance/fees requirements or the Township’s decision not to waive a deadline
set forth in this chapter to the Board of Trustees by filing an appeal in
writing with the Township Supervisor within five (5) business days after the
date the written notice of the decision is made. Failure to file a timely
appeal shall result in a waiver of the right to appeal. Appeals to the Board of
Trustees will be considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Board of Trustees following written notice of appeal.
   The Board of Trustees shall review all reliable and relevant evidence,
documents, or information and may receive and consider new evidence attached to
the written notice of appeal. After due consideration of the facts contained in
the record submitted to the Board of Trustees by the Township Supervisor, and
all other submitted materials, the Board of Trustees may: a) affirm the denial
in total; or b) overturn the denial, subject to any conditions and upon such
terms as the Board of Trustees deem necessary or appropriate to protect and
promote the public health, safety and welfare.
   The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-
2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-15: PERMIT DURATION AND EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Duration Of Permit: Any audio and/or film production permit issued
under this chapter shall be valid only for the time period specified within the
permit.
   B.   Permit Extensions: The Township Supervisor, in the exercise of the Town
Supervisor’s discretion, may approve a request for an extension of time beyond
the time specified in the permit only if all of the following conditions are
met:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an additional non-refundable one hundred dollars
($100.00) prior to the processing of the permit extension request;
      2.   The extension does not violate any of the terms and conditions of
the permit initially approved by the Township Supervisor;
      3.   Applicant shall have filed with the Township Supervisor a letter of
understanding, approved by the Township Supervisor and signed by a majority of
the owners of record and occupants of property situated within eight hundred
(800) linear feet, in each direction and on both sides of the street(s), of the
audio and/or film production and staging location(s);
      4.   Applicant shall pay any and all applicable additional fees and
charges set forth in section
2-3-10 of this chapter;
      5.   The Township Supervisor shall have determined that the requested
extension will not place an undue burden on the normal operations of the
Township; and
      6.   The Township Supervisor shall have determined that the requested
extension will not unreasonably interfere with the normal operations of schools
or businesses located with the unincorporated areas of the Township.
   C.   Extension Of Permit Conditions: In the event an extension of time
period for the audio and/or film production permit, the permit shall remain
subject to all conditions of the original permit. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019;
amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022; Ord. TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-16: HOURS OF PRODUCTION:
   Audio and/or film production activities, including time for set-up, staging
and restoration, shall be limited to the following hours: Monday through
Friday, seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o’clock (7:00) P.M., and Saturday,
Sunday and holidays, eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) P.M. Audio
and/or film production crews and equipment shall not arrive or stand at the
production or staging site(s) except during said hours of production. A request
for hours of production or staging beyond those specified in this section may
be approved by the Township Supervisor only after permittee has presented a
letter of understanding, approved by the Township Supervisor and signed by a
majority of the owners of record and occupants of property situated within
eight hundred (800) linear feet, in each direction and on both sides of the
street(s), of the location(s) upon which audio recording and/or filming or
staging is expected to occur. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord. TO-2023-1,
2-14-2023)
2-3-17: VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT PARKING:
   Unless otherwise directed by the Township Supervisor and with the approval
of the Township Supervisor, vehicles, trailers and equipment shall only be
parked on one side of any Township street. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019; amd. Ord.
TO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
2-3-18: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   General Penalty: Any person who violates a provision of this chapter,
who makes a false statement in obtaining a permit under this chapter, or who
violates a condition of any permit issued under this chapter, shall be subject
to the monetary penalties imposed under section
1-4-1 of this Code. This penalty shall be in addition to any claim by the
Township under subsection
2-3-6D5 of this chapter.
   B.   Separate Offenses: Each act of violation and each day on which a
violation of this chapter or permit issued pursuant to this chapter occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Liability Of Permittee: Every permittee shall be subject to penalties
for violations of this chapter and for violations of the terms or conditions of
any permit issued pursuant to this chapter by any officer, director, manager,
employee, agent or representative of the permittee as if such violation had
been committed by the permittee personally. (Ord. TO-2019-2, 1-8-2019)
TITLE 3
PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL HEALTH, SAFETY AND PROTECTION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Special Police District
3-1-1: SPECIAL POLICE DISTRICT:
   The unincorporated area of Leyden Township is hereby declared a special
police district for tax purposes, in accordance with the statute in such case
made and provided. 1  (Res., 10-21-69; amd. Ord. TO-2022-1)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 139, ¶39.30a.
CHAPTER 2
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
3-2-1: Purpose; Scope; Prohibition Generally
3-2-2: Rules of Construction
3-2-3: Definitions
3-2-4: Responsibility; Maintenance Required
3-2-5: Enforcement; Penalty
3-2-6: Weed Control
3-2-7: Tree Removal
3-2-8: Abandoned, Inoperable Vehicles
3-2-9: House Numbering
3-2-10: Sanitation
3-2-11: Rodent Harborage
3-2-12: Grading and Drainage
3-2-13: Sidewalks and Driveways
3-2-14: Accessory Structures
3-2-15: Defacement of Property; Graffiti
3-2-16: Protective Treatment
3-2-17: Exterior Walls
3-2-18: Motor Vehicle Parking
3-2-19: Seasonal Decorations
3-2-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE; PROHIBITION GENERALLY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Property Maintenance Code is to protect,
within the unincorporated area of Leyden Township, the public health, safety
and welfare and to prevent and control blight by establishing regulations and
enforcement procedures to the end that real estate within the Township is
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition, free of health, fire and safety
hazards.
   B.   Scope: The provisions of this Property Maintenance Code shall govern
the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of
structures, equipment and exterior property.
   C.   Prohibition Generally: It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act
which endangers the public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the
public. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence
of any nuisance on any property under his/her control. Any person who shall be
responsible for the maintenance of a public nuisance, as defined in Sec.
3-2-3, below, shall be guilty of an offense. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-2: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
For the purposes of this Property Maintenance Code, certain terms and words are
hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the
singular numbers shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word
“building” shall include the word “structure”; and the word “shall” is
mandatory and not directory. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this Property Maintenance Code.
ACCESSORY      A structure the use of which is incidental to that part of the principal building
BUILDING:      and which is located on the same lot.
CODE           The person designated by the Town Supervisor and Board of Trustees of Leyden
ENFORCEMENT    Township as the code enforcement officer empowered to enforce the provisions of
OFFICER:       this Property Maintenance Code.
               The control and elimination of insects, rodents, and other pests by eliminating
EXTERMINATION: their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may
               serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any
               other recognized legal pest elimination methods.
               Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill, or carrion, and every
               accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation,
               use, cooking and dealing in or storage of, meats, fish, fowl, fruits or
GARBAGE:       vegetables, and any other matter of any nature which are subject to decay,
               putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odor, or which
               during or after decay may serve as breeding or deeding material for flies or other
               germ-carrying insects.
               Any permanent display of any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture,
               outline, character, spectacle, delineation, announcement or any combination
               thereof which is/are painted or otherwise applied of a color different from the
GRAFFITI:      color of the exterior of the structure on which it is painted or otherwise applied
               and which size is/are visible beyond the property line boundaries of the property
               on which it is painted or otherwise applied and placed thereon without the
               permission of the owner.
INFESTATION:   The presence within or around a dwelling or dwelling unit of any insects, rodents,
               or other pests.
               Any motor vehicle which, for a period of at least seven (7) days or any longer
               period of time fixed by ordinance, the engine, wheels or other parts have been
INOPERABLE     removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged
MOTOR VEHICLE: or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
               own motor power. An inoperable motor vehicle shall not include a motor vehicle
               which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor
               power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
               Any discarded, used or consumed substance or waste. Litter includes, but is not
               limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings, or other
               lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal, plastic, or paper
LITTER:        containers, wood, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of dead animal,
               animal or human excrete, any nauseous or offensive material or liquid of any kind,
               any object which creates a public health or safety hazard, public nuisance or fire
               hazard or anything else of unsightly or unsanitary nature which has been
               discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly.
OCCUPANT:      Any person living in, sleeping in or having actual possession of a building or
               portion thereof.
OPERATOR:      Any person having charge, care, management or control of any building or part
               thereof.
               Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal or
               equitable title to any building, the agent of said person, or any person having
OWNER:         management or control of the building or a portion thereof, including, but not
               limited to, a purchaser, mortgagee, receiver, or lessee in possession of any
               building or portion thereof.
               Any natural person, partnership, trust, corporation or association. Whenever used
PERSON:        with respect to any penalty, the term “person” as applied to partnerships or
               associations shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to trusts
               or corporations, shall mean the trustees or officers thereof.
PREMISES:      A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings and structures thereon.
               For purposes of this Property Maintenance Code, “public nuisance” is any activity,
               inactivity, neglect, omission, commission, abandonment, inadvertent or otherwise,
               or the like, which does, or tends to, permits, or results in a condition or
               conditions or circumstances which deleteriously affects the public health, public
PUBLIC         safety, public welfare, public morals, public sensibilities, public rights and
NUISANCE:      enjoyment of residence or property, panders to vicious tastes, creates attractive
               nuisance for minors, results in a dilapidated, abandoned and dangerous buildings
               or improvements or unfinished or uncompleted improvements on real property,
               permits the growth of noxious or poisonous weeds or growth and accumulation of
               trash dumps or the like.
               Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall
               include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible
RUBBISH:       material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree
               branches, yard trimming, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, dust,
               or any object that is removed from items that are presently worthless or
               unsuitable for immediate purposes.
               For the purposes of this Property Maintenance Code, “weeds” shall include, but are
               not limited to, dandelions, burdock, ragweed (giant), ragweed (common), thistle,
WEEDS:         cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common milk weed, wild carrot, poison ivy, mild
               mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter, wild lettuce, curly dock, smart weeds (all
               varieties), poison hemlock, wild hemp, and grass; except, however, weeds do not
               include cultivated flowers and gardens. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
 
3-2-4: RESPONSIBILITY; MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures
and exterior property in compliance with the requirements set forth in this
Property Maintenance Code, except as otherwise provided in this Town Code. A
person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy
premises that are not in a sanitary and safe condition and that do not comply
with the requirements of this Property Maintenance Code. Occupants of a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housing unit are responsible for keeping it in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition those parts of the dwelling unit, rooming
unit, housekeeping unit or premises they occupy and control.
   B.   Vacant Structures and Land: Vacant structures and premises thereof or
vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition
as provided in this Property Maintenance Code so as to not cause a blighting
problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
   C.   Maintenance Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or
occupant of any building to fail, refuse or neglect to maintain the real estate
or building in accordance with the provisions of this Property Maintenance
Code. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-5: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
   A.    Enforcement: The Township, by its duly authorized code enforcement
officer, shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this Property
Maintenance Code. If any violation is discovered by the code enforcement
officer, a citation shall be issued to the party responsible for the abatement
of the violation, setting forth the provision or the provisions of this
Property Maintenance Code deemed to be violated.
   B.   Penalty: A violation shall be subject to a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The fine for the first violation shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). The fine for the second violation shall be three hundred dollars
($300.00). The fine for the third or greater number of violations shall be five
hundred dollars ($500.00). Any citation issued for the same violation within
three (3) months of the issuance or disposition of a prior violation shall be
deemed to be the second, third, or greater number of consecutive violations as
to the same condition for the purpose of determining the amount of the fine.
Any fine paid to the Township within ten (10) days of the issuance of the
citation shall be reduced by one-half (½) of the amount of the fine set forth
on the citation. The imposition of a fine and/or the payment thereof, does not
preclude the Township from commencing proceedings for the demolition, repair or
enclosure of buildings as provided in Section 85-50 of the Illinois Township
Code (60 ILCS 1/85-50). (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-6: WEED CUTTING:
   A.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real estate in residential
areas of the Township to suffer or permit any weeds, as defined in Section
3-2-3 of this Property Maintenance Code, and grass to grow to a height of six
inches (6") or more, to remain on such property.
      2.   Every owner and/or occupant shall be required to cut the grass,
weeds or similar vegetation in the parkway immediately adjacent the front or
side yard of said real property, as necessary, so that the grass or weeds or
similar vegetation on such parkway does not exceed six inches (6") in height.
   B.   Nuisance Declared: Any weeds or grass growing to a height of six inches
(6") or greater found growing on any real estate in residential areas of the
Township are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   C.   Removal Notice: It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, at the
direction of the Town Supervisor or designee, to serve or cause to the owner of
real estate, on which weeds are growing in violation of this section, to be
served with a notice by United States mail, postage prepaid, directed to the
owner at the owner’s last known address demanding the removal of the weeds and
abatement of the nuisance within seven (7) days. The owner may be served by
sending notice to the person who last paid the taxes on the real estate.
   D.   Abatement of Nuisance: If the owner of real estate on which weeds are
growing refuses or neglects to cut said weeds within seven (7) days of service
of the removal notice, the Town Supervisor or his/her designee, may provide for
the cutting and removal of the weeds by Township personnel or by independent
contractors.
   E.   Removal Costs:
      1.   Weed cutting and removal work by Township personnel shall be charged
at a minimum cost of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first hour of
weed cutting and removal for the cost of mobilization, labor equipment and
overhead, and at an hourly cost of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00)
for each additional hour or part thereof of weed cutting and removal work.
      2.   Weed cutting and removal work performed by independent contractors
shall be charged at the billed cost to the Township, plus fifty dollars
($50.00) for Township processing and overhead.
   F.   Bills for Services; Delinquencies:
      1.   Payment of Charges: Charges for weed cutting and removal pursuant to
subsection 3-2-6E. above, and penalty charges as provided in subsection
3-2-5B. herein, shall be included and billed as part of the Township’s periodic
bill for sewer and water utility service to the subject property, and shall be
paid at the Town Hall within fifteen days (15) after the billing date. The
property owner, and any nonowner that is the occupant or the or lessee thereof,
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the removal services to the
premises.
      2.   Disconnection of Utility Service for Failure to Pay Bill: If the
property owner, occupant or lessee has not paid the charges for removal as set
forth in subsection 3-2-6 E. above, and penalty charges, if any, as provided in
subsection
3-2-5B. of this Property Maintenance Code, within thirty (30) days of the date
of the issuance of the bill for such costs, utility service to the subject
property may be disconnected by the Town Supervisor or his/her designee in
accordance with the provisions set forth in section
5-1-11 of the Town Code.
   G.   Charges a Debt; Lien for Charges: The charges for unpaid weed cutting
or removal, or penalty charges billed in accordance with subsection
3-2-5B. of this Property Maintenance Code, by the Township to the owner,
occupant or lessee of the subject property, shall be a debt to the Township. If
the charges are not paid within thirty (30) days after they are due, they shall
be deemed delinquent and shall be a lien upon the real estate as provided in
section
5-4-4 of the Town Code, when such lien is filed within sixty (60) days after
the cost and expense is incurred. A change in ownership or occupancy of the
premises found delinquent shall not be a cause for reducing or eliminating
these charges or any penalties; except, however, the lien shall not be valid as
to any purchaser whose rights in and to the real estate have arisen after the
weed cutting and before the filing of the notice of lien. Additionally, said
lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor, or other
lienholder whose rights in and to the real estate arise before the filing of
said notice. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022; amd. Ord. TO 2022-13, 9-13-2022)
3-2-7: TREE REMOVAL:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a tree
located on the person’s property without a written tree permit issued by the
Township. There shall be no charge for such permit. The application for the
permit shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant. The applicant shall be the owner of
the property or lot where the tree(s) is located;
      2.   Commonly known address of lot or property where the tree(s) sought
to be removed is located;
      3.   A written statement indicating the reason for removal of the tree
(s);
      4.   A general description of the tree(s) to be removed, including
species and size; and
      5.   Name and address of contractor or other person responsible for the
tree removal.
   B.   Duty to Remove Debris and Stumps: If the property owner hires a private
contractor to remove trees from the owner’s property, it shall be the
responsibility of the private contractor to clean up the area where the
contractor is working or has completed work and remove all branches, debris,
and largest portions of the tree(s) and dispose of such debris in such a manner
so that it will not remain on Township streets, not flow into the sewer, or
will not have to be hauled away by the Township, or its designated agent. All
stumps on Township rights-of-way and privately owned property shall be stumped
ground to depth of at least eight inches (8") below grade and all holes
remaining after stump removal shall be filled with dirt and sodded or seeded by
the property owner.
   C.   Nuisance Declared: Any bushes, branches, debris and largest portions of
the tree(s) not removed as provided in subsection 3-2-7B., above, are declared
to be a nuisance.
   D.   Removal Notice: It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, at the
direction of the Town Supervisor or designee, to serve or cause the property
owner, on whose property the bushes, branches, debris and largest portion of
the tree(s) remain in violation of this section, to be served with a notice by
United States mail, postage prepaid, directed to the property owner at the
owner’s last known address, demanding removal of the bushes, branches, debris
and largest portion of the tree(s) within fourteen (14) days as provided in
subsection 3-2-7B., above. The property owner may be served by sending notice
to the person who last paid the taxes on the property.
   E.   Abatement of Nuisance: If the property owner refuses or neglects to
remove the bushes, branches, debris and largest portion of the tree(s), as
provided in subsection 3-2-7B., above, within fourteen (14) days of service of
the removal notice, the Town Supervisor or designee may provide for the removal
of such bushes, branches, debris and largest portion of the tree(s) by Township
personnel or by independent contractors.
   F.   Removal Costs:
      1.   Removal of the bushes, branches, debris and largest portion of the
tree(s) by Township personnel shall be charged at a minimum cost of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first hour of removal for the cost of
mobilization, labor equipment and overhead, and at an hourly rate of one
hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for each additional hour or part thereof
for the removal of the bushes, branches, debris and largest portion of the tree
(s).
      2.   Removal of the bushes, branches, debris and largest portion of the
tree(s) performed by independent contractors shall be charged at the billed
cost, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for Township processing and overhead.
      3.   There will be no charge for removal of the bushes, branches, debris
and largest portion of the tree(s) if the bushes, branches, debris, and largest
portion of the tree(s) to be removed was caused by an “Act of Nature”,
including, but not limited to, tornadoes, torrential rain storms, and snow
storms.
   G.   Bills for Services; Delinquencies:
      1.    Payment of Charges: Charges for removal of bushes, branches, debris
and largest portion of the tree(s) pursuant to subsection 3-2-7F., above, and
penalty charges as provided in section
3-2-5B. of the Property Maintenance Code, shall be included and billed as part
of the Township’s periodic bill for sewer and water utility service to the
subject property, and shall be paid at the Town Hall within fifteen days (15)
after the billing date. The property owner, and any nonowner that is the
occupant or the or lessee thereof, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay
for the removal services to the premises.
      2.   Disconnection of Utility Service for Failure to Pay Bill: If the
property owner, occupant or lessee has not paid the charges for removal as set
forth in subsection 3-2-7 F. above, and penalty charges, if any, as provided in
subsection
3-2-5B. of this Property Maintenance Code, within thirty (30) days of the date
of the issuance of the bill for such costs, utility service to the subject
property may be disconnected by the Town Supervisor or his/her designee in
accordance with the provisions set forth in section
5-1-11 of the Town Code.
   H.   Charges a Debt; Lien for Charges: The charges for removal of bushes,
branches, debris and largest portion of the tree(s), or penalty charges billed
in accordance with subsection
3-2-5B. of this Property Maintenance Code, by the Township to the owner,
occupant or lessee of the subject property, shall be a debt to the Township. If
the charges are not paid within thirty (30) days after they are due, they shall
be deemed delinquent and shall be a lien upon the real estate as provided in
section
5-4-4 of the Town Code, when such lien is filed within sixty (60) days after
the cost and expense is incurred. A change in ownership or occupancy of the
premises found delinquent shall not be a cause for reducing or eliminating
these charges or any penalties; except, however, the lien shall not be valid as
to any purchaser whose rights in and to the real estate have arisen after the
weed cutting and before the filing of the notice of lien. Additionally, said
lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor, or other
lienholder whose rights in and to the real estate arise before the filing of
said notice. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
3-2-8: ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: Except as otherwise provided in the Town Code, no
person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of
any motor vehicle, trailer, or other method of conveyance of any kind which is
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked, partially dismantled, or
otherwise in a condition that constitutes a hazard to public health or safety,
whether attended or not, upon any private property within the Township for a
period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours. Any operable and/or
licensed motor vehicles shall be parked only on areas of hard surface pavement
and/or gravel driveways legally installed.
   B.   Unlicensed Motor Vehicles: The failure of any motor vehicle to display
an annual registration sticker or plate or a current temporary permit pending
registration or the display by a motor vehicle of an annual registration
sticker which has been expired for more than fifteen (15) days shall cause the
motor vehicle to be considered inoperative for the purpose of this section.
   C.   Exception: This section does not apply to any motor vehicle entirely
enclosed within a building on private property when not in use; any motor
vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise (i.e., place of business
engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles), lawfully licensed and
properly operated in the appropriate zoning district, pursuant to the zoning
laws of Cook County; or to operable historic vehicles over twenty-five (25)
years of age.
   D.   Nuisance Declared: Any motor vehicle in violation of subsection 3-2-
8A., above, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   E.   Enforcement and Penalties:
      1   Notice to Remove:
         a.   Public Ways: Wherever the Town Board or its named designate, or
the Highway Commissioner of the Town or the Highway Commissioner’s named
designate sends notice to the last owner of such vehicle, as registered with
the Secretary of State, to dispose of such inoperable motor vehicle, it shall
be unlawful for such owner to permit the said vehicle, or parts thereof, to
remain upon the public way after the passage of seven (7) days from the
forwarding of such notice by mail or personal delivery.
         b.   Private Ways: Wherever the Town Board or its named designate, or
the Highway Commissioner of the Town or the Highway Commissioner’s named
designate sends notice to the last owner of such vehicle, as registered with
the Secretary of State, to dispose of such inoperable motor vehicle, it shall
be unlawful for such owner to permit the said vehicle, or parts thereof, to
remain upon the private way after the passage of seven (7) days from the
forwarding of such notice by mail or personal service upon the registered owner
or some occupant of the owner’s household over the age of ten (10) years.
      2.   Removal by Enforcing Authorities; Costs: The State’s Attorney’s
office or the police department of any municipality located totally or
partially within the Township are hereby authorized to remove or cause to be
removed such inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof.
The reasonable cost of such removal shall be charged and paid by such
registered owner upon billing thereof.
      3.   Penalties:
         a.   A fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day that
the registered owner fails to obey the notice of the Township and permits such
vehicle, or parts thereof, to remain upon the public way seven (7) days after
such notice herein made and provided for is hereby imposed upon such registered
owner. Each day after the expunction of the said seven (7) days, as aforesaid,
shall be considered a separate offense.
         b.   A fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day that
the registered owner fails to obey the notice of the Township and permits such
vehicle, or parts thereof, to remain upon the private way seven (7) days after
such notice herein made and provided for is here imposed upon such registered
owner. Each day after the expunction of the said seven (7) days, as aforesaid,
shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord., eff. 1-1-88; amd. Ord. TO-2022-
1, 2-8-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
3-2-9: HOUSE NUMBERING:
   A.   Compliance: It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent or person in
possession of any buildings in unincorporated Leyden Township to number the
building in the manner provided by this section.
   B.   Placement of Numbers; Size of Numbers:
      1.   Each building to which a house number has been assigned shall have
the house number displayed upon the building.
      2.   The assigned house number shall be either affixed directly to the
building or posted or displayed upon a sign affixed to the building or posted
in a prominent position. The house number shall be displayed in such a manner
so that the numbers contrast in color with the background and shall be
observable and readable by those traveling in either direction on the adjoining
public street or other thoroughfare providing access to the building. If the
building has an unattached mailbox, the assigned house number shall be affixed
on both sides of said mailbox.
      3.   All numbers shall be in standard Arabic Numbers. Not less than three
(3) inches in height and shall be reflective for visibility during nighttime
hours.
      4.   If the house number posted on the building is not readily
identifiable from the roadway fronting the building, then the number shall be
affixed to the building as well as posted by the roadway. If the building has
multiple house numbers or apartment numbers (i.e., professional buildings,
multi-family residences), a building directory shall be posted at the main
entrance to the building.
      5.   The house numbers shall be placed as to not be obstructed by trees,
shrubbery or other foliage, or any extension of the building.
   C.   Removing, Defacing Numbers: No person shall willfully deface or remove
any number required by this section which has been placed upon any building.
(TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-10: SANITATION:
Exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition, free of any accumulation of rubbish, litter or garbage. The
owner and/or occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property that such
occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
   A.   Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage. Exterior property and premises, and
the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish
or garbage.
   B.   Garbage Storage and Disposal. Every owner and/or occupant of a dwelling
unit shall store and dispose of garbage, refuse, and any other matter of any
nature which are subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious
or offensive gases or flies or other insects, rodents, or other pests in a
clean, sanitary and safe manner, so as not to become a public nuisance. Garbage
and refuse shall be properly disposed and kept in an approved container as
provided in Chapter 4, “Waste Disposal Regulations” , of Title 3, of the Town
Code.
   C.   Containers. The operator of every establishment, producing garbage and
rubbish, that is not a “Covered Unit”, as defined in Section 3-4-1 of Chapter
4, Title 3 of the Town Code, shall provide, and at all times cause to be
utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for
the storage of such materials, as provided in Chapter 4, Title 3, until removed
from the premises for disposal.
   D.   Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment (i.e., “White
Goods”, as defined in Section 3-4-1 of Chapter 4, Title 3), not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing
the doors. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-11: RODENT HARBORAGE:
Structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and
infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by
approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After pest
elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage
and prevent reinfestation. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-12: GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
Premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to
prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure
located thereon; except, however, approved retention areas and reservoirs. (TO-
2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-13: SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS:
Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces, and similar areas shall
be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free of loose or broken
material and cracks and other hazardous conditions. All means of ingress and
egress from any building shall be maintained in good repair and free from any
obstructions, including vegetation. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-14: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Accessory structures, including detached garages, fences, tool sheds, walls and
other out-buildings, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair,
and secured through working doors so as not to be unsafe or harborage for
insects, rodents, and other pests. Fences shall be maintained in a good state
of repair free from loose or deteriorating members. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-15: DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY; GRAFFITI:
   A.   A person shall not willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property
by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of
maintenance and repair.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property to allow
any graffiti sign painted or otherwise applied on an exterior wall of a
building or any structure upon that property to remain thereon for more than
fourteen (14) days. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-16: PROTECTIVE TREATMENT:
Exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames,
cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in
good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall
be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective
covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated
and surfaces repainted. Siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be
maintained weather resistant and water tight. Metal surfaces subject to rust or
corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and surfaces with
rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and
corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces
designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. (TO-
2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-17: EXTERIOR WALLS:
Exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where
required to prevent deterioration. (TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-18: MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING:
No motor vehicle shall be parked on any lot unless parked on a concrete or
asphalt driveway.
(TO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-2-19: SEASONAL DECORATIONS:
   No person shall display exterior items of a primarily decorative nature
visible from the public right-of-way and associated with the celebration of
seasonal events or holidays earlier than 90 calendar days before, and 90
calendars after, the seasonal event or holiday.
   Any person found to have been in violation of this section shall be fined
not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense.
(TO-2025-3, 4-8-2025)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC WAYS PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
3-3-1: Purpose
3-3-2: Enforcement
3-3-3: Penalties
3-3-4: Discharge Of Sewage Into Open Ditches Along Township Streets And
Highways
3-3-5: Deposit Of Snow Or Ice upon Public Highway; Prohibition
3-3-6: Water Drainage Onto Township Property
3-3-7: Deposit Of Refuse, Garbage And Litter On Township Road District Property
3-3-8: Debris And Vegetation
3-3-9: Repairs To Motor Vehicles On Public Ways; Broken Windows
3-3-10: Abandoned, Inoperable Vehicles
3-3-11: Removal Of Animal Waste
3-3-12: Excessive Noise On Public Property
3-3-13: Restraint Of Animals
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
A serious problem deleterious to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens
of the Town of Leyden exists by reason of the actions of certain citizens in
disposing or causing to be depositing of garbage, abandoning vehicles,
discharge of sewage, depositing of snow and ice, water drainage, debris and
vegetation, junk and other waste on the public ways and property of the
Township. Such actions also hampers and prevents the Town of Leyden, its
various agencies, departments and the Highway Commissioner from their
respective statutory duties. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-2: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The person designated by the Town Supervisor and Board of Trustees as
the Leyden Township Code Enforcement Officer is empowered to enforce the
provisions of this Public Ways Property Maintenance Code.
   B.   Violation of this Public Ways Property Maintenance Code shall be deemed
a nuisance which may be abated by the Highway Commissioner, Town Supervisor or
Town Attorney who may enforce this Code through injunctive or other relief ,
including prosecution for a fine as set forth in Section
3-3-3 below. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person or entity who shall violate any provision of this Public
Ways Property Maintenance Code shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, plus
any attorney fees and court costs. A separate and distinct offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   B.   Collection and Payment of Fees: Any fines collected by the Township for
offenses committed under this Public Ways Property Maintenance Code upon any
highway or right-of-way maintained by or under the supervision of the Leyden
Township Highway Commissioner shall be paid to and deposited into the Township
Road and Bridges fund. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-4: DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE INTO OPEN DITCHES ALONG TOWNSHIP STREETS AND
HIGHWAYS:
Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, whether public
or private, to discharge or empty any type of sewage, including the effluent
from septic tanks or other sewage treatment devices, or any other domestic,
commercial or industrial waste, or any putrescible liquids, or cause the same
to be discharged or emptied in any manner into open ditches along any public
street or highway, or into any drain or drainage structure installed solely for
street or highway drainage purposes. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-5: DEPOSIT OF SNOW OR ICE UPON PUBLIC HIGHWAY; PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to remove or cause to be plowed
or removed snow or ice from private property onto property belonging to the
Township, including but not limited to parkways, streets, sidewalks, easements,
and rights-of-way under the jurisdiction of the Highway Commissioner. (Ord. HO-
2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-6: WATER DRAINAGE ONTO TOWNSHIP PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow water to drain or
discharge unnaturally from private property onto Township property including,
but not limited to, parkways, streets, sidewalks, easements, and rights-of-way
under the jurisdiction of the Highway Commissioner without express written
authorization of the Highway Commissioner. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022; amd. Ord.
HO-2023-1, 2-14-2023)
3-3-7: DEPOSIT OF REFUSE, GARBAGE AND LITTER ON TOWNSHIP ROAD DISTRICT
PROPERTY:
Except as provided in Chapter 4, “Waste Disposal Regulations”, Title 3 of the
Town Code, no person or entity shall deposit refuse, garbage, litter, or any
can, container or other receptacles, whether empty or containing the same, on
rights-of-way, streets, parkways, or other property belonging to or under the
jurisdiction of the Highway Commissioner. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-8: DEBRIS AND VEGETATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to cause or allow any
debris, refuse, tree limbs, tree trunks, leaves, grass clippings and/or other
types of vegetation to be placed upon any property belonging to the Township,
including but not limited to parkways, streets, sidewalks, easements, and
rights-of-way under the jurisdiction of the Highway Commissioner. Placement of
said items on parkways, streets, sidewalks, easements and rights-of-way is
prohibited without the express approval of the Highway Commissioner.
   B.   This Section shall not apply to scheduled garbage pick-up in compliance
with Chapter 4, “Waste Disposal Regulations”, and Section
3-2-7, “Tree Removal”, of Chapter 2, Title 3 of the Town Code, or to any other
refuse collection sponsored or authorized by the Highway Commissioner and/or
the Town Supervisor. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-9: REPAIRS TO MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC WAYS; BROKEN WINDOWS:
   A.   Repairs: It shall be unlawful for anyone to change any parts, repair,
wash, grease, wax, polish or clean a motor vehicle on any public streets,
roads, alleys ,and rights-of-way under the jurisdiction of the Highway
Commissioner except such repairs, cleaning or polishing as is necessary to
ensure good vision, or such emergency repairs as are necessary to remove such
motor vehicle from the public way. Such emergency repairs shall be made only as
close as possible to the right-edge of the roadway, with the motor vehicle
facing in the direction of the traffic flow.
   B.   Broken Windows: It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle with a
broken window to remain on any public street, road, alley and right-of-way
under the jurisdiction of the Highway Commissioner for more than twenty-four
(24) hours. After twenty-four (24) hours, the motor vehicle shall be towed at
the owner’s expense.
      1.   Any motor vehicle in violation of this Section may be towed to a
safe storage place where it shall be held until claimed by the owner. The owner
shall be required to pay towing and storage charges.
      2.   The Highway Commissioner is authorized to contract with any
municipality or private towing company, to ticket, tow or otherwise enforce
this Section. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-10: ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
   A.   Inoperable Motor Vehicle Defined:
      1.   “Inoperable motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle from which, for a
period of at least seven (7) days or any longer period of time fixed by
ordinance, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the
engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power.
      2.   “Inoperable motor vehicle” shall not include a motor vehicle which
has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor
power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
   B.   Nuisance Declared: The Highway Commissioner hereby declares that
inoperable vehicles on public ways under the jurisdiction of the Highway
Commissioner to be a nuisance.
   C.   Notice to Remove: Whenever the Highway Commissioner or his/her
designated agent sends a notice to the last owner of an inoperable vehicle
located on a public way, as registered with the Secretary of State, to dispose
of such inoperable vehicle, it shall be unlawful for such owner to permit said
vehicle, or parts thereof, to remain upon the public ways after the passage of
seven (7) days from the issuance of the notice by mail or personal delivery.
   D.   Removal by Enforcing Authorities; Costs: The Cook County Sheriff’s
Office or the police department of any municipality located totally or
partially within the Township are hereby authorized to remove or cause to be
removed such inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof. The reasonable cost of
such removal shall be charged and paid by the registered owner of the
inoperable motor vehicle upon the billing thereof.
   E.   Penalties: A fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day that
the registered owner fails to obey the notice of the Highway Commissioner and
permits such inoperable vehicle, or parts thereof, to remain upon the public
ways seven (7) days after such notice herein is made, shall be imposed upon
such registered owner. Each day after the expiration of said seven (7) days
shall be a separate offense. (Ord. HO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
3-3-11: REMOVAL OF ANIMAL WASTE:
   A.   No person shall permit any animal in their custody or control to enter
upon public property including, but not limited to, public parks, public roads,
and public ways, and defecate or deposit excrement, feces or waste onto such
public property, unless such person immediately and effectively removes and
disposes of such waste in a clean and sanitary manner.
   B.   Any person found to have been in violation of this section shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense.
(Ord. TO-2024-7, 5-14-2024; amd. HO 2024-5, 5-14-2024)
3-3-12: EXCESSIVE NOISE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   No person shall make, cause, permit, or allow any excessive noise upon
Township property including, but not limited to, public parks, public roads,
and public ways, or in such close proximity to such public property as to be
distinctly and loudly audible upon such public property, that unreasonably
disturbs the peace, health, or safety of the neighborhood within the area of
audibility. Any such noise that occurs during the closing hours of Township
parks shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   B.   Any person found to have been in violation of this section shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than fivve hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense.
(Ord. TO-2024-9, 6-11-2024; amd. Ord. HO 2024-6, 6-11-2024)
3-3-13: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS
No person shall permit any animal in their custody or control to enter upon
public property including, but not limited to, public parks, public roads, and
public ways, without securing the animal by a leash or other restraint.
Any person found to have been in violation of this section shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. (Ord. TO 2024-13, 9-10-2024; amd. Ord. HO-2024-8, 9-10-2024)
CHAPTER 4
WASTE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Leyden Township Special Refuse Collection And Disposal District
3-4-3: Prohibited Acts
3-4-4: Collection
3-4-5: Nonresidential; Commercial Waste
3-4-6: Landscape Waste
3-4-7: Recyclable Waste
3-4-8: Refuse
3-4-9: Waste Hauling License; Permit Fees
3-4-10: Violations As Nuisances; Abatement
3-4-11: Bills For Services; Delinquencies
3-4-12: Penalty
3-4-13: Interpretation
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words have the meanings herein ascribed
to them, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
                                 Residue from the burning of wood, coal, or
ASHES:                           other combustible materials and residue from
                                 fires used for cooking and heating buildings.
                                 Items of household refuse that are not
                                 contained within an approved collection
                                 container and that may require special
BULK ITEMS:                      handling and management, including White Goods
                                 and household goods, bedding and furniture.
                                 Bulk items must be usual to housekeeping and
                                 must be generated by the covered unit at the
                                 covered unit's dwelling unit.
                                 The biological process by which micro-
COMPOSTING:                      organisms decompose the organic fraction of
                                 waste, producing a humus-like material that
                                 may be used as a soil conditioner.
                                 A "roll-out" cart and aluminum, galvanized or
                                 heavy duty plastic garbage pails with a
CONTAINER:                       capacity of not less than ten (10) gallons and
                                 not more than thirty-two (32) gallons for the
                                 disposal of refuse.
                                 The "proposer" who is selected and executes an
CONTRACTOR:                      agreement with the Township to provide waste
                                 collection and disposal services.
                                 Each dwelling unit in one and two-family
                                 residential properties in the District to whom
                                 waste removal and disposal services is
                                 serviced by the exclusive solid waste
                                 agreement entered into between the Township
                                 and the designated contractor. Covered unit
COVERED UNIT:                    shall also include the Town of Leyden and
                                 commercial customers served by the designated
                                 contractor within unincorporated Leyden
                                 Township unless the agreement indicates that
                                 particular customer provisions are intended to
                                 apply to only one and two-family residential
                                 dwelling units. "Covered Unit" shall also be
                                 referred to "Customer".
                                 The Leyden Township Special Refuse Collection
DISTRICT:                        and Disposal District, being the
                                 unincorporated areas of Leyden Township, Cook
                                 County, Illinois.
                                 Electronic waste includes television,
                                 monitors, printers, computers, electronic
                                 keyboards, facsimile machines, videocassette
                                 recorders, portable digital music players,
                                 video game consoles, small scale servers,
                                 scanners, electronic mice, digital convertor
ELECTRONIC WASTE:                boxes, cable receivers, digital video disc
                                 recorders and any other electronic device
                                 banned from landfill disposal by the State of
                                 Illinois pursuant to the Illinois Electronic
                                 Products Recycling and Reuse Act, 415 ILCS
                                 150/5 et seq., and as amended from time to
                                 time.
                                 Exempt waste includes hazardous waste,
                                 hazardous substances, biomedical or
                                 biohazardous waste, electronic waste,
                                 construction or landscape contractor generated
                                 waste, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts,
                                 tires, trailers, engines, lead acid batteries,
EXEMPT WASTE:                    used oil and other waste material that is not
                                 accepted as municipal waste at the municipal
                                 solid waste disposal facility used by the
                                 Town's licensed waste hauler. Household
                                 hazardous waste and electronic waste for which
                                 a customer calls ahead to arrange a separate
                                 pick-up from the contractor shall not be
                                 considered exempt waste.
                                 Waste resulting from the handling,
GARBAGE:                         preparation, cooking and consumption of food,
                                 and wastes from the handling, storage and sale
                                 of produce in the District.
GAYLORD BOX:                     A bulk-sized corrugated box.
HOUSEHOLD:                       A customer's residential dwelling unit and its
                                 occupants.
                                 Yard clippings, leaves, brush or other organic
LANDSCAPE WASTE:                 or vegetative yard materials generated from
                                 routine and periodic yard and landscape
                                 maintenance generated in the District.
LEYDEN:                          The Town of Leyden, Cook County, Illinois.
                                 A person, firm or corporation possessing a
LICENSED WASTE HAULER:           license from the Town of Leyden to collect and
                                 remove waste from the District.
                                 Any building with three (3) or more single-
MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING:           family apartments, condominiums, or co-
                                 operative dwelling units with a common
                                 entrance located in the District.
                                 Collectively, garbage, refuse, landscape
MUNICIPAL WASTE:                 waste, recyclable waste, and ashes that are
                                 usual to housekeeping, but excluding exempt
                                 waste. See also "waste."
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:         Any commercial, office and institutional
                                 building located in the District.
                                 The depositing of waste, or the consolidation
                                 of waste from one or more sources, at a site
OPEN DUMPING:                    that does not fulfill the requirements of a
                                 sanitary landfill under the Illinois
                                 Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et
                                 seq., and as amended from time to time.
                                 A person, firm or corporation that owns,
OWNER:                           rents, occupies or manages property or
                                 premises located in the District.
                                 Aluminum and tin cans; newsprint; mixed paper
                                 trail (mail, computer paper, stationary,
                                 envelopes, greeting cards and the like),
                                 chipboard and corrugated cardboard in pieces
                                 not to exceed thirty inches (30") in width;
                                 green, brown and clear glass bottles; steel
                                 and bi-mental cans; PET plastic (soda pop
RECYCLABLES OR RECYCLABLE WASTE: bottles); HDPE plastic (milk and water
                                 bottles); magazines; telephone books; brown
                                 paper bags; and plastic six-pack rings.
                                 "Recyclables" or "Recyclable Waste" shall also
                                 include other materials at such time as
                                 markets develop and provisions for collecting
                                 and recycling such materials are made for the
                                 District.
                                 Any process by which materials that would
                                 otherwise become waste, including but not
                                 limited to metals, glass, paper, landscape
RECYCLING:                       waste and plastics, are collected, separated,
                                 processed and returned to the economic
                                 mainstream in the form of raw materials or
                                 products.
                                 Combustible trash, including, but not limited
                                 to, bulk items, paper, cartons, boxes,
                                 barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard
                                 trimmings, wood furniture, bedding;
                                 noncombustible trash, including, but not
                                 limited to, White Goods, metals, tin cans,
                                 metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of
                                 rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery,
                                 other mineral waste; street rubbish,
REFUSE:                          including, but not limited to, street
                                 sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt,
                                 contents of litter receptacles. "Refuse" does
                                 not include solid wastes resulting from
                                 industrial processes and manufacturing
                                 operations such as food processing wastes,
                                 boiler-house cinders, lumber, scraps and
                                 shavings. "Refuse" does not include exempt
                                 waste except to the extent that exempt wastes
                                 are accepted as municipal waste at
                                 contractor's landfill or disposal facility.
                                 A heavy-duty, two (2) wheeled trash container
                                 made of rigid, heavy-duty plastic with a
                                 capacity of between ninety (90) and ninety six
                                 (96) gallons provided by a contractor pursuant
                                 to a solid waste agreement between the
                                 Township and contractor. "Roll-out cart" shall
                                 also mean a heavy-duty, two (2) wheeled roll-
                                 out trash container made of rigid, heavy-duty
ROLL-OUT CART:                   plastic with a capacity not in excess of
                                 ninety six (96) gallons that is compatible
                                 with the contractor's collection equipment.
                                 With respect to recyclable waste, "roll-out
                                 cart" shall mean a heavy-duty, two (2) wheeled
                                 container made of rigid, heavy-duty plastic
                                 with a capacity of sixty five (65) gallons
                                 provided by the contractor pursuant to a solid
                                 waste agreement.
SUPERVISOR:                      The Town Supervisor of Leyden Township or
                                 designated representative.
TOWN/TOWNSHIP:                   The Town of Leyden, Cook County, Illinois.
                                 All areas of Leyden Township which are not
UNINCORPORATED LEYDEN TOWNSHIP:  included within the corporate boundaries of a
                                 municipality.
                                 Garbage, refuse, landscape waste, recyclable
                                 waste and ashes that are usual to housekeeping
WASTE:                           and are generated by the customer at a covered
                                 unit. Waste does not include exempt waste and
                                 materials generated from commercial
                                 activities. See also "municipal waste".
                                 All refrigerators, ranges, water heaters,
                                 freezers, air conditioners, humidifiers and
                                 other similar appliances that are usual to
WHITE GOODS:                     housekeeping and that are generated by a
                                 customer at a covered unit. (Ord. TO-92-1, 1-
                                 14-1992; amd. Ord. SWO-2001-3, 9-18-2001; Ord.
                                 TO-2014-5, 10-14-2014; Ord. TO-2021-17, 12-14-
                                 2021; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
 
3-4-2: LEYDEN TOWNSHIP SPECIAL REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL DISTRICT:
   This chapter shall be applicable only in unincorporated Leyden Township
heretofore declared a special refuse collection and disposal district. (Ord.
TO-92-1, 1-14-1992)
3-4-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   General: No person shall dispose of any waste except as permitted in
this chapter.
   B.   Disposal Of Waste On Public Property: No person shall deposit, abandon,
dump, or place any waste, or cause any waste to be deposited, abandoned, dumped
or placed on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public property, except that
the owner of any premises may place waste generated on said premises at the
curbside of the abutting public street or other approved collection area during
the period provided in subsection
3-4-4E of this chapter prior to the time the waste is scheduled to be removed
by a licensed waste hauler, provided that the waste is within containers
complying with this chapter.
   C.   Disposal Of Waste On Private Property: No person other than the owner
shall deposit, abandon, dump or dispose of any waste on any privately owned
property. The owner of the property may do so only as provided in subsections
3-4-4E and
3-4-6C of this chapter.
   D.   Open Dumping: No person shall cause or allow the open dumping of any
waste within the district.
   E.   Conducting Waste Facilities: No person shall conduct any waste
collection, removal, treatment or disposal operation in the district without a
license hereunder.
   F.   Waste Subjected To The Elements: No person shall store, cast, throw,
drop, place or deposit any waste in such a manner that the waste may be carried
by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow into or upon any street, sidewalk,
alley, park or other public or private place in the district or into or upon
adjacent premises.
   G.   Unauthorized Waste Removal: No person other than the town, a licensed
waste hauler or a licensed junk dealer shall remove any waste from any premises
in the district. This subsection shall not apply to the removal of discarded
bulk items or white goods by vendors of such items upon purchase of
replacements.
   H.   Disturbing Waste Containers: No person other than the town, a licensed
waste hauler, or the owner of the premises shall displace, uncover or in any
way disturb a waste container or the contents of a waste container located on
any premises in the district.
   I.   Removal Of Nonmunicipal Waste: Subsections G and H of this section
shall not apply to the collection and removal of any nonmunicipal waste by
authorized waste haulers for disposal, treatment or storage at a site or
facility meeting the requirements of the Illinois environmental protection act
and the Illinois pollution control board, provided such collection and removal
is with the permission of the owner of the premises. (Ord. TO-92-1, 1-14-1992)
   J.   Accumulation Of Waste: No person shall store, dump, or permit the
accumulation of debris, refuse, garbage, trash, compost or any other waste in a
manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents, vermin or other
disease carrying animals, that creates a nuisance, results in noxious or
offensive smells, or that is otherwise offensive or dangerous to the public
health. (Ord. SWO-2001-3, 9-18-2001)
3-4-4: COLLECTION:
   A.   General: The town supervisor shall have charge of the municipal waste
collection, recycling and disposal program for the district, and the
enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   Contracting Waste Haulers: The Town may contract with one or more duly
qualified and licensed waste haulers for the collection, removal and disposal
of ashes, garbage, refuse, landscape waste, recyclable waste, electronic waste,
and household hazardous waste.
   C.   Scheduling Of Collections: The scheduling of pick-up hours, days and
routes for all waste removal for covered units shall be determined by written
agreement executed by the Town Supervisor and a licensed waste hauler.
   D.   Duties Of Customers/Covered Units: It shall be the duty of each
customer in the District to:
      1.   Utilize landscape waste containers as specified in section
3-4-6 of this chapter for disposal and pick up of landscape waste.
      2.   Utilize recycling waste containers as specified in section
3-4-6 of this chapter for disposal and pick-up of landscape waste.
      3.   Utilize refuse containers as specified in section
3-4-8 of this chapter for disposal and pick up of garbage, ashes and refuse.
      4.   Utilize the waste collection and disposal services offered by the
licensed waste hauler under contract with the town to the extent such services
are made available to persons in the district.
      5.   Promptly pay the waste collection and disposal charges billed
directly to owners of property in the district in accordance with the rates and
pursuant to the terms set forth in the town's waste removal contract with its
licensed waste hauler(s), now in effect or as hereafter approved, amended,
modified or replaced.
      6.   Comply with the provisions of this chapter as now in effect or
hereafter amended, including any rules and regulations hereafter adopted,
amended, modified or replaced.
   E.   Time And Place Of Setting Waste Out For Collection: Landscape waste
containers, recycling waste containers, and bulk items shall be placed at the
curbside of the road adjacent to the covered unit's premises on the regularly
or specially scheduled pick-up day or days for such materials. These
receptacles and items shall not be placed out for collection before five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. of the day prior to pick up and shall be removed from the
pick-up area by nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on the day of pick-up.
   F.   Duties Of Waste Haulers: The services to be rendered by any waste
hauler operating within unincorporated Leyden Township shall be performed with
due care and in a professional, orderly, efficient and workmanlike manner. In
addition:
      1.   Any waste hauler operating within the District must have and
maintain all necessary federal, state and local permits, licenses and
qualifications for municipal solid waste collection and disposal as may be
necessary to lawfully perform such services.
      2.   Waste haulers must employ a workforce adequate in number, training
and equipment to accomplish the same on a regular basis despite adverse
conditions, breakdowns or similar hindrances. Waste haulers shall not litter
streets or any customer's premises in the process of making collections nor
allow any municipal waste to blow, fall or spill from any vehicle used for
collections. Waste haulers shall repair or replace, at its expense, containers
damaged as a result of its handling thereof, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
Waste haulers shall replace lids or covers on containers immediately after
emptying. Waste haulers' employees shall close all fence gates both upon
entering and leaving premises and shall not cut across rear, front, or side
yards, or flower beds to adjoining premises without permission of the owner.
      3.   Waste haulers shall use only fully enclosed, modern, packer-type
trucks in good working order and in a clean and sanitary condition in
collecting garbage, ashes and refuse (excluding bulk items and White Goods).
      4.   Waste haulers shall use enclosed vehicles and/or covers to prevent
any loss, spillage or blowing of materials during the transfer or
transportation of municipal waste to a disposal facility.
      5.   Waste haulers shall immediately clean up and collect any municipal
waste spilled or lost during collection or transportation, without regard to
whether the waste hauler caused the material to be spilled or lost.
      6.   All services by a waste hauler, either under contract with or
licensed by the Town, shall be performed by the waste hauler's employees in a
neat, orderly and courteous manner, without causing loud or raucous noises,
bright lights or other nuisance and with due care and regard for the safety,
peace and quietude of all other persons while engaged in waste collection and
disposal.
      7.   No waste hauler or its employees shall consume or be under the
influence of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substances (except by
doctor's prescription and subject to such doctor's work restrictions)
immediately prior to or during the course of performing their duties under a
contract with the Town or this chapter. Waste haulers shall not suffer or
permit their employees to perform services under a contract with the Town or
this chapter while actually or apparently under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
      8.   Waste haulers shall collect and remove all waste (with the exception
of exempt waste, absent special arrangements) set for collection by an owner/
renter of property in the District notwithstanding any dispute as to the manner
in which the waste is set out for placement or the contents of the waste,
provide that the waste is not of such a nature that the operator of the
disposal facility will have cause to reject the waste.
      9.   Waste haulers shall tag any waste set out for collection by an
owner/renter of property in the District, but which is not collectable, with a
tag explaining why such waste was not collected and the requirements, if any,
for arranging collection and disposal of the waste.
      10.   Waste haulers must carry and maintain, at its sole expense,
worker's compensation insurance, motor vehicle liability insurance and general
comprehensive liability insurance in amounts and subject to terms and
conditions as the Town may provide in its written agreement with a waste hauler
or as a condition to issuance of a license to collect and dispose of waste in
the District.
      11.   Waste haulers shall comply with all federal, state and local
regulations on the disposal of special and hazardous waste materials.
   G.   Uncollectable Waste: All waste not subject to collection by the
licensed waste haulers under contract with the Town shall be disposed of by the
owner of the premises in which the waste is produced or located in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter and applicable Federal, State and local
requirements. (Ord. TO-92-1, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. TO-2021-17, 12-14-2021)
3-4-5: NONRESIDENTIAL; COMMERCIAL WASTE:
   A.   Removal Of Waste: To the extent that waste collection and disposal
services offered by the Town under contract through its licensed waste hauler
(s) are not made available to owners of property in the District, the duties
set forth in subsection
3-4-4D4, 5 and 6 shall not be applicable. In that event, such owners must
provide for the removal of waste from the premises by a licensed scavenger
service as often as necessary to prevent the creation of a nuisance, but no
less often than once a week. Otherwise, all provisions of this Chapter shall be
applicable.
   B.   Containers: All waste generated for disposal on property in the
District shall be deposited in containers which meet the requirements of
Sections
3-4-6,
3-4-7 and
3-4-8 of this Chapter.
   C.   Pick-Up: Nonresidential waste/commercial waste pick-ups shall be at the
alley to the rear of the building to be served, or in the designated "garbage
area" located on the premises, provided that such designation meets the prior
approval of the building owner and the waste hauler. (Ord. TO-92-1, 1-14-1992;
amd. Ord. TO-2021-17, 12-14-2021)
3-4-6: LANDSCAPE WASTE:
   A.   Mandatory Separation; Disposal: No person shall combine landscape waste
with any other household waste for the purposes of disposal or collection. No
person shall set landscape waste out for collection in any container other than
the landscape waste containers described in subsection E of this section.
   B.   All landscape waste haulers shall dispose all landscape waste at a
lawfully operated and duly licensed and/or permitted disposal facility, unless
otherwise directed by the Town pursuant to an agreement or license conditions
to dispose of landscape waste in a particular site or location. A facility may
treat, compost, grind, or land apply said landscape waste. No landscape waste
may be disposed of at a landfill or solid waste incinerator unless otherwise
authorized by the Illinois Environmental Agency (IEPA).
   C.   Composting: No person shall compost landscape waste in the District
without a permit therefor unless the waste was generated on the property on
which it is to be composted. The Town encourages and permits mulching and/or
composting of landscape waste on the property on which it was generated
provided that such mulching or composting is performed so as not to create a
nuisance.
   D.   Open Burning: No person shall burn any accumulations of landscape waste
on any private or public property.
   E.   Landscape Waste Containers:
      1.   Landscape waste shall be placed into bags, which shall be flat
bottom thirty (30) gallon paper bags of a minimum two (2) ply, fifty (50) pound
wet strength Kraft paper, with approximate dimensions of sixteen inches by
twelve inches by thirty five inches (16" x 12" x 35"), or other biodegradable
paper bags of comparable size and quality. Plastic bags, whether described as
"biodegradable" or not, shall not be permitted except by prior written
agreement between the waste hauler and the Town.
      2.   Landscape waste generated on the premises of customers/covered units
for collection by the licensed waste hauler under contract with the Town may
also be placed in an approved thirty-two (32) gallon container that is clearly
marked with a sixteen inch (16") red painted "X" on both sides. This container
shall not weigh more than fifty (50) pounds when full.
   F.   Landscape Brush, Branches And Shrubbery: Loose brush, branches and
shrubbery cuttings (four inches (4") or less in diameter), if securely tied in
bundles not exceeding four feet (4') in length and sixty (60) pounds in weight,
shall be collected by the waste hauler if the bundle is properly placed at the
curbside for pick-up.
   G.   Costs: The cost of curbside collection and disposal of landscape waste,
including landscape brush, branches and shrubbery as described in subsection F
above, from customers/covered units, will be charged to the customers/covered
units by the waste hauler under contract with the Town as part of the municipal
solid waste collection, removal and disposal services.
   H.   Quantity Subject To Weekly Collection: There shall be no limit as to
the number of landscape waste containers or properly bundled brush, branches
and shrubbery which may be deposited by customers/covered units for pick-up by
the waste hauler under contract with the Town.
   I.   Enclosed Storage Of Landscape Waste: No person shall store, place or
deposit any landscape waste, except firewood, within an enclosed structure. All
firewood stored within an enclosed structure must be stored in a place and
manner so that it is not susceptible to spontaneous combustion.
   J.   Blowing Or Drifting Waste: All persons shall exercise due care to
prevent accumulations of landscape waste from blowing or drifting onto the
property of another.
   K.   Prohibition On Use Of Landscape Waste Collection Service And
Containers:
      1.   No person shall mix landscape waste with other waste materials in
any landscape waste collection containers. No landscape waste containers shall
be placed for pickup if they contain nonlandscape waste materials.
      2.   No person shall place any landscape waste for collection by the
licensed waste hauler under contract with the Town if such waste was not
generated on the premises of the residential customer placing such waste for
collection at the curbside of the person’s property.
      3.   No residential customer shall suffer or permit any other person to
place landscape waste not generated on the customer’s premises in landscape
waste containers placed for collection from customer’s premises.
      4.   All landscape, lawn or yard services shall contract separately for
removal and/or disposal of landscape waste generated within or without the
District. No person may place any landscape waste collected through such
services for regular collection from the premises of residential customers by
the licensed waste hauler under contract with the Town.
      5.   No landscape, lawn or yard service may deposit landscape waste in
any centralized landscape waste drop-off container as may be provided by the
Town. (Ord. TO-92-1, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. TO-2021-17, 12-14-2021; Ord. TO-2022-
13, 9-13-2022)
3-4-7: RECYCLABLE WASTE:
   A.   Mandatory Separation:
      1.   All recyclables shall be separated from all other waste for the
purposes of disposal and collection. The recyclables collected shall be
separated and otherwise treated so as to facilitate the sale of said materials
to processing companies or recycled material brokers.
      2.   Subject to the existence of a viable market, the Town Supervisor is
authorized to designate additional categories or eliminate existing categories
of recyclable materials for separation, collection and disposal.
      3.   All designated recyclable materials, except newsprint, shall be
rinsed and stripped of any lids, stoppers, packaging or labels before being
placed in the appropriate recycling cart for collection and disposal.
   B.   Picking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any waste collection
service, hauler, recycler, or other entity or person to remove, collect,
obtain, possess or pick any item of recyclable waste placed for collection as
part of the town's recycling program, except pursuant to contract and/or
license from the town. When placed for collection, designated recyclable waste
items shall be considered property of the town. When collected by the town's
licensed recyclable waste hauler, recyclable waste items shall be the property
of the town's recyclable waste hauler.
   C.   Containers: Recyclables shall only be placed in a roll-out cart
provided by the waste hauler under contract with the Town or in rigid plastic
recycling bins previously distributed by the Town. The Town or the waste hauler
shall continue to own the recycling containers distributed. Each customer shall
be responsible for the reasonable care of its recycling containers. When any
customer relocates outside the Township, the customer must return the recycling
containers to the Town.
   D.   Recycling Facilities: It is to be the duty of any recyclable waste
hauler under contract with and/or licensed by the town to have available at all
relevant times one or more recycling facilities, with all necessary or
appropriate federal, state and local permits, licenses or approvals, for the
collection, sorting and recycling of recyclable waste generated for disposal
under its contract with the town and/or this chapter. The recyclable waste
hauler shall dispose of all recyclable waste at such a facility unless
otherwise directed by the town to dispose of the recyclable waste in a
particular site or location. No recyclable waste may be disposed of at a
landfill or in any other way than by recycling without approval by the town.
   E.   Quantity Of Recyclable Waste Subject To Weekly Collection: There shall
be no limit on the quantity of recyclable waste to be collected from each
residential property during each regularly scheduled collection provided that
all recyclable waste set out for collection was generated in the normal course
of use of the premises.
   F.   Exclusive Use Of Containers For Recycling: No person shall place or
deposit anything except designated recyclable waste in any recycling cart for
pick up and collection.
   G.   Public Education: The town supervisor or the town's licensed recyclable
waste hauler shall publish and distribute information to each residential
customer in the district on the mandatory recycling program along with
educational materials explaining the recycling process and its benefits. (Ord.
TO-92-1, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. TO-2014-5, 10-14-2014; amd. Ord. 2019-6, 5-14-
2019; Ord. TO-2021-17, 12-14-2021)
3-4-8: REFUSE:
   A.   Collection: Owners of property in the District shall provide for
collection, removal and disposal of refuse generated on their premises at least
once a week. Refuse shall be placed in containers as described in this section
and set out for collection as set forth in subsection
3-4-4E of this chapter.
      1.   Residents shall be allowed to place up to two (2) cubic yards of
household construction and demolition debris generated by "do-it-yourself"
projects as part of regular refuse set-outs. Larger quantities of household
construction and demolition debris shall require special pick-up service
pursuant to subsection G of this section.
   B.   Containers:
      1.   Customers/Covered Units (One And Two-Family Residences): All refuse
to be collected in the regular weekly customer service shall be placed in
approved containers except for such items as are too bulky to fit in said
containers. An approved container for customers shall mean a roll-out cart or a
container of standard waterproof construction and made of durable, rigid, heavy
duty plastic, aluminum, galvanized steel or other acceptable metal with a
tight-fitting cover and with handles suitable for lifting by one (1) person.
Except as hereinafter provided, such containers shall have a capacity of not
less than ten (10) gallons nor more than thirty-two (32) gallons, and not weigh
more than fifty (50) pounds when filled. Subject to the provisions of
subsection G, there shall no limit to the number of approved refuse containers
customers may place for curbside pick-up by the waste hauler under contract
with the Town.
         a.   Each Customer/Covered Unit shall be provided with one (1) Roll-
Out Cart for Refuse and one (1) Roll-Out Cart for Recyclables. If the Customer
requests additional Refuse and/or Recycling carts, the price shall be as
follows:
            (1)   One additional cart - $5.00 per month.
            (2)   Two or more additional carts - $30.00 per month.
            The charge for additional carts shall appear on the Customer’s
monthly Sewer/Water and Garbage bill.
         b.   Each customer shall be responsible for the reasonable care of its
refuse containers. Containers must be kept closed with lids or covers at all
times, as not to allow debris to escape or harbor mosquitoes, flies, rodents,
vermin or other disease carrying animals that create a nuisance, results in
noxious or offensive smells, or that is otherwise offensive or dangerous to the
public health.
      2.   Nonresidential Customers (Multi-Family and Commercial): Where fully
enclosed metal container systems exceeding thirty-two (32) gallons in capacity
are now in use at multi-family dwellings or commercial buildings, or where the
property owners request such systems or the waste hauler under contract with
the Town deems such system with respect to any multi-family dwellings or
commercial buildings where such containers are not in use, then fully enclosed
metal containers in excess of thirty-two (32) gallons in capacity shall be
provided by the waste hauler, or may be utilized by such customer if approved
by the waste hauler. With respect to such containers, the minimum bottom width
shall be no less than thirty-one (31) inches for one (1) cubic yard of
container space and the container shall be provided with outriggers.
         a.   Larger size containers shall be proportionately wider at the
bottom.
         b.   Containers having a capacity of four (4) cubic yards or more
shall be no higher than forty-three inches (43") with a four (4) piece lid
opening.
         c.   Containers shall meet federal and state safety standards.
      3.   Whenever containers in excess of thirty-two (32) gallon capacity are
used for multi-family or commercial buildings, the waste hauler under contract
with the Town shall furnish regularly scheduled collection service twice weekly
unless a compactor is provided by the property owner.
      4.   Containers, in excess of thirty-two (32) gallon capacity, used for
providing service to multi-family and commercial buildings shall be cleaned by
the waste hauler under contract with the Town at least quarterly or more often
if necessary, to keep them in sanitary condition. Any cleaning required more
frequently than once each quarter, as deemed necessary by the Town shall be at
the expense of the customer served.
      5.   Non-Customers: Each owner of a multi-family dwelling or a commercial
building in the District not serviced by the waste hauler under contract with
the Town, shall provide refuse containers specified in subsection B2 or a
waterproof dumpster with a close fitting lid for the collection and disposal of
refuse generated on the premises by the owner, tenants and occupants. All
refuse generated from such buildings shall be collected and disposed of in such
containers. Containers must be kept closed with lids or covers at all times as
to not allow debris to escape or harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents,
vermin or other disease carrying animals, that create a nuisance, results in
noxious or offensive smells, or that is otherwise offensive or dangerous to the
public health.
      6.   Disposal In Bags: All refuse to be disposed of pursuant to this
section shall first be placed in bags complying with subsection C below.
   C.   Refuse Bags: All refuse shall be disposed of in a closed or sealed bag,
except for large single items of refuse which do not fit in a standard garbage
bag but which fit in the containers described in subsection B of this section.
Refuse bags shall then be placed in containers described in said subsection B
of this section.
   D.   Availability Of Landfills Or Incinerators: All refuse haulers engaged
in waste collection and disposal in the district shall have available to them
at all relevant times one or more landfill sites or incinerators with all
necessary or appropriate federal, state, and local permits, licenses or
approvals for the operation of the disposal facility.
   E.   Waste Not Subject To Collection: Nonmunicipal waste, hazardous waste,
special waste, toxic waste, solid waste resulting from industrial or
manufacturing process, waste produced or generated as the result of
construction or repair activity (unless such construction or repair waste is
placed in a container that meets the requirements of subsections B and C of
this section), white goods, furniture and other similar items shall only be
disposed of by waste haulers and in disposal facilities having all necessary or
appropriate federal, state and local permits, licenses and approvals.
   F.   Cleanup Days: From time to time the town may designate a day or days
for the collection of large items from residential customers which are
otherwise not subject to collection. Subject to the town supervisor's
regulations and the requirement of subsection
3-4-4E of this chapter, miscellaneous waste items such as those described in
subsection E of this section may be placed out for collection on a public right
of way, adjacent to the owner's premises, on the cleanup day or days designated
by the town for collection and disposal.
   G.   Special Pick-Ups:
      1.   Customers/Covered Units:
         a.   Household Construction And Demolition Debris: The waste hauler
under contract with the Town, shall offer customers special pick-up services
for the collection of household construction and demolition debris in approved
containers when the quantity of such materials exceeds two (2) cubic yards, or
for large quantities of waste arising from residential move-ins or move-outs.
Special pick-up services shall be made available at least one time each week at
rates established in the contract between the Town and the waste hauler.
            (1)   The waste hauler shall provide the customer with an estimate
of the cost of a special pick-up service within forty eight (48) hours after
receiving a special pick-up request. The cost of such service shall be billed
to the customer by the waste hauler.
            (2)   Special pick-ups shall be accomplished within one (1) week
after requested by the customer.
         b.   Electronic Waste: The waste hauler under contract with the Town
shall provide for electronic waste and recycling if the customer calls ahead to
request the service. Electronic waste collection service shall be provided on
the same day as regular waste collection and at no additional cost to the
customer or Town. The waste hauler shall also provide gaylord boxes to the Town
for the purpose of collecting electronic waste at the Township Highway Garage.
The waste hauler shall remove and recycle all electronic waste collected
through the drop-off program at no additional cost to the Town.
         c.   Household Hazardous Waste: The waste hauler under contract with
the Town shall provide household hazardous waste collection and disposal if the
customer calls ahead to request the service. Household hazardous waste
collection shall be provided on the same day as regular waste collection at no
additional cost to the customer or Town.
         d.   White Goods/Bulk Items: Customers shall notify the waste hauler
under contract with the Town twenty-four (24) hours in advance for the
collection of White Goods or any bulk item weighing more than fifty (50)
pounds.
      2.   Non-Customers: Special pick-up collections of miscellaneous waste
items otherwise not subject to collection may be arranged by non-customers with
a licensed waste hauler. All special pick-ups will take place at such times
during normal business hours and days as may be mutually convenient for both
the non-customer and the waste hauler, subject to restrictions of subsection
3-3-4E of this chapter, provided such pick-up does not interfere with the
normal collection and disposal of waste under this chapter. (Ord. TO-92-1, 1-
14-1992; amd. Ord. TO-2014-5, 10-14-2014; Ord. 2019-6, 5-14-2019; Ord. TO-2021-
17, 12-14-2021; Ord. TO-2022-5, 4-12-2022)
3-4-9: WASTE HAULING LICENSE; PERMIT FEES:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to engage in waste removal,
collection and disposal in the District without first having secured a license
from the Town Clerk. All applications for waste hauling licenses shall be made
to the Town Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk.
   B.   Number Of Licenses: Only one license shall be issued and outstanding at
any given time to a waste hauler engaged in the removal of waste, collection
and disposal services within the District. A copy of the valid license must be
carried in all of the waste hauler's waste collection and transportation
vehicles serving properties within the District.
   C.   License Fee: The annual fee for a waste hauling license shall be as
follows:
      1.   No fee if the waste hauler is under contract with the Town to
provide waste removal, collection and disposal in the District.
      2.   Fifty dollars ($50.00) for each waste hauler engaged in the removal
of waste, collection and disposal for non-customers (multi-family buildings and
commercial property) within the District.
   D.   Term of License: Each waste hauling license issued hereunder shall be
valid for one (1) year, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   A license issued to a waste hauler pursuant to contractual
arrangements with the Town shall be valid only during the term of the contract
and in the absence of material default.
      2.   A license issued to a waste hauler without contractual arrangement
shall be null and void upon issuance of a license pursuant to contractual
arrangements with the Town for waste collection, removal and disposal services.
      3.   Failure to observe all requirements of this chapter shall be cause
for revocation of a waste hauling license.
   E.   Qualifications: An applicant for a waste hauling license shall
demonstrate the following qualifications:
      1.   The availability to the applicant of appropriate waste disposal
facilities duly permitted by the IEPA.
      2.   A sufficient number of modern, sanitary, leakproof waste collection
and transportation vehicles and equipment to provide efficient waste
collection, removal and disposal services.
      3.   Insurance meeting the requirements of subsection
3-4-4F10 of this chapter.
   F.   Permit Fees: Any property owner who rents a “roll-off” dumpster for the
owner’s property shall be required to apply for a Town permit the issued by the
Town Clerk. The permit fees are as follows:
      1.   Single family and two-family residential properties: Fifty dollars
($50.00) for each “roll-off” dumpster. The permit shall be valid for seven (7)
days.
      2.   Multi-family buildings and commercial properties: One hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each “roll-off” dumpster. The permit shall be valid for
thirty (30) days. (Ord. TO-92-1, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. TO-2021-17, 12-14-2021;
Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
3-4-10: VIOLATIONS AS NUISANCES; ABATEMENT:
   A.   Declaration Of Nuisance: It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared
to be a nuisance for any person to:
      1.   Deposit, abandon, dump, or place any waste, or cause any waste to be
deposited, abandoned, dumped or placed on any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public property; provided, this subsection shall not apply to any owner,
occupant or lessee of the premises who places waste generated on said premises
at the curbside of the abutting public street or other approved collection area
during the time provided in subsection
3-4-4E of this chapter prior to the time the waste is scheduled to be removed
by a licensed waste hauler, and provided that the waste is within containers
complying with this chapter;
      2.   Fail to provide for the removal and collection of waste as required
by this chapter and such failure results in a public nuisance;
      3.   Store, dump, or permit the accumulation of debris, refuse, garbage,
compost or any other waste in a matter that may harbor mosquitoes, flies,
insects, rodents, vermin or other disease carrying animals, that creates a
nuisance, results in noxious or offensive smells, or that is otherwise
offensive or dangerous to the public health;
      4.   Deposit, abandon, dump or dispose of any waste on any privately
owned property; provided that the owner, occupant or lessee of the property may
do so only as provided in subsections
3-4-4E and
3-4-6C of this chapter; and
      5.   Store, cast, throw, drop, place or deposit any waste in such a
manner that the waste may be carried by the action of the sun, wind, rain or
snow into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public or private
place in the district or into or upon adjacent premises.
   B.   Authority To Abate: The town supervisor is hereby authorized to abate
any nuisance described in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Notice To Abate: The town clerk, at the direction of the town
supervisor, shall serve or cause to be served a notice to the owner, occupant
or lessee of any premises on which a nuisance exists, which notice shall demand
the abatement of the nuisance within seven (7) days. The owner may be served by
sending notice to the person who last paid the taxes on the real estate. (Ord.
SWO-2001-3, 9-18-2001)
   D.   Abatement By Township:
      1.   If the owner, occupant or lessee who is so notified does not abate
the nuisance within seven (7) days, as required by notice, the town supervisor
may provide for the abatement of the nuisance by township personnel or by
independent contractors.
      2.   Nuisance abatement work performed by township personnel shall be
charged at a minimum cost of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
hour of nuisance abatement work for the cost of mobilization, labor, equipment
and overhead, and at an hourly cost of one hundred seventy five dollars
($175.00) for each additional hour or part thereof of nuisance abatement work.
      3.   Nuisance abatement work performed by independent contractors shall
be charged at the billed cost to the township, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for
township administration and overhead. (Ord. TO-2014-5, 10-14-2014)
   E.   Separate Offenses; Penalty: A separate offense, punishable as provided
in section
3-4-12 of this chapter, shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
the nuisance continues unabated after seven (7) days from receipt of the notice
provided for in subsection C of this section. (Ord. SWO-2001-3, 9-18-2001)
3-4-11: BILLS FOR SERVICES; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Payment Of Charges: Charges for waste collection and disposal services
provided to covered units/customers by the Town’s licensed waste hauler,
penalty charges as provided in section
3-4-12 of this chapter, and charges for the abatement of any nuisance by the
Town, as provided in section
3-4-10 of this chapter, shall be included and billed as part of the Town’s
periodic bill for sewer and water utility service to the subject property, and
shall be paid at the Town hall within fifteen (15) days after the billing date.
The owner of the subject property, and any nonowner who is the occupant or the
lessee thereof, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for waste
collection and disposal services provided to the premises and any charges for
the abatement of a nuisance as provided herein.
      1.   Covered units/customers shall be charged the fees set forth in the
agreement between the Town and a waste hauler for waste collection and disposal
services; provided, however, that the charges for non-senior residential units
shall be twenty-three dollars and twenty-one cents ($23.21) and senior
residential units shall be twenty-one dollars and sixty-five cents ($21.65) for
the billing cycle commencing on July 1, 2025.
   B.   Late Charge: For late charges, see subsection
5-4-4 E of this code.
   C.   Disconnection Of Utility Service For Failure To Pay Bill: If the owner,
occupant or lessee has not paid the charges for unpaid waste collection and
disposal services, penalty charges or the charges for abatement of a nuisance,
within thirty (30) days of the date of the issuance of the bill for such costs,
utility service to the subject property may be disconnected by the town
supervisor in accordance with the procedures set forth in section
5-1-11 of this code.
   D.   Charges A Debt; Lien For Charges: The charges for unpaid waste
collection and disposal, penalty charges and any charges for abatement of a
nuisance billed in accordance with this section by the town to the owner,
occupant or lessee of the subject property shall be a debt due to the town. If
the charges are not paid within thirty (30) days after they are due, they shall
be deemed delinquent and shall be a lien upon the real estate as provided in
section
5-4-4 of this code. A change of ownership or occupancy of premises found
delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these charges or any
penalties.
(Ord. SWO-2001-3, 9-18-2001; amd. Ord. SWO-2004-3, 3-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2019-6,
5-14-2019; Ord. TO-2021-17, 12-14-2021; Ord. TO-2024-8, 5-14-2024; Ord. TO-
2025-5, 6-10-2025)
3-4-12: PENALTY:
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. TO-92-1, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. SWO-2001-3, 9-18-2001; amd. Ord. 2019-6, 5-
14-2019)
3-4-13: INTERPRETATION:
   It is the intent of the town board that this chapter be construed to be
consistent with the requirements of the Illinois environmental protection act.
It is the intention of the board in enacting this chapter to supplement, not
supersede or replace, the requirements of the Illinois environmental protection
act. (Ord. TO-92-1, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. SWO-2001-3, 9-18-2001)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
ROADS AND RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
4-1-1: Work Involving Road District Roads And Rights Of Way
4-1-2: Posting Notices On Utility Poles
4-1-3: Driveway Permits Required
4-1-4: Access To Township Roads; Damage
4-1-5: Penalties; Disconnection Of Utility Services
4-1-6:   Unscheduled Bus Stops
4-1-1: WORK INVOLVING ROAD DISTRICT ROADS AND RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   Construction Permits Required:
      1.   No person shall construct, alter, remove, add to, diminish or
demolish any part or portion of any township road district road or right of way
or commence to construct, alter, remove, add to, diminish or demolish any part
or portion of any township road district road or right of way without first
having obtained a construction permit therefor, issued and signed by the
highway commissioner or an authorized representative.
      2.   No person that performs construction or other work on private
property which connects, touches or enters onto or off of township road
district roads or rights of way shall connect, touch or enter onto or off of
any part or portion of any township road district road or right of way without
first having obtained a construction permit therefor, issued and signed by the
highway commissioner or an authorized representative.
   B.   Applications For Permits: Application for a permit shall be in writing
on the form prescribed by the highway commissioner. Such application shall
briefly describe the proposed work and shall contain such information,
drawings, plans and specifications as may be reasonably required by the highway
commissioner to assess such proposed work. Application shall be made by the
owner or lessee or agent of either, or the architect, engineer or builder
employed in connection with the proposed work. Such application shall contain
the full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner or lessee or
agent of either and if the applicant is a corporate body, of its responsible
officers. Such application, when signed by the highway commissioner, may serve
as a permit hereunder.
   C.   Permit Fees: There shall be no fees for permits required by this
section. A surety bond or security deposit shall be posted if required by the
highway commissioner to guarantee proper performance of the work and
restoration of the road or right of way.
   D.   Inspections: The highway commissioner shall have authority to inspect
any work performed on or to any township road or right of way or any portion
thereof. If he finds, after inspection, that the work performed does not meet
the construction standards applicable to township roads, he may order the work
stopped and reperformed in accordance with such standards. (Ord., 1-8-1985;
amd. 1992 Code; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
4-1-2: POSTING NOTICES ON UTILITY POLES:
   A.   Posting Notices Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and illegal to post or
place in any manner whatsoever any political, election or any kind of notices
whatsoever upon any and all utility poles within the unincorporated area of
Leyden Township.
   B.   Enforcement: The highway commissioner and town supervisor are hereby
authorized to prosecute both criminally and civilly the violators of this
section and to make complaint through lawful authority against said violators
for prosecution according to law.
   C.   Nonliability Of Enforcing Officers: The highway commissioner and
supervisor shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action
brought by any person allegedly aggrieved by their action under this section or
brought similarly by any other person and if they, or any of them, are so held
personally liable that they be reimbursed, indemnified and held harmless by the
corporate fund, save for the highway commissioner, who shall be similarly held
harmless by the road and bridge fund. (Ord., 4-25-1978)
4-1-3: DRIVEWAY PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall construct, reconstruct, remove or resurface (exclusive
of seal coating) a driveway which provides access from public or private
property to a township roadway without first having applied for and obtained a
permit from the highway commissioner. The application for a driveway permit
shall be made on a form supplied by the highway commissioner, signed by the
property owner and accompanied by the following:
      1.   A drawing of the driveway which includes measurements for said
driveway, the dimensions for the driveway at the property line and at the
street line, and the location of the driveway on the property to be served.
      2.   A current plat of survey for the property.
      3.   The name and address of the owner of the property to be served by
the driveway and of the contractor that will be constructing the driveway.
      4.   For commercial driveways, a scaled drawing depicting the cross
section of the proposed driveway construction detailing and the construction
materials to be used and the thickness of each layer of material. For
residential driveways, the application shall include a written description of
construction materials to be used and the thickness of each layer of material.
For purposes of this section, driveways serving residential buildings with
three (3) or more dwelling units shall be considered commercial driveways.
      5.   All driveways shall make a smooth transition from the property line
to the edge of pavement of the township road with a slope not greater than one-
half inch (1/2") for each twelve inches (12") in any direction, unless a
variance to this specification is requested in the permit application and
granted by the highway commissioner.
   B.   The fee for a residential driveway permit shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). The fee for a commercial driveway permit shall be three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00), plus two dollars ($2.00) for each linear foot of applicant's
drive area that abuts the right of way at the property line, excepting the
first thirty feet (30') of applicant's drive that abuts the right of way. No
permit fee is required for removal of a driveway.
   C.   Applicants for a residential driveway permit shall deposit a cash
performance bond of three hundred dollars ($300.00) with the highway
commissioner to guarantee compliance with this section and the highway
commissioner's driveway and drainage regulations. A cash performance bond of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be required by the highway
commissioner as a condition to the issuance of a residential driveway permit
and/or the opening of a driveway if parkway encroachments must be removed or
parkway restoration must be performed.
   D.   Applicants for a commercial driveway permit shall deposit a cash
performance bond of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to guarantee compliance with this
section and the highway commissioner's driveway and drainage regulations. The
highway commissioner may require a cash performance bond in excess of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if the highway commissioner determines that an
additional performance guarantee is required due to the complexity or scope of
the proposed work, the foreseeable impact of the work on township facilities or
other public property, or the probable cost of restoring the pavement, parkway
and drainage facilities and functions upon completion of the work could exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   E.   The highway commissioner may require that a culvert or other drainage
device be installed, repaired or replaced in conjunction with the construction
or removal of the driveway.
   F.   No driveway authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this section may
be opened and made available for access to a township road until the township
parkway adjacent to the property served by the driveway has been restored to
the standards specified by the Highway Commissioner upon issuance of the
driveway permit. Unless the Highway Commissioner specifies different standards
as part of a driveway permit, the township parkway shall be restored with open
ditch and grass providing positive drainage, and with a gravel shoulder of not
more than twenty-four inches (24") from the edge of pavement.
   G.   Driveway permits will not be issued until all township code violations
affecting the property served by the driveway have been corrected, or the owner
has agreed to correct the violation as a condition to the issuance of the
permit and/or the opening of the driveway.
   H.   The permit applicant and the owner of the property served by the
proposed driveway are jointly and severally responsible for complying with the
requirements of this section.
   I.   Any cash performance bond deposited with the highway commissioner under
this section is subject to being refunded to the permittee upon the permittee's
written application to the highway commissioner within six (6) months after
completion of the permitted work, or expiration of the driveway permit, but
only if the permittee has corrected all township code violations affecting the
property served by the driveway, and only if the work performed pursuant to the
permit has been completed in conformance with all permit conditions and
standards specified by the highway commissioner. Failure to submit a written
request for refund of a driveway permit performance guarantee within six (6)
months after completion of such work or expiration of such permit shall result
in the deposit being forfeited to and retained by the road district general
fund. (Ord. TO-2011-6, 5-10-2011; amd. Ord. TO-2012-4, 3-13-2012; Ord. HO-2021-
4, 9-14-2021; Ord. HO-2021-5, 10-12-2021)
4-1-4: ACCESS TO TOWNSHIP ROADS; DAMAGE:
   A.   Crossing Parkway Prohibited: No person may drive, operate or permit any
motorized vehicle, trailer, or other such equipment to enter a property from a
township road or to access a township road from a property except by means of
an improved driveway meeting the requirements of section
4-1-3 of this chapter or of section
4-3-1 of this title.
   B.   Exceptions: A motor vehicle, trailer, or other such equipment may be
operated across the parkway of a township road under the following
circumstances:
      1.   For purposes of construction of a principal or accessory structure
on the property adjacent to and abutting such point of access when such
construction is authorized by a building permit issued by the governmental
entity with building jurisdiction of the property; provided, however, that such
access shall be subject to the requirements of the highway commissioner for: a)
temporary access driveways; b) protecting township roads, sewers, water mains
and drainage facilities; and c) the restoration of the township parkway upon
completion of the construction.
      2.   When authorized by a temporary permit issued by the highway
commissioner.
   C.   Damage To Parkway: It shall be a violation of this section for any
person to knowingly, recklessly or negligently damage or injure the township
parkway, or public property located within the township parkway. (Ord. TO-2009-
4, 9-8-2009)
4-1-5: PENALTIES; DISCONNECTION OF UTILITY SERVICES:
   A.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential properties and three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for commercial properties for each offense and each
day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
   B.   Payment of Penalties: Penalties imposed for violations of this chapter,
as provided in subsection
4-1-5.A, above, and not paid within thirty (30) days of the imposition of such
penalties, shall be included and billed as part of the Town's periodic bill for
sewer and water utility service to the subject property, and shall be paid at
the town hall within fifteen (15) days after the billing date. The owner of the
subject property, and any nonowner that is the occupant or the lessee thereof,
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the penalties imposed herein.
   C.   Disconnection Of Utility Service For Failure To Pay Penalties: If the
owner, occupant or lessee has not paid any penalties imposed for a violation of
this chapter within thirty (30) days of the date such penalties are imposed,
utility service to the subject property may be disconnected by the
Superintendent of the Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System of the Town of
Leyden in accordance with the procedures set forth in section
5-5-11 of this Code. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. TO-2009-4, 9-8-2009; Ord. HO-2020-2,
7-7-2020; Ord. HO-2021-4, 9-14-2021; Ord. HO-2021-5, 10-12-2021)
4-1-6:   UNSCHEDULED BUS STOPS:
   A.   Definitions: The terms used in this section shall be defined as
follows:
 
APPLICATION: A request for approval to make a bus stop in the district on a
             form to be provided by the commissioner.
APPROVAL:    A written notice signed by the commissioner that approves an
             application.
 
 
                             Any type of motor vehicle that is designed to
BUS:                         carry, or is actually carrying, more than ten (10)
                             individuals.
COMMISSIONER:                The highway commissioner of the district.
DISTRICT:                    The Leyden Township Road District.
                             Bus service that operates trips involving the
                             dropping off of passengers in the district on a
REGULARLY SCHEDULED SERVICE: predictable and recurring basis, following a
                             schedule that is published in advance and
                             available to the general public, and provides
                             service in exchange for paying a fare.
                             Any location in the district where individuals are
                             dropped off by a bus that originated from a
UNSCHEDULED BUS STOP:        location outside of Cook County, Illinois that is
                             not providing regularly scheduled service and not
                             operating pursuant to the written approval of the
                             commissioner.
 
   B.   Application For Unscheduled Bus Stop:
      1.   No Unscheduled Bus Stop: It shall be a violation of this section for
the owner, operator, or driver of any bus to make an unscheduled bus stop for
the purpose of dropping off passengers in the district.
      2.   Application: The owner, operator, or driver of any bus that is not
providing regularly scheduled service that desires to make a bus stop to drop
off passengers in the district shall file an application with the commissioner.
The application shall be submitted to the commissioner at least five (5)
calendar days prior to the date of the proposed drop-off date. The Application
shall include and provide the following information:
         a.   The full name, full address, and telephone numbers of the owner,
operator, and driver of the bus.
         b.   The full name, full address, mobile and landline telephone
numbers of the entity or individuals that has either directed, paid for, or
financed the transport of persons to be dropped off in the district by the bus.
         c.   The full name of all persons and identifications of the persons
who are proposed to be dropped-off in the district by the bus.
         d.   The name, address, or location in the district that the bus
proposes to drop off passengers.
         e.   The date and time at which the bus passengers will be dropped off
in the district, which shall be from eight (8:00) A.M. to five (5:00) P.M. on
Monday through Friday, excluding any district holidays.
         f.   The name and address of all locations form which the passengers
are being picked up for transport to the district.
         g.   The full name, full address, telephone numbers of all entities or
individuals that shall be present in the district to meet the bus and receive
the passengers when they are dropped off.
         h.   A detailed plan identifying how the individuals being dropped off
will be cared for, housed, and fed, either temporarily or permanently, upon
being dropped off in the district. The plan shall include the full names, full
addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons that will be present at the
date and time of the drop-off and responsible for the care, housing and feeding
of the passengers. The plan shall be signed by the entity that agrees to be
responsible for the care of the individuals and at least one (1) additional
individual that will be present to receive the passengers and responsible for
their care. The entity and the individual that will be present to receive the
passengers and be responsible for their care shall each by their signature
certify that they will be responsible for providing the actions detailed in the
plan.
      3.   Application Approval: The commissioner shall review an application
to verify its accuracy, completeness, timeliness, and veracity. The
commissioner shall approve or deny the application in writing within three (3)
calendar days upon receipt of the application. (Ord. TO 2024-1, 1-9-2024; amd.
Ord. HO-2024-1, 1-9-2024)
CHAPTER 2
TOWNSHIP PARKS
(Rep. by Ord. TO-2021-11, 10-12-2021)
CHAPTER 3
UNPERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Encroachments Prohibited In District Roads And Rights Of Way
4-3-2: Notice To Remove Unpermitted Encroachments; Violations
4-3-3: Removal Of Unpermitted Encroachments Upon Sale Of Abutting Property
4-3-4: Payment Of Penalties/Disconnection Of Utility Service
4-3-1: ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED IN DISTRICT ROADS AND RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   No person shall pave, grade, improve, stone, designate, delineate or
otherwise prepare or use any portion of any township road district road right
of way or parkway for parking of any private motor vehicle, for storage of
private property or for any other structure, improvement or obstruction which
are collectively referred to herein as "unpermitted encroachments", except the
following permitted encroachments.
   B.   The following structures and improvements are permitted encroachments
in the parkway of township roads:
      1.   One driveway per buildable lot having a width at the property line
of not more than twenty feet (20'), with a maximum width at the street line of
not more than twenty six feet (26') inclusive of a maximum of three foot (3')
flares at the street line. The driveway may be increased to a maximum width of
thirty feet (30'), with a maximum width at the street line of not more than
thirty six feet (36') inclusive of a maximum of three foot (3') flares at the
street line when:
         a.   A buildable lot abuts two (2) township roads (a corner lot);
         b.   The driveway services a permanent garage structure;
         c.   The driveway is not wider than the garage elevation that provides
vehicle traffic to the garage; and
         d.   The driveway width does not exceed the dimension calculated from
the far left and far right overhead doorjambs, plus an additional five feet
(5') of driveway total width beyond such dimension with a maximum of not more
than three feet (3') of such additional width on one side of either doorjamb.
      2.   A mailbox complying with U.S. postal service regulations serving the
abutting property.
      3.   Utility services.
      4.   Light posts.
      5.   Official regulatory traffic signs.
      6.   Sidewalks. (Ord. TO-2009-4, 9-8-2009)
   C.   It is the duty of any person, firm or corporation that owns, manages,
uses or controls any area within a district road, right of way or parkway that
has been improved, paved, designated, maintained or used for storage or parking
of motor vehicles or other unpermitted encroachments, to cease such use, to
remove all improvements, paving, stone, timbers or other materials comprising
such unpermitted encroachments from the district road right of way, and to
restore the right of way, including, but not limited to, drainage ditches and
culverts within the right of way, to the right of way specifications
established by the highway commissioner. (Ord. TO-2005-4, 10-12-2005)
4-3-2: NOTICE TO REMOVE UNPERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It is the duty of any person, firm or entity that installs, improves,
maintains or uses a parking space or other unpermitted encroachment in a
township road right of way or parkway in violation of section
4-3-1 of this chapter, within fourteen (14) days after the delivery of written
notice of violation from the highway commissioner, to: 1) remove all such
improvements, paving, stone, timbers or other materials comprising such
unpermitted encroachment from the district road right of way; and 2) restore
the right of way, including drainage ditches and culverts, to the right of way
specifications established by the highway commissioner.
   B.   Failure to comply with the requirements of subsection A of this section
following notice from the Highway Commissioner is a violation of this section.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall
be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential properties and three hundred
dollars ($300.00) for commercial properties for each offense. A new offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that such offense exists or continues.
(Ord. TO-2005-4, 10-12-2005; amd. Ord. HO-2021-4, 9-14-2021; Ord. HO-2021-5,
10-12-2021)
4-3-3: REMOVAL OF UNPERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS UPON SALE OF ABUTTING PROPERTY:
   A.   Any person, firm or entity that installs, improves, maintains or uses a
parking space or other unpermitted encroachment in a township road right of way
or parkway in violation of section
4-3-1 of this chapter that also owns abutting property that benefits from the
maintenance and use of such a parking space or other unpermitted encroachment
shall, prior to selling or offering to sell such benefiting property, remove
all such improvements, paving, stone, timbers or other materials comprising the
unpermitted encroachment from the district road right of way and shall restore
the right of way, including, but not limited to, drainage ditches and culverts
within the right of way, to the right of way specifications established by the
highway commissioner.
   B.   The highway commissioner shall remove all parking spaces or other
unpermitted encroachments located within the district road right of way
abutting any private property that uses or benefits from such improvements
whenever such benefiting property is placed on the market for sale. Benefiting
property is deemed to have been placed on the market for sale whenever any of
the following events occur:
      1.   The benefiting property is listed in the multiple listing service
(MLS) as being for sale;
      2.   A property "For Sale" sign is displayed on the benefiting property;
      3.   The benefiting property is offered for sale privately to interested
persons;
      4.   Legal or beneficial title to the benefiting property is transferred;
      5.   The identity of the owner for utility service purposes is changed.
   C.   Restoration fees for work performed by the Town of Leyden shall be
based on square footage as follows:
      1.   Zero to seventy five (0-75) square feet: Two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00);
      2.   Seventy six to two hundred fifty (76-250) square feet: Five hundred
dollars ($500.00);
      3.   Two hundred fifty one to four hundred ninety nine (251-499) square
feet: Seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00);
      4.   Five hundred (500) or more square feet: One thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   D.   Payments: Restoration payments shall be placed on the final water bill
for the restored property.
   E.   Failure to remove all such improvements, paving, stone, timbers or
other materials comprising such unpermitted encroachments from the township
road right-of-way as required by subsection A of this section is a violation of
this section. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
section shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential properties and
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for commercial properties for each offense. A
new offense shall be deemed committed on each day that such offense exists or
continues. (Ord. TO-2005-4, 10-12-2005; amd. Ord. HO-2021-4, 9-14-2021; Ord.
HO-2021-5, 10-12-2021)
4-3-4: PAYMENT OF PENALTIES/DISCONNECTION OF UTILITY SERVICE:
   A.   Payment of Penalties: Penalties imposed for violations of this chapter
and not paid within thirty (30) days of the imposition of such penalties, shall
be included and billed as part of the Town's periodic bill for sewer and water
utility service to the subject property, and shall be paid at the town hall
within fifteen (15) days after the billing date. The owner of the subject
property, and any nonowner that is the occupant or the lessee thereof, shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay the penalties imposed herein.
   B.   Disconnection Of Utility Service For Failure To Pay Penalties: If the
owner, occupant or lessee has not paid any penalties imposed for a violation of
this chapter within thirty (30) days of the date such penalties are imposed,
utility service to the subject property may be disconnected by the
Superintendent of the Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System of the Town of
Leyden in accordance with the procedures set forth in section
5-5-11 of this Code. (Ord. HO-2020-2, 7-7-2020)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
(Rep. by Ord. TO-2021-11, 10-12-2021)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Parking Regulated
4-5-3: Official Traffic Signs
4-5-4: Violations And Penalties
4-5-5: Vehicle Weight Restriction On Residential Streets
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
   Unless otherwise stated herein, the words and phrases used in this chapter
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the Illinois vehicle
code 1 .
   IVC: Shall mean, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
Illinois vehicle code 2 , as now or hereafter amended.
   PARKWAY: That portion of a street or highway exclusive of the roadway and
shoulder. (Ord. TO-2011-2, 3-8-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
4-5-2: PARKING REGULATED:
A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
places:
   1.   On a sidewalk or parkway.
   2.   Within an intersection.
   3.   On a crosswalk.
   4.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than twelve feet (12').
   5.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   6.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   7.   In a fire lane.
B.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall stand or park a vehicle on the following highways or
portions thereof:
   1.   Reserved.
C.   No person shall stop, stand, park, or abandon a vehicle upon any roadway,
highway, parkway, or public property while displaying the vehicle for sale or
selling any merchandise from the vehicle, except where authorized in writing by
the Town Supervisor or the Highway Commissioner.
(Ord. TO-2011-2, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. TO-2023-4, 9-12-2023; Ord. HO-2023-4, 9-
12-2023)
4-5-3: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS:
   A.   Subject to approval of the county superintendent of highways, the
highway commissioner may place, erect and maintain official traffic signs on
township roads and highways as authorized by the IVC or by the Illinois highway
code 1 . Such signs shall comply with the provisions of the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to remove or knowingly possess any
traffic control device, sign or barrier erected on any township highway, or to
deface or injure the same, except such persons as are duly authorized to do so.
(Ord. TO-2011-2, 3-8-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
4-5-4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   B.   The parking or standing offenses described in any citation issued
pursuant to this chapter may be settled, compromised and paid within the time
specified in the citation for an amount not less than twenty dollars ($20.00).
   C.   Failure to pay the compromise penalty assessed pursuant to subsection B
of this section within thirty (30) days shall result in an increase of said
compromise penalty to thirty dollars ($30.00).
   D.   In the event that the person to whom a citation is issued pursuant to
this chapter fails to settle and pay the compromise penalty amount within the
time prescribed in this section, a notice to appear or uniform traffic
complaint may be issued to said offender for the violation and said person
shall be subject to the general penalty set forth in this section. (Ord. TO-
2011-2, 3-8-2011)
4-5-5: VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTION ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS:
   A.   Weight Restriction: Except for public works vehicles and other vehicles
authorized to do so by the Leyden Township, on all residential streets under
the jurisdiction of Leyden Township, the gross weight of any type of motor
vehicle, including the weight of the vehicle and its maximum loads, shall not
exceed ten thousand (10,000) pounds, except, when such a vehicle is making a
local delivery and/or pickup. When making such delivery and/or pickup, the
vehicle shall proceed to its destination by the shortest possible route. At no
time, other than when making a delivery and/or pickup, shall any such vehicle
park on a residential street.
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating this Section shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense. (Ord. HO-2022-4, 4-12-2022)
CHAPTER 6
STANDARDS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES
IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
4-6-1: Purpose And Scope
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Annual Registration Required
4-6-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
4-6-5: Action On Permit Applications
4-6-6: Effect Of Permit
4-6-7: Revised Permit Drawings
4-6-8: Insurance
4-6-9: Indemnification
4-6-10: Security
4-6-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
4-6-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
4-6-13: General Construction Standards
4-6-14: Traffic Control
4-6-15: Location Of Facilities
4-6-16: Construction Methods And Materials
4-6-17: Vegetation Control
4-6-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
4-6-19: Cleanup And Restoration
4-6-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
4-6-21: Variances
4-6-22: Right To Appeal
4-6-23: Penalties
4-6-24: Enforcement
4-6-25: Severability
4-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the Township's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Township
rights-of-way and the Township as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this chapter, Leyden Township intends to exercise
its authority over the rights-of-way in Leyden Township and, in particular, the
use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without
limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of Leyden
Township's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way
or public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize Leyden Township's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   C.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Township. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement. This chapter shall not apply to any facilities
constructed by others to be owned by the Township.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Township, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Township
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the Township enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the Township may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this chapter.
   E.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Township and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Township, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   F.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith to
the extent of such conflict.
   G.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
   H.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The Township shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the Township so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Township to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code section 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
   ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
   ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE: Any existing pole or other structure within
the public right-of-way that can be used to support an antenna and is not a
utility pole or Township-owned infrastructure.
   ANTENNA: Any equipment, device, or similar item designed for transmitting
signals to a receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data, or
other signals from satellites or other sources.
   APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non- recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE: The Town Code of Leyden Township and ordinances enacted by Leyden
Township.
   CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of- way lines
of a right-of-way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes an adverse effect on the ability of
persons, other companies with facilities in the right-of-way, or vehicles to
use the right-of-way for its intended use or which may damage, destroy or
injure vegetation in the right-of-way. Such work shall include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, but shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a road.
   EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right- of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER: The Township Engineer or designee.
   EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications
and video cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables,
vaults, boxes, cabinets and other equipment enclosures, power pedestals and
appurtenances thereto located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way under this chapter, but excepting therefrom all
structures, devices, objects or materials owned by the Township.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as, but not limited to, vaults, boxes, cabinets,
equipment enclosures, antennas, transformers, pumps, or meter stations.
   FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where access to the land is precluded by control of access on
the highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Highway Commissioner or the Township Engineer to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or
regulation.
   HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicular traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER: The Highway Commissioner of Leyden Township or
designee.
   HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Illinois Commerce Commission (the
"ICC") pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
   JULIE: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators Utility
Notification Program.
   JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
roads.
   OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of- way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
sections
4-6-4 and
4-6-5 of this chapter.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE: The internal force acting radically against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the
Township. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, State or Federal level.
   RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for roadway or utility purposes, including utility easements in
which the Township has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit
the location of facilities other than those of the Township. "Right-of-way"
shall not include any real or personal Township property that is not
specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include Township
buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY: That part of the right-of-way that includes the pavement and
shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
4-6-10 of this chapter.
   SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio service,
paging service or any other form of commercial mobile or portable one-way or
two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information
by electronic or similar means, between or among points of wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. For purposes
of this definition, “private line” means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive
service for a single customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations. “Telecommunications” shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. “Telecommunications” shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided to the ultimate retail consumer who
originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. “Telecommunications”
shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as
defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC sections 521 and
following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services
subject to an open video system fee payable to the Township through an open
video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission
(47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TOWNSHIP: Leyden Township, Cook County, Illinois.
   TOWNSHIP-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Infrastructure in the public right-of-way
within the Township that is owned, operated or maintained by the Township,
including, without limitation, streetlights, traffic signals, towers,
structures or buildings.
   TOWNSHIP'S DESIGN MANUAL: Leyden Township's construction specifications and
requirements embodied in a booklet or manual.
   TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201
(v).
   WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. SWO-2018-6,
8-14-2018; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
4-6-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Township shall register
on January 1 of each year with Highway Commissioner, or designee, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone, e-mail address and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf
of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's
facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in section
4-6-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. SWO-
2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any
Township right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a
new facility, 3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the right- of-way, without
first filing an application with the Highway Commissioner and obtaining a
permit from the Township therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Township and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Township may designate. Duplicate copies
shall be submitted to the Township Engineer. The applicant may designate those
portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by
clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the
application;
      4.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all general contractors and subcontractors performing any work
under the permit for which application is made;
      5.   The name of, and a 24-hour emergency contact telephone number (not a
voice mail or a recording) for at least one person with primary responsibility
for the work under the permit for which application is made;
      6.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      7.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Township:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Township and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the Township finds that additional information or
assurances are needed;
      8.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      9.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
4-6-8 of this chapter;
      10.   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section
4-6-10 of this chapter;
      11.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
4-6-21 of this chapter); and
      12.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Township.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of new electric power, communications,
telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that applicant has elected to obtain, has been
issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied and provide copies of IEPA permits;
`      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, or other local or State entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied and provide copies of IEPA permits;
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed;
      6.   In the case of a small wireless facility, compliance with the
Township regulations implementing the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the Township within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) per one
hundred (100) linear feet of the facility within Township right-of-way, or a
minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No application fee is required to be
paid by any electricity utility that is paying the Municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Township Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by Township Engineer
and the Highway Commissioner within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Township Engineer or Highway
Commissioner shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the Township Engineer and Highway Commissioner are satisfied that
the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Highway
Commissioner shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer or Highway Commissioner that the
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Additional Township Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Township
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Township not less than ten (10) days prior
to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Highway
Commissioner shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the Highway Commissioner fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the Township by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter. For purposes of determining when the ten (10) or twenty five (25)
day period specified in this subsection begins, service of notice to the
Township shall be considered to have occurred on the date that the Township has
received all of the documentation required to be submitted under subsection B1
of this section.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Township, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to section
4-6-4 of this chapter, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
Township an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Additional Township Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after the submission to the Township, unless otherwise acted upon the Township,
provided the holder has complied with all applicable Township codes, ordinances
and regulations.
   D.   Small Wireless Facilities: Notwithstanding the foregoing, applications
for small wireless facilities shall be made and processed pursuant to the
Township regulations implementing the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
(Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the Township authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on Township rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   B.   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless the construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   C.   Pre-Construction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be
held at a date, time and place designated by the Township with such Township
representatives in attendance as the Township deems necessary. The meeting
shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit and special
considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without
limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and
their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
   D.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
Township does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements
of the Township and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Township within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with section
4-6-21 of this chapter. If the Township denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the Township, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
      If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors
and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the Township within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the Township. In lieu of a
copy of the policy, a certificate indicating that the insurance policies
required by this section have been obtained and are in force, may be submitted
with the approval of the Highway Commissioner.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
   It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until ten (10) days after receipt by the
Township, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Township's Highway Commissioner of such intent
to cancel or not to renew.
   Within seven (7) days after receipt by the Township of said notice, and in
no event later than three (3) days prior to said cancellation, the utility
shall obtain and furnish to the Township evidence of replacement insurance
policies meeting the requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the Township evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private
self-insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the Township and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the utility in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Township and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, and costs
of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of
or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the Township, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Township occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Township issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Township may pay or incur by reason of any action
or non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform, that the Township must perform itself, or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Township from the permittee pursuant
to this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Township in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Township, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Township. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Township and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Township of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location within Cook, McHenry, Lake, Kane, or DuPage
Counties, Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Township, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the Township estimates are likely to be incurred if
the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the Township, with each phase consisting of construction of
facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Township may, in
the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount
of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under
the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be
equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions
of this subsection C for any single phase. The Security Fund for each
construction project will be ten dollars ($10.00) per linear foot of the
project, or the company may post a yearly cash retainer or letter of credit for
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) (replenished yearly), or a bond for an
amount determined by the Township, for all construction work to be undertaken
that year.
   D.   Withdrawals: The Township, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the Township for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the Township for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Township has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Township
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Township that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the
Township, upon written request for said withdrawal to the Township, provided
that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum
balance required in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Township for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Township to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Township as a result of said revocation,
provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Township with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Township, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Township may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Township shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to
any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. SWO-2018-
6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Township Right To Revoke Permit: The Township may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Township shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Township, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the Township with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Township, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Township within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation;
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the Township providing written proof of such
removal to the Township within ten (10) days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation.
      The Township may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Township Correction And Notice: If the deficiency creates an imminent
threat to life, health or safety, the Township may correct the deficiency
immediately upon verbal notice by the Township to permittee.
   E.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Township may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
   F.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the Township or
its designee may, at the option of the Township: 1) correct the deficiencies;
2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non- compliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Township. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the Township for all costs of removal. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Township no less
than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Township's right-
of- way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. SWO-2018-
6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in any applicable ordinances, rules, regulations or manuals of the
Township and in the following IDOT publications:
      1.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      2.   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      3.   Highway Design Manual;
      4.   Highway Standards Manual;
      5.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      6.   Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code section 545);
      7.   Flagger's Handbook;
      8.   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations; and
      9.   Public Improvements Standards Manual.
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Township Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Township Engineer shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The Township's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code. The Township Highway Commissioner may require that
additional traffic protection measures be taken, if because of the location
where the work is to be performed or because of anticipated high traffic
volumes, he determines additional traffic protection measures are warranted.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable Federal, State, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The Highway
Commissioner may prohibit work from being performed at specified hours or on
specified days where higher than usual traffic volumes are anticipated.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section 4-6-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the Township. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With Township Facilities: No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Township Engineer and the Highway
Commissioner determine that the proposed location will require the relocation
or displacement of any of the Township's utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the Township's utility
facilities.
      2.   Rights-Of-Way And Adjacent Lands: Any utility facility shall be
located in the right-of-way so as to cause only minimum interference with the
use of the public right-of-way and public places, and to cause only minimum
possible interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin the public right-of-way and public places.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      5.   Cooperation: Any utility seeking to place a facility in the Township
shall comply with the Township's reasonable requests to place facilities on
public property where possible, and shall comply with Township direction with
respect to the location and screening of equipment and facilities.
      6.   Size Of Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest
suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets
then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular
application.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Rights-Of-Way:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way only if overhead utility facilities already
exist in the area of the right-of-way where the overhead parallel facility is
proposed to be located and if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line
and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6m) behind the face of the
curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3m) of the right-of-way or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way only if approved by the Highway
Commissioner and:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line, and five feet (5') (1.5m) from any water main;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
roadway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as approved by the Highway Commissioner and any
above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
         d.   Electric service feeds on or within aerial streets shall be
underground.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Roadways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Township roadways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadway
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be
located in culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable,
unless otherwise approved by the Township.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a right-of-way only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3m) of the right- of-
way line and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a right-of-way only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The Township may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR 192.707).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Township
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way (a
public utility easement, for example) that are not highways, rather than within
particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The Township may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      2.   The Township may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   F.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The Township may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees, vegetation or terrain
features visible to the right-of-way user or adjacent residents and property
owners or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed by the
right-of-way.
   G.   Above Ground Facilities: Above ground facilities may be installed only
if:
      1.   Existing facilities in the area are located above ground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible as
determined by the Township Engineer; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable - the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
      4.   The above ground facilities installed are located so as to cause
only minimal interference with the use of any right-of-way within which the
facilities are installed and with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who adjoin said right- of-way.
      5.   The smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner for the type of
above ground facility shall be used.
      6.   For purposes of this chapter, a facility shall be considered above
ground if more than ten percent (10%) of the overall height of the facility
measured from the base or bottom support of the facility is located above
ground.
   H.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the roadway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.    Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Township
Engineer and/or Highway Commissioner from the edge of the pavement. Pits for
boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in
advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48)
hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open,
they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be
designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the
boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Township to be preserved shall be bored under or
around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with any applicable
ordinances, rules, regulations or manuals of the Township and the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Township Engineer and/or Highway
Commissioner.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         c.   Tree Preservation: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the Township to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with any applicable ordinances, rules,
regulations or manuals of the Township and with IDOT's "Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfill area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Township Engineer and/or Highway Commissioner, the utility, at
its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the Township Engineer and/or Highway Commissioner.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a roadway only if that portion of the roadway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph is
permitted under section 4-6-21 of this chapter, the following requirements
shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the Township Engineer and/or Highway Commissioner.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Township.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
four (4) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or resurfacing or unless a pavement cut is
necessary for a JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
roadway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Township. Casing pipes shall be installed where required and approved by the
Township Engineer and/or Highway Commissioner.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the roadway.
         c.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         e.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                            Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general)    30 inches (0.8m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 24 inches (0.6m)
Gas or petroleum products                   30 inches (0.8m)
Water line                                  72 inches (1.83m)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage    Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                        protection, as approved by Township
                                            Engineer or Highway Commissioner
      No power or communication line shall be located at a depth of cover
between four feet (4') and seven feet (7') without express approval by the
Township in the permit.
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within Township rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 305 (formerly General Order
160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities,
if otherwise permitted under this chapter, shall use single pole construction
and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make
every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not
be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the Township. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with encasement provided between the ditch
lines or toes of slopes of the roadway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction;
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means; or
         e.   Open trench in a manner approved by Township Engineer and/or
Highway Commissioner.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Township
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 -
Transportation of Natural Gas and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the requirements of
the Township's Design Manual and the current "Standard Specifications for Water
and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') (305mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Township Engineer and/or Highway Commissioner.
With the approval of the Township Engineer and/or Highway Commissioner,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free
area. The housing for ground- mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral
color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the requirements of the Township's Design Manual, and the
applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the
standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior written
approval must be obtained from the Township.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
Township shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Township, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Township Engineer and/or the
Highway Commissioner when emergency work is required to restore vital utility
services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Township or restricted in
accordance with this chapter, the hours of construction are sunrise to sunset.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the Township shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Township will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Township or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act 1 . (Ord. SWO-
2018-6, 8-14-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
4-6-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities - Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with Leyden Township as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right- of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Township will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Township may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Township may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of vegetation controlling chemicals
will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless approved by the Township Engineer
and/or Highway Commissioner. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
Township, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within
the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate Authorities have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Township improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the Township in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Township, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-
way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The Township retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the Township, as the Township may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights-of-way of the Township, the utility shall notify the Township
within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the Township may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Township
Engineer and/or Highway Commissioner determines that such removal will be in
the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that
the Township does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove
it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Township, the abandoning utility
shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion
of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
   Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the
utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
within ten (10) days, and to the satisfaction of the Township. This includes
restoration of all disturbed areas. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be
made using materials and methods approved by the Township Engineer and/or
Highway Commissioner. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which
existed prior to the commencement of the project. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the Township and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the roadway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, immediately, notify the Cook
County Sheriff's Department of the situation. This notification shall include a
description of the problem, work being undertaken, and what steps have been
taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make
the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the Cook County Sheriff's Department shall
be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the Highway
Commissioner a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Highway
Commissioner as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The Township Board shall decide whether a
variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Township Board may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Township Board may require the utility requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-22: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
   Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination,
including denial of a variance, made by the Highway Commissioner under the
provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Township
Administrator. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the
Township Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The Township Administrator shall timely
decide the appeal. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-23: PENALTIES:
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Township
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
Township's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit related cost appointment of the Township. Sanctions may be imposed upon
a utility who does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-
2018)
4-6-24: ENFORCEMENT:
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Township may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
4-6-25: SEVERABILITY:
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. SWO-2018-6, 8-14-2018)
CHAPTER 7
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose And Scope
4-7-2: Definitions
4-7-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
4-7-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
4-7-5: Completeness Of Application/Tolling Of Time
4-7-6: Action On Permit Applications
4-7-7: Effect Of Permit
4-7-8: Permit Suspension And Revocation
4-7-9: Pole Attachment Agreement
4-7-10: Collocation Requirements And Conditions
4-7-11: Collocation Completion Deadline
4-7-12: Aerial Facilities
4-7-13: Annual Recurring Rate/Rental Fee
4-7-14: Construction; Maintenance; Safety; Inspection; And Restoration
4-7-15: Insurance
4-7-16: Indemnification
4-7-17: Security
4-7-18: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
4-7-19: Removal, Relocation Or Abandonment
4-7-20: Exceptions To Applicability Of This Chapter
4-7-21: Penalties
4-7-22: Enforcement
4-7-23: Dispute Resolution
4-7-24: Severability
4-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Township's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by Cook County as commercial or industrial
zoning districts, in a manner not inconsistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-0585).
   B.   Intent:
      1.   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, this chapter does
not limit the applicability of the provisions of chapter 6, "Standards For The
Construction Of Utility Facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way", of this title
to the location and installation of small wireless facilities within the
Township. If the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of chapter 6 of
this title, are in conflict, this chapter applies and controls.
      2.   In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the wireless provider shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible
without violating Federal or State laws or regulations. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-
2018)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed
location pursuant to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) authorization, for
the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled information
services. The antenna does not include an unintentional radiator, mobile
station or device.
   APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or Township amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT: Any person or entity that submits an application and the agents,
employees and contractors of such person or entity.
   APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Township for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities at a specified location, and a
request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such
collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(43), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522
(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153
(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51),
as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE: A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section
VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the
Township Board pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements
of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by
the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order
or Township ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
   PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Township to perform an
action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE: A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: An area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Township-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   STEALTH DESIGN: A method of camouflaging any tower, antenna, wireless
facilities, or other ancillary supporting communications facility, including,
but not limited to, supporting electrical, optical, or mechanical, or other
equipment, which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses and which is
visually and aurally unobtrusive. Stealth design may include a repurposed
structure.
   TOWNSHIP UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Township in a
public right-of-way.
   UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications, and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
"Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless facility"
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which
the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or
fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles
or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to
or directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Township.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord. TO-2022-2, 3-8-2022)
4-7-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   Small wireless facilities are permitted uses in Township rights- of-way and
areas zoned commercial and industrial by Cook County. Applications for permits
to collocate small wireless facilities on said property shall be subject to
administrative review as set forth in this chapter and, if applicable, approval
of any request for height exceptions or other variances. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-
14-2018)
4-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No small wireless facility shall collocate on a
utility pole or similar structure or other wireless support structure without
first filing an application with the Highway Commissioner and obtaining one or
more permits from the Township therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Township and shall be filed
with the Highway Commissioner in such number of duplicate copies as the
Township may designate. Duplicate copies shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer. Applicants shall submit applications, the supporting information, and
notices to the Township to the Highway Commissioner by personal delivery, by
regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means,
i.e., overnight mail, or by e-mail.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall
provide the following information to the Township, together with the Township’s
permit application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small
wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
      1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed, and a depiction of the completed facility;
      3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      6.   Certification that the collocation complies with all of the
collocation requirements and conditions set forth in section
4-7-10 of this chapter, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge;
      7.   In the event the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached
to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Township, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner
of such pole to the proposed collocation; and
      8.   Certification by a radio engineer that new, replacement or modified
small wireless facility operates within all applicable FCC standards.
      9.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Township, but in no event shall the applicant be required to provide more
information to obtain a permit than the Township requires a communications
service provider that is not a wireless provider that requests to attach
facilities to a structure.
   D.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Township, shall be allowed,
at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. If the
consolidated application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
Township has the right to remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which
incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Township may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments and/or revisions to information contained in the permit
application shall be submitted by the applicant in writing to the Highway
Commissioner within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the
amendment and/or revision.
   F.   Application Fees: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter
shall be accompanied by the following non-refundable applicable fees:
      1.   Six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate
a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure;
      2.   Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
facilities, as provided in subsection D of this section; or
      3.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility
addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility
pole or wireless support structure for such collocation.
   G.   Exceptions To Application; Approval Of Permit: The Township shall not
require an application, approval or permit or any fees or other charges from a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      1.   Routine maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Township at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with the requirements of subsection C of this section; or
      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      4.   Notwithstanding subsections G1, G2 and G3 of this section, wireless
providers shall secure a permit to work within rights- of-way for activities
that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures as provided in chapter 6,
"Standards For The Construction Of Utility Facilities In The Public Rights-Of-
Way", of this title.
   H.   Duration Of Permit: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of
not less than five (5) years. The permit shall be renewed for a period of
equivalent durations unless the Township makes a finding that the small
wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the
applicable Town codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in
this chapter. If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act is repealed as
provided in the Act, renewal of permits shall be subject to the applicable Town
Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal of the permit.
(Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord. TO-2022-2, 3-8-2022)
4-7-5: COMPLETENESS OF APPLICATION/TOLLING OF TIME:
   A.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days of receiving an
application, the Township shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant of the status of the application. If the application
is incomplete, the Township shall specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the Township fails to
notify the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information
and the applicable fees specifically enumerated in the Permit Application Form
are submitted to the Highway Commissioner by the applicant.
   B.   Tolling Of Time: The processing deadlines set forth in subsection
4-7-6B of this chapter shall be tolled for the following reasons:
      1.   The application is incomplete and the Township sends notice of such
incompleteness to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the receipt of
the application. The time for processing the application is tolled until the
applicant provides the missing information.
      2.   An express agreement in writing by both the applicant and the
Township to toll the time period for the application.
      3.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-6: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Township Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all of the required documentation, shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer and the Highway Commissioner.
   B.   Application Process: The Township shall process applications as
follows:
      1.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
      2.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless facility shall be processed within ninety (90) days
after the submission of a completed application. If the Township does not
approve or deny the completed application within said ninety (90) days, the
application shall be deemed approved.
         a.   If the applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the Township, in writing,
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five
(75) days after the submission of a completed application.
         b.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
by the Township of the deemed approved notice by the Township.
         c.   The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
Township's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided
under this chapter.
      3.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes
the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure or a
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed
within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a completed
application. If the Township does not approve or deny the completed application
within said one hundred twenty (120) days, the application shall be deemed
approved.
         a.   If the applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the Township, in writing,
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred
five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
         b.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th
day after submission of the completed application or the 10th day after the
receipt by the Township of the deemed approved notice by the Township.
         c.   The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
Township's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided
under this chapter.
   C.   Approval/Denial Of Permit: The Township shall deny any permit
application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
      1.   If the Township makes the determination that applicable codes,
ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation
requirements and conditions set forth in section
4-7-10 of this chapter, require that the existing utility pole or wireless
support structure must be replaced before the requested collocation is
permitted, the approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility
pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's expense. The replacement
of the utility pole or wireless support structure shall be subject to the
provisions set forth in chapter 6, "Standards For The Construction Of Utility
Facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way", of this title.
      2.   The Township shall document the basis for denial of the permit,
including the specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the
denial is based. The documentation shall be sent to the applicant on or before
the day the Township denies the permit application.
      3.   The applicant may submit a revised application once within thirty
(30) days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an
additional application fee. The revised application shall cure the deficiencies
identified by the Township in its written denial of the original application.
The Township shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the applicant's revised application or it is deemed
approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days
of denial of the application, shall trigger the requirement that the applicant
submit a new application with the applicable fees and the recommencement of the
Township's applicable review period.
         a.   If the applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the Township, in writing,
its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved
basis. This notice may be submitted with the revised application.
         b.   Any review of the revised application by the Township shall be
limited to the deficiencies cited by the Township in its denial of the original
application.
         c.   The revised application procedure shall not apply if the cure for
the deficiencies set forth in the denial requires the review of a new location,
new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. (Ord. SWO-2018-
5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-7: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the Township authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter and does not create a property right
or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who
may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   B.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
Township does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements
of the Township and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
   C.   Approval: The approval of the installation, placement, maintenance, or
operation of a small wireless facility pursuant to this chapter does not
authorize the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of any
communications facilities other than small wireless facilities in the right-of-
way. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-8: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Township Right To Revoke Permit: The Township may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons.
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      3.   The wireless provider's placement or maintenance of a small wireless
facility in the public rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to
the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and the wireless
provider fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice
from the Township;
      4.   The wireless provider's failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans;
      5.   A Federal or State authority suspends, denies, or revokes a wireless
provider's certification or license to provide communication services; or
      6.   The wireless provider ceases to use its small wireless facilities in
public rights-of-way and has not complied with subsection
4-7-19C of this chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Township shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Township, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the Township with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Township, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Township within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the small wireless facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Township providing written
proof of such removal to the Township within ten (10) days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation. The Township may, in its discretion, for good
cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Township Correction And Notice: If the deficiency creates an imminent
threat to life, health, or safety, the Township may correct the deficiency
immediately upon verbal notice by the Township to permittee.
   E.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Township may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
   F.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provision of subsection C of this section, the Township or
its designee may, at the option of the Township: 1) correct the deficiencies;
2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non- compliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Township. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the Township for all costs of removal. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-9: POLE ATTACHMENT AGREEMENT:
   Within thirty (30) days after the permit application is approved to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Township
and applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement for the
initial collocation on the Municipal pole. The Township shall be responsible
for providing said agreement. The Township and the applicant shall enter into
supplements to the Master Pole Attachment Agreement for subsequent approved
permits to collocate additional small wireless facilities on the Municipal
utility poles not included in the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
   A.   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Township and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in a right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Township utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, shall remain in
effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Township's utility
poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Township before June 1, 2018,
subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements
entered into on or after June 1, 2018 shall comply with this chapter.
      1.   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Township
on June 1, 2018 may accept the rates, fees and terms set forth in this chapter
for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new
utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the
subject of an application submitted two (2) or more years after June 1, 2018 by
notifying the Township that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The
existing agreement shall remain in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the Township's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted
to the Township before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises
its option under this subsection. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-10: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Public Safety Conditions:
      1.   Reservation Of Space: The Township has the right to reserve space on
Township utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Township's
electric utility uses, or both. The reservation of such space shall not
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Township
reasonably determines that the Township utility pole cannot accommodate both
uses.
      2.   Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies:
         a.   The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
         b.   The wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency's communications equipment.
         c.   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         d.   If a small wireless facility causes interference as set forth in
subsection A2c of this section, and the wireless provider has been given
written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless
provider, at its own expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to
correct and eliminate the interference, including but not limited to, powering
down the small wireless facility and later powering up the small wireless
facility for intermittent testing, if necessary. The wireless provider shall
remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC,
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973, and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
         e.   The Township has the right to terminate the permit for a small
wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in
compliance with the sections of the Code of Federal Regulations set forth in
subsection A2d of this section. Failure to remedy the interference as required
herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   B.   Public Safety Concerns:
      1.   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable Federal,
State and local codes, code provisions, and regulations concerning public
safety. The proposed collocation cannot materially interfere with the
following:
         a.   The safe operation of traffic control equipment;
         b.   Sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or
public safety purposes; and
         c.   Compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, or similar
Federal or State standards and regulations regarding pedestrian access or
movement.
      2.   Additionally, for the safety of electrical utility workers and
members of the public, the small wireless facility shall comply with the
following:
         a.   Small wireless facilities collocated on the same Township pole as
a street light shall be on the same disconnect as the street light;
         b.   Small wireless facilities shall be grounded and otherwise fully
comply with all applicable Electrical Codes;
         c.   Whenever conduit of small wireless facilities crosses telephone
or electric power wires, wires shall be crossed and be maintained in accordance
with the National Electric Code, the National Electric Safety Code and the
"Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electrical Supply and
Communication Lines" established by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of
Standards of the United States in force at the time of the effective date of
this chapter, and as amended from time to time.
   C.   Third-Party Contracts: The wireless provider shall comply with
requirements that are imposed in a contract between the Township and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   D.   Non-Interference With Electric Distribution/Transmission System:
      1.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities
on Township utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole.
      2.   Notwithstanding the above, the antenna and support equipment of the
small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the
Township utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable,
if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving top
of the pole.
   For purposes of this subsection, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code, published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   E.   Compliance With Applicable Codes And Regulations:
      1.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with the
Township's written design standards applicable for decorative utility poles,
stealth structures, concealment and aesthetic requirements set forth in a
Township ordinance, written policy, comprehensive plan or other written design
that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic
landmark or in a historic district.
      2.   Signage: The wireless provider shall comply with any applicable sign
regulations of the Township and/or Cook County's zoning ordinance.
      3.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements set forth in chapter 6, "Standards For The
Construction Of Utility Facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way", of this title.
Any request by the wireless provider for a variance from the applicable spacing
requirements shall be subject to the procedures set forth in section
4-6-21, "Variances", of this title.
      4.   Underground Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with the
provisions set forth in chapter 6 of this title, regulating undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a variance. Any request by a wireless provider for a
variance to install such new utility poles or modify existing utility poles
shall be subject to the procedures set forth in section
4-6-21, "Variance", of this title.
      5.   Sign Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with sign
regulations applicable to public rights-of-way.
   F.   Alternate Placements:
      1.   Existing Utility Poles: Except as provided in this chapter, a
wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities
on an existing specific utility pole or category of existing utility poles or
be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single existing pole.
      2.   New Utility Pole: For an application for the collocation of a small
wireless facility on a new utility pole, the Township may propose that the
small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed
collocation. The applicant shall be required to accept the Township’s proposal
if the applicant has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable
terms and conditions and the alternate location and structure does not impose
technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
         a.   If the applicant refuses a collocation as proposed by the
Township, the applicant shall be required to provide a written certification
describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the
alternate location does not satisfy the criteria set forth in this subsection.
   G.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      1.   New Or Replacement Utility Poles Or Wireless Support Structures: The
height for new or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole that only supports wireless facilities that exists
within the right-of-way on the date the applicant is submitted to the Township,
and is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement
utility pole or wireless support structure and is in the same right-of-way
within the jurisdictional boundary of the Township; provided, however, the
Township may designate which intersecting right-of-way within the three hundred
feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall
control the height limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      2.   Height Exceptions/Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure in excess of the
height limitations set forth above, the applicant may request a variance for
the height limitation pursuant to the procedures, terms and conditions set
forth in section
4-6-21 of this title. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord. TO-2022-2, 3-8-
2022)
4-7-11: COLLOCATION COMPLETION DEADLINE:
   Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit by the Township
unless the Township and the wireless provider agree to extend this time period,
there is a delay caused by make-ready work for a Township utility pole, or
there is a lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete the installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after the issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall
be declared void unless the Township grants an extension in writing to the
wireless provider. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-12: AERIAL FACILITIES:
   A.   A wireless provider shall comply with the process for make- ready work
under 47 USC 224, and its implementing regulations for collocation on Township
utility poles that support aerial facilities used to provide communications
services or electric services.
      1.   The Township shall follow a substantially similar process for make-
ready work, except to the extent that the timing requirements are otherwise set
forth in this chapter.
      2.   The good-faith estimate of the person owning or controlling the
Township utility pole for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to
support the requested collocation shall include Township utility pole
replacement, if necessary.
   B.   If a utility pole does not support aerial facilities used to provide
communication services or electric service, the Township shall provide a good-
faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the Township utility
pole to support the requested collocation, including pole replacement, if
necessary, within ninety (90) days after the receipt of a complete application.
      1.   Make-ready work, including any Township utility pole replacement,
shall be completed within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good-
faith estimate by the applicant at the wireless provider's sole cost and
expense.
      2.   If the Township determines that applicable codes or public safety
regulations require the Township utility pole to be replaced to support the
requested collocation, the Township shall require the wireless provider to
replace the Township utility pole at the wireless provider's sole cost and
expense.
   C.   The make-ready work shall meet all of the applicable codes and/or
industry standards. Make-ready work shall include all work needed to
accommodate additional public safety communications needs that are identified
in subsection
4-7-10A of this chapter and included in an existing or preliminary Township or
public service agency budget for attachment within one year of the submitted
application.
      1.   Fees for make-ready work, including any Township utility pole
replacement, shall not exceed actual costs or the amount charged to
communication service providers for similar work. Said fees shall not include
any consultant's fees or expenses for the Township utility poles that do not
support aerial facilities used to provide communications services or electric
service.
      2.   Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed
within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good-faith estimate by the
wireless provider, at its sole cost and expense. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-13: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE/RENTAL FEE:
   The wireless provider shall pay to the Township an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Township utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals: a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year; or b) the
actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of
space on the Township utility pole, if the actual, direct and reasonable costs
are greater than two hundred dollars ($200.00). The Township shall have the
burden of proving the actual, direct and reasonable costs. If the Township has
not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be payable on the first annual anniversary of
the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual
anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-14: CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE; SAFETY; INSPECTION; AND RESTORATION:
   A.   The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its
small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance
with the requirements and conditions of this chapter and chapter 6 of this
title. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents and
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations. Specifically, the wireless provider
shall comply with the following requirements and conditions:
      1.   The wireless provider shall maintain its small wireless facilities
in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and applicable law.
      2.   All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry
practices and standards shall be used during the construction, installation, or
maintenance of small wireless facilities.
      3.   After the completion of any placement or maintenance of a small
wireless facility in a public right-of-way, the wireless provider shall, at its
own expense, restore the public right-of- way to its original condition before
such work. If the wireless provider fails to do so within ten (10) days, or
such longer period of time as may be agreed to between the Township and the
wireless provider in writing, following completion of such placement or
maintenance, the Township may perform restoration and charge the costs of the
restoration against the wireless provider.
      4.   The wireless provider shall use and exercise due caution, care and
skill in performing work in the public right-of-way and shall take all
necessary and reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. The persons
constructing, installing and maintaining small wireless facilities must be a
licensed electrician, certified to work as a lineworker, or successfully
complete an accredited lineworker apprenticeship program.
      5.   A wireless provider shall not place or maintain its small wireless
facilities so as to interfere with, displace, damage or destroy any utilities,
including, but not limited to, sewers, gas or watermains, storm drains, pipes,
cables or conduits of the Township or any other person's facilities lawfully
occupying the Township's public rights-of-way.
      6.   The Township shall have the right to make such inspections of small
wireless facilities placed or maintained in public rights- of-way as it finds
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-15: INSURANCE:
   A.   Recovered Coverages And Limits: Except for a wireless provider with an
existing franchise to occupy and operate the rights-of- way, during the period
in which the wireless provider's facilities are located within the Township's
improvements or rights-of-way, the wireless provider, at its own cost and
expense, shall carry the following insurance:
      1.   Property insurance for its property replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Workers' compensation insurance with the statutory limits;
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Township's improvements or rights-of-way, with limits not
less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      4.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident; and
      5.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
   If the wireless provider is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   B.   Copies Required: The wireless provider shall include the Township as an
additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide
certification and documentation of inclusion of the Township in a commercial
general liability policy prior to the collocation of any small wireless
facility.
   C.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
      It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until ten (10) days after receipt by
the Township, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a written notice addressed to the Township's Highway Commissioner of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.
   Within seven (7) days after receipt by the Township of said notice, and in
no event later than three (3) days prior to said cancellation, the wireless
provider shall obtain and furnish to the Township evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
   D.   Self-Insurance: The wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion
of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of
this section. A wireless provider that self- insures is not required, to the
extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to
self- insure shall provide to the Township evidence sufficient to demonstrate
its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limits required
by the Township.
   E.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Wireless Provider's
Liability: The legal liability of the wireless provider to the Township and any
person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance
policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. (Ord.
SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-16: INDEMNIFICATION:
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Township, and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property
damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or
occupancy of the Township improvements or rights-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter or the
Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. The wireless provider's indemnity
obligations hereunder shall not apply against any liabilities and losses as may
be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the Township, its employees or
agents. The wireless provider shall further waive any claims that it may have
against the Township with respect to consequential, incidental, or special
damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-
14-2018)
4-7-17: SECURITY:
   The wireless provider shall comply with the security provisions set forth in
section
4-6-10, "Security", of this title. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-18: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A wireless provider shall notify the Township
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any small
wireless facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the wireless
provider. The new owner of the wireless provider or the small wireless facility
shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
including this chapter with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-
way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by the terms and conditions of the permit and
any applicable agreement between the Township and the prior owner if the new
owner uses the small wireless facility or allows it to remain on the Township's
right-of-way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance, coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. SWO-2018-
5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-19: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR ABANDONMENT:
   A.   Removal By Township: Under this chapter, the Township is not required
to install or maintain any specific utility pole or to continue to install or
maintain any specific utility pole in any location if the Township determines
to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type generally, such as
electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of its geographic
jurisdiction.
   If the Township determines to eliminate above-ground Township utility poles
of a particular type generally, and collocated small wireless facilities are in
place, the Township shall either: 1) continue to maintain the utility pole or
install and maintain a reasonable alternative utility pole or wireless support
structure for the collocation of the small wireless facility; or 2) offer to
sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a reasonable cost or allow
the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so it can maintain
service from that location.
   B.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation: The Township retains the right and
privilege to cut or move any small wireless facilities within the rights-of-way
of the Township, as the Township may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If the
circumstances permit, the Township shall attempt to notify the wireless
provider prior to cutting or removing the facility and shall notify the
wireless provider after cutting or removing the facility.
   C.   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility must remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after the date of the written notice from the Township notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Township to the owner at the
last known address of the owner. If the small wireless facility is not removed
within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Township has the right to remove or
cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment
agreement for Township utility poles or through whatever actions are provided
for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. The
Township shall charge the cost of the removal against the wireless provider or
any successor in interest to the wireless provider. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-
2018)
4-7-20: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY OF THIS CHAPTER:
   Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   A.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Township or another unit of local government that is not located within
public rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support
structure without the consent of the property owner;
   B.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   C.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
   For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given
to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to relieve a person from any requirement: 1) to
obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service; or 2) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-21: PENALTIES:
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-22: ENFORCEMENT:
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Township may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-23: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
   The Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction
to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Township utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Township shall allow the collocating wireless provider to collocate on its
poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year
per Township utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of
the dispute. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
4-7-24: SEVERABILITY:
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. SWO-2018-5, 8-14-2018)
TITLE 5
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM
CHAPTER 1
COMBINED SYSTEM USER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Supervision And Control
5-1-2: Definitions
5-1-3: Office Of Superintendent
5-1-4: Applications For Service; Connection To System
5-1-5: General Regulations For The Combined System
5-1-6: Rules And Regulations
5-1-7: Power And Authority Of Inspectors
5-1-8: Enforcement Of Provisions
5-1-9: Nuisance Abatement Procedures
5-1-10: Accidental Discharges
5-1-11: Disconnection Of Utility Service
5-1-12: Physical Disconnection Of Utility Service Lines
5-1-13: Appeals
5-1-14: Liability To Town For Losses
5-1-15: Office Hours
5-1-16: Fiscal Year
5-1-17: Penalties
5-1-18: Unclaimed Deposits
5-1-1: SUPERVISION AND CONTROL:
   The board of town trustees shall have the supervision and control of and
shall operate the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the town pursuant
to the provisions of the bond ordinance duly adopted by the board of town
auditors on October 18, 1952, this title and "an act in relation to waterworks
systems, sewerage systems and combined waterworks and sewerage systems in
townships having less than 500,000 population", 60 Illinois Compiled Statutes
65/1 et seq., all as may now or hereafter be amended. (Ord. SWO-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
   When used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   APPROVING AUTHORITY: The town of Leyden or its duly authorized agent or
representative.
   BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Celsius (20°C), expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l). Quantitative
determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
"standard methods".
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
   BUILDING SEWER: A sanitary sewer which begins immediately outside of the
foundation wall of any building or structure being served and ends at its
connection to the public sewer.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE: A charge levied on users, from time to time, for
the purpose of meeting the costs of improving, extending or reconstructing any
portion of the combined system.
   CATEGORY A: Those sanitary sewer users who discharge normal domestic
strength wastewater with concentrations of BOD no greater than two hundred
fifty (250) mg/l, suspended solids no greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/
l, and nitrogen no greater than sixteen (16) mg/l.
   CATEGORY B: Those sanitary sewer users who discharge wastewater with
concentrations in excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l of BOD, two hundred
fifty (250) mg/l suspended solids and sixteen (16) mg/l nitrogen. Users whose
wastewater exceeds the concentration for any one of these parameters shall be
in Category B.
   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT: The amount of chlorine in mg/l which must be added to
sewage to produce a residual chlorine as specified in the national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit.
   COLLECTOR or SUPERINTENDENT: The Collector of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system of the Town of Leyden.
   COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   COMBINED SYSTEM: The combined waterworks and sewerage system of the Town of
Leyden, Cook County, Illinois.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS: BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus, nitrogen, pH or
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the Town's
NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment facility; provided, that such
facility is designed to treat such additional pollutants and, in fact, does
remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
   CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the Town of Leyden
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specified use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by means of treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if
it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
   GROUND GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation, cooking, dispensing,
handling, storage and sale of food products and produce that has been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under
the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers and that no particle
shall be greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS: Wastewater with pollutants that will adversely
affect the wastewater treatment facilities or disrupt the quality of wastewater
treatment if discharged to the wastewater treatment facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing or commercial establishment.
"Industrial waste" includes any wastewater which is not sanitary sewage.
   LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE: Charges for costs other than operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
   MWRD: The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
   NPDES PERMIT: The national pollutant discharge elimination system permit, a
document issued by the State of Illinois which establishes effluent limitations
and monitoring requirements for the municipal wastewater treatment facility.
   NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water
or ground water.
   NITROGEN: Ammonia nitrogen.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER: Wastewater with concentrations of BOD
no greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, suspended solids no greater than
two hundred fifty (250) mg/l and nitrogen no greater than sixteen (16) mg/l.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS: Shall include all costs associated with the
operation and maintenance of the combined system, including its wastewater
treatment facilities and water facilities and further including administrative
and replacement costs, all as determined, from time to time, by the Town.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven (7) and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 10-7.
   PERSON: Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
Municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   PHOSPHORUS: Total phosphorus and is expressed in mg/l of P (phosphorus).
   PIPE: Either sewer or water pipe, as the case may be, through which service
of the combined system is furnished.
   PREMISES: Shall include any lot, or part thereof, any building, or part
thereof, or any parcel or tract of land whatsoever.
   PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment facilities.
   PUBLIC SEWER: Any publicly owned sewer, storm drain, sanitary sewer or
combined sewer.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
combined system, including its wastewater treatment facilities and water
facilities, to maintain the capacity and performance for which such facilities
were designed and constructed. Operation and maintenance costs include
replacement costs.
   SANITARY SEWAGE: A combination of liquid- and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries sewage or wastewater.
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE: A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment
facilities for payment of operation and maintenance expenses, debt service
costs and other expenses or obligations related to said facilities.
   SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SHALL/MAY: The use of the word "shall" indicates that which is mandatory;
the use of the word "may" indicates that which is permissible.
   SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty
four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation and/or adversely
affects the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment
facilities.
   STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN: A drain or sewer for conveying water, ground
water, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SUPERINTENDENT: The duly elected or appointed Supervisor of Leyden Township
or his/her duly authorized representative.
   SURCHARGE: The assessment, in addition to the basic sewer user charge and
debt service charge, which is levied on those users whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in subsection
5-4-2D of this Title.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater", and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
   TOWN: The Town of Leyden, Cook County, Illinois.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent of the
wastewater treatment facilities or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which any portion of the combined
system will be operated.
   USER: Any person receiving both sewer and water service from the combined
system.
   USER CHARGE: The combined system service charges, as defined in Section
5-4-1 of this Title.
   USER CLASS: One or more of the following types of users, as such type is
defined herein:
      Commercial User: That type of user receiving service provided to all
transient dwellings, such as hotels and motels, to retail or wholesale
establishments and to any premises used for the purpose of selling merchandise
or rendering service.
      Industrial User: Shall include establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
any substance into another substance or product.
      Institutional/Governmental User: Shall include schools, churches, penal
institutions and users which are units or agencies of Federal, State and local
governments.
      Residential User: That type of user receiving service provided to any
dwelling units, such as houses, mobile homes, apartments and permanent multi-
family dwellings.
   WASTEWATER: The spent water of any person. From the standpoint of source, it
may be a combination of the liquid- and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, institutions or any user class,
together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be
present.
   Effluent Criteria: Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   Major Contributing Industry: An industrial users of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
   A.   Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average work
day; or
   B.   Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or
   C.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
   D.   Is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   Milligrams per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in one thousand ml of water. It
has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing twenty five (25) pounds of
BOD and thirty five (35) pounds of suspended solids.
   Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   Water Quality Standards: Are defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES: That portion of the combined system
consisting of the structures, equipment and processes required to collect,
carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes to transport effluent to a
watercourse. "Wastewater facilities" shall include wastewater treatment works.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludge. "Wastewater treatment works"
may also be referred to as wastewater plant, wastes treatment plant or
pollution control plant.
   WATER FACILITIES: That portion of the combined system consisting of the
structures, equipment and processes required to provide water service to all
users and shall include all sources of water, filtration and pumping equipment
and all water mains, pipes, service lines and meters.
   WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND: The principal accounting designation for all
income and revenue derived from the operation of the combined system. (Ord. SW-
O-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord. SWO-96-3, 11-4-1996; Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-1-3: OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.   Form And Contents Of Application: Applications for service shall be in
written form as prescribed by the superintendent and shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following: 1) the name and address of the person for
whom the service is desired; 2) the legal description and street address of the
premises where the service is to be furnished; 3) the acknowledgment of
responsibility for all charges assessed for service furnished as result of such
application; 4) the kind of connection sought, the purpose for which water is
to be used, whether anything other than normal domestic wastewater is to be
discharged and all plumbing work necessary to connect to the combined system;
5) an acknowledgment of the content of and a consent to be bound by the
provisions of this title and amendments thereto, duly signed and witnessed, by
the person responsible for charges for service. (Ord. SWO-89-1, 8-8-1989)
   B.   Purchase And Sale Of Real Property: In addition to all other
requirements in this section, the following regulations shall apply whenever
ownership or control of real property served by the combined system is sold or
transferred:
      1.   As a condition precedent to receiving or continuing to receive
utility service from the combined system, any person that purchases real estate
served by the combined system is obligated to: a) provide proof of ownership;
b) submit an application for service as provided herein; c) submit a security
deposit (in the case of commercial, multi-family and rental properties) to
ensure that future charges for sewer and water service provided to the premises
shall be promptly paid; d) enter into a service contract as provided herein; e)
satisfy any unpaid charges, liens, fees, or costs due from the seller or the
real estate for services provided to premises; f) pay the connection or
reconnection fee due for premises; and g) such other information as may be
required to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this title. (Ord.
SWO-99-4, 12-14-1999)
      2.   As a condition precedent to the release of any charges, liens, fees
or costs for services provided to the seller or seller’s real estate, any
person that sells real estate served by the combined system is obligated to: a)
give the superintendent notice not less than five (5) business days prior to
the date on which the sale or transfer of the premises is to be closed
requesting a final meter reading, and the issuance of a final bill for any
unpaid charges, liens, fees, or costs due for services provided to the seller
or the premises; b) make an appointment for a final meter reading and to
provide access to the premises as necessary for the superintendent to cause
such meter or meters to be read; c) provide the name and address of the
purchaser or transferee, the legal description and common address of the
premises, and the date on which the sale or transfer of the premises is to be
sold; d) pay in good funds any unpaid charges, liens, fees, or costs due from
the seller or the real estate for services provided to premises; e) provide
such other information as may be required to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this title. Payoff statements will be provided upon request. In
the event that the township is given notice of the final read request less than
forty eight (48) hours before the closing, a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
convenience fee shall be added to the final bill.
      3.   In the event that ownership or control of property served by the
combined system is transferred without complying with the requirements of this
section, sewer and water utility service to the premises shall be discontinued
until the owner has fully complied with this section. Once utility service has
been discontinued, service shall not be reconnected until a reconnection fee
has been paid.
      4.   Upon complying with the requirements of this section for reinstating
sewer and water utility service to the owner’s premises, the owner shall make
an appointment for reinstating utility service. The charge for reinstating
sewer and water utility service shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per service.
      5.   An owner of any premises which receives the benefit of utility
service from the combined system shall remain responsible for the payment of
any and all charges for utility services provided to a lessee, tenant or
occupant of the owner’s premises. Landlords shall be required to establish and
maintain a security deposit for the leased premises to secure full and timely
payment of the customer account if an account is held in the name of a tenant.
   C.   Engineering Specifications: Any connections to the combined system
shall be made in accordance with the recommendations of the town engineer, the
requirements of this code, the Illinois plumbing code 1  and all other
applicable governmental rules, regulations or permits. When required by the
superintendent, the applicant shall submit engineering drawings and
specifications for review by the town engineer.
   D.   Service Contract: No connection shall be made to the combined system
until the applicant has executed a written agreement with the town containing
the terms and conditions for supplying utility service to the applicant’s
premises. Said terms and conditions are in addition to and supplement the
requirements of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the town as now or
hereafter amended.
   E.   Security Deposit And Connection Fees: Applicable connection fees shall
be paid prior to execution of a utility service contract. An additional sum
shall be paid to the superintendent at that time to guarantee that the
connection is made in a good and workmanlike manner and to guarantee the
restoration of any public property damaged during the course of constructing
the connection.
   The security deposit shall be the greater of: 1) the amount of the
applicable connection fee; or 2) the amount determined by the superintendent as
reasonably required to correct defects in materials and workmanship and to
repair damage to public property if the applicant fails to perform the
connection and restoration work correctly. If the superintendent is satisfied
that any defects in materials or workmanship have been corrected and that
public property damaged directly or indirectly as a result of such work has
been properly restored, the security deposit, or such part thereof which has
not been used to restore damaged public work or to cure defects in materials or
workmanship, shall be refunded, without interest, to the applicant.
   F.   Bond: No connection shall be made to the combined system unless the
person applying therefor shall have on file in the office of the superintendent
satisfactory proof of the plumbing contractor’s surety bond in the amount
required under the Illinois plumbing code.
   G.   Connection To Combined System: When the applicant hereunder has
complied with all of the provisions of this title, the applicant’s premises may
be connected to the combined system in accordance with the requirements of this
title and a duly executed utility service contract. Connection shall be made by
an Illinois licensed plumber to the roundway, buffalo box or water stub and to
the public sanitary sewer by means of a building sewer.
   H.   Penalty: Any person who shall install any sewer and water service pipes
or do any work in connection therewith, except for minor repairs, without
having first complied with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. SWO-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord. SWO-99-4, 12-14-1999; Ord. SWO-2009-3, 5-4-
2009; Ord. SWO-2011-3, 5-10-2011; Ord. SWO-2014-2, 3-11-2014; Ord. SWO-2022-1,
2-8-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 305/33
5-1-4: APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE; CONNECTION TO SYSTEM:
   A.   Form And Contents Of Application: Applications for service shall be in
written form as prescribed by the superintendent and shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following: 1) the name and address of the person for
whom the service is desired; 2) the legal description and street address of the
premises where the service is to be furnished; 3) the acknowledgment of
responsibility for all charges assessed for service furnished as result of such
application; 4) the kind of connection sought, the purpose for which water is
to be used, whether anything other than normal domestic wastewater is to be
discharged and all plumbing work necessary to connect to the combined system;
5) an acknowledgment of the content of and a consent to be bound by the
provisions of this title and amendments thereto, duly signed and witnessed, by
the person responsible for charges for service. (Ord. SWO-89-1, 8-8-1989)
   B.   Purchase And Sale Of Real Property: In addition to all other
requirements in this section, the following regulations shall apply whenever
ownership or control of real property served by the combined system is sold or
transferred:
      1.   As a condition precedent to receiving or continuing to receive
utility service from the combined system, any person that purchases real estate
served by the combined system is obligated to: a) provide proof of ownership;
b) submit an application for service as provided herein; c) submit a security
deposit (in the case of commercial, multi-family and rental properties) to
ensure that future charges for sewer and water service provided to the premises
shall be promptly paid; d) enter into a service contract as provided herein; e)
satisfy any unpaid charges, liens, fees, or costs due from the seller or the
real estate for services provided to premises; f) pay the connection or
reconnection fee due for premises; and g) such other information as may be
required to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this title. (Ord.
SWO-99-4, 12-14-1999)
      2.   As a condition precedent to the release of any charges, liens, fees
or costs for services provided to the seller or seller’s real estate, any
person that sells real estate served by the combined system is obligated to: a)
give the superintendent notice not less than five (5) business days prior to
the date on which the sale or transfer of the premises is to be closed
requesting a final meter reading, and the issuance of a final bill for any
unpaid charges, liens, fees, or costs due for services provided to the seller
or the premises; b) make an appointment for a final meter reading and to
provide access to the premises as necessary for the superintendent to cause
such meter or meters to be read; c) provide the name and address of the
purchaser or transferee, the legal description and common address of the
premises, and the date on which the sale or transfer of the premises is to be
sold; d) pay in good funds any unpaid charges, liens, fees, or costs due from
the seller or the real estate for services provided to premises; e) provide
such other information as may be required to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this title. Payoff statements will be provided upon request. In
the event that the township is given notice of the final read request less than
forty eight (48) hours before the closing, a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
convenience fee shall be added to the final bill.
      3.   In the event that ownership or control of property served by the
combined system is transferred without complying with the requirements of this
section, sewer and water utility service to the premises shall be discontinued
until the owner has fully complied with this section. Once utility service has
been discontinued, service shall not be reconnected until a reconnection fee
has been paid.
      4.   Upon complying with the requirements of this section for reinstating
sewer and water utility service to the owner’s premises, the owner shall make
an appointment for reinstating utility service. The charge for reinstating
sewer and water utility service shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per service.
      5.   An owner of any premises which receives the benefit of utility
service from the combined system shall remain responsible for the payment of
any and all charges for utility services provided to a lessee, tenant or
occupant of the owner’s premises. Landlords shall be required to establish and
maintain a security deposit for the leased premises to secure full and timely
payment of the customer account if an account is held in the name of a tenant.
   C.   Engineering Specifications: Any connections to the combined system
shall be made in accordance with the recommendations of the town engineer, the
requirements of this code, the Illinois plumbing code 1  and all other
applicable governmental rules, regulations or permits. When required by the
superintendent, the applicant shall submit engineering drawings and
specifications for review by the town engineer.
   D.   Service Contract: No connection shall be made to the combined system
until the applicant has executed a written agreement with the town containing
the terms and conditions for supplying utility service to the applicant’s
premises. Said terms and conditions are in addition to and supplement the
requirements of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the town as now or
hereafter amended.
   E.   Security Deposit And Connection Fees: Applicable connection fees shall
be paid prior to execution of a utility service contract. An additional sum
shall be paid to the superintendent at that time to guarantee that the
connection is made in a good and workmanlike manner and to guarantee the
restoration of any public property damaged during the course of constructing
the connection. The security deposit shall be the greater of: 1) the amount of
the applicable connection fee; or 2) the amount determined by the
superintendent as reasonably required to correct defects in materials and
workmanship and to repair damage to public property if the applicant fails to
perform the connection and restoration work correctly. If the superintendent is
satisfied that any defects in materials or workmanship have been corrected and
that public property damaged directly or indirectly as a result of such work
has been properly restored, the security deposit, or such part thereof which
has not been used to restore damaged public work or to cure defects in
materials or workmanship, shall be refunded, without interest, to the
applicant.
   F.   Bond: No connection shall be made to the combined system unless the
person applying therefor shall have on file in the office of the superintendent
satisfactory proof of the plumbing contractor’s surety bond in the amount
required under the Illinois plumbing code.
   G.   Connection To Combined System: When the applicant hereunder has
complied with all of the provisions of this title, the applicant’s premises may
be connected to the combined system in accordance with the requirements of this
title and a duly executed utility service contract. Connection shall be made by
an Illinois licensed plumber to the roundway, buffalo box or water stub and to
the public sanitary sewer by means of a building sewer.
   H.   Penalty: Any person who shall install any sewer and water service pipes
or do any work in connection therewith, except for minor repairs, without
having first complied with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. SWO-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord. SWO-99-4, 12-14-1999;
Ord. SWO-2009-3, 5-4-2009; Ord. SWO-2011-3, 5-10-2011; Ord. SWO-2014-2, 3-11-
2014; Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 305/33.
5-1-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR THE COMBINED SYSTEM:
   A.   Combined Service Only: Only combined sewer and water service shall be
provided by the combined system. No separate water service or separate sewer
service shall be provided to any user, except as approved by resolution or
ordinance of the town board. Combined sewer and water service shall be
exclusive of taking separate water service or separate sewer service provided
by any other utility system or source, unless taking such separate service is
approved by resolution or ordinance of the town board. (Ord. SWO-2012-1, 2-14-
2012)
   B.   Application For Use Of Water: No person, other than an employee of the
combined system acting in the discharge of their duties, shall open or take
water from any fire hydrant, plug, valve, faucet, pipe or other opening
connected with the combined system for any purpose unless such person shall
have first made application to and received permission from the superintendent
for use of such water for a specified purpose.
   C.   Extension Of Mains: The town board of trustees may extend water and
sewer mains where the owner of the property, or the persons desiring such
extension, shall advance and pay to the town a sum of money equal to the entire
cost of the main extension. Alternatively, the town board may require the
persons desiring such extension to construct such extension under the
supervision of the town engineer.
   D.   Responsibility For Cost Of Installing Or Disconnecting Service: The
cost of installing or disconnecting service to the combined system shall be
borne by the person for whose premises such services has been installed or
disconnected.
   E.   Repair Of Meters And Pipes: Every person using service of the combined
system shall, at their own cost, keep in repair all water meters and pipes,
including building sewers and private water supply pipes leading from the
shutoff rod box to their premises, and shall prevent all waste from such water
meters or pipes. If any such water meter or pipe is permitted to remain out of
repair, the superintendent may, after a two (2) day prior notice in writing,
cut off the service to the premises. Said notice may be served by personal
service or by certified mail to the owner or occupant in possession, charge or
control of the premises. Any service cut off pursuant to this subsection shall
not be restored until the superintendent determines that the water meters or
pipes have been properly repaired.
   F.   Obstruction Of Access To Water Meter: No person shall, in any manner,
obstruct, cause or permit to be obstructed, access to any stopcock, water
meter, proportional, indicating or recording device, shutoff rod box or
connection with any water main or service pipe by any means shift or device
whatever. In the event that the owner or person in possession, charge or
control of such premises, after proper notification, shall fail to remove any
such obstruction, the superintendent may withhold service to such premises
until the obstruction is removed.
   G.   Injury To Or Obstructing Hydrants: No person shall wilfully or
carelessly break or injure any public hydrant or pollute or unnecessarily waste
the water at any such hydrant or obstruct the use of any fire hydrant or place
any material in front thereof or within five feet (5') from either side
thereof.
   H.   Authority To Enter Premises: The filing of an application for use and
service of the combined system shall constitute the user’s express grant of a
license to the superintendent, or any other persons designated in section 5-1-
7 of this chapter, to enter the user’s premises for any purpose authorized by
said section
5-1-7 of this chapter.
   I.   Nonliability Of Town: All service applied for hereunder shall be upon
the express condition that the town shall not be subject to nor liable for any
claim for damages caused by reason of any interruption of the supply or use
thereof by reason of breakage, stoppage, alterations or extensions thereto.
   J.   Contract To Extend Or Receive Service: The town board may contract to
extend and provide waterworks or sewage service to any city or village within
the township. The town board may contract for a supply of water from any city
or village operating a waterworks system.
   K.   Compliance With Provisions; Interpretation:
      1.   The filing of an application for use and service of the combined
system, or the receipt of the use and service of the combined system in the
absence of such application, shall constitute the user’s agreement to abide by
and conform to all of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the town as now
or hereafter amended.
      2.   All persons receiving the benefit of utility service from the
combined system, including, but not limited to, property owners, beneficial
owners, lessees and their agents, employees and contractors, are required to
comply with all applicable statutes, rules, regulations and permits of any
other governmental body or agency having jurisdiction over the delivery,
receipt, use or discharge of water from the combined system. In the event of
any conflict between the requirements of this title and the requirements of
such governmental bodies or agencies, the more stringent requirements shall
control. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
   L.   Compliance With Occupancy Requirements: Sewer and water service from
the combined system shall not be provided to any person, user or customer
premises when the premises has been declared uninhabitable or unfit for human
occupancy, or has not been approved for use and occupancy, under the zoning and
building ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the governmental entity or
entities having zoning and/or building jurisdiction of such premises. Every
person using or occupying premises that receives the use and benefit of sewer
and water service from the combined system has the duty and shall be
responsible for compliance with all applicable zoning and building ordinances,
codes, rules and regulations applicable to the use and occupancy of such
premises. Any premises used or occupied in violation of the applicable zoning
and building ordinances, codes, rules and regulations governing the use and
occupancy of such premises shall be subject to the termination of sewer and
water service to such premises in accordance with the procedures provided in
section
5-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. SWO-2002-5, 6-11-2002; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-
13-2022)
5-1-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   The superintendent may promulgate rules and regulations in accordance with
the terms of this title covering the use of the combined system, including, but
not limited to, the form and content of applications for service, tapping
regulations, the place, time, location, size and other conditions governing
water pipe, sewer pipe and meter installations, connections thereto and use
thereof, as well as restrictions and prohibitions on the use thereof. (Ord. SW-
O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-1-7: POWER AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town, the
Illinois environmental protection agency and the U.S. environmental protection
agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties receiving utility services from the combined system for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this title.
The superintendent shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the town, the Illinois environmental protection agency and the
U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the owner or occupant, the owner or occupant
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the town employees, and the town
shall indemnify the owner or occupant against liability, claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner or occupant and
growing out of the inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or testing
operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner
or occupant to maintain safe and proper conditions as required by this title or
any applicable federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
   C.   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter onto
all easements which the town holds for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage or waterworks lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with
the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord.
SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
5-1-8: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   The superintendent, or any employee who the Superintendent may direct, shall
enforce the provisions of this title and for that purpose, shall qualify as a
special police officer. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989; Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022;
Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
5-1-9: NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   No Immediate Danger: If it is determined by the superintendent that a
public nuisance has been created or is being maintained by violation of this
title, but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great
and immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, written notice
shall be served on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance to remove or
correct the same (identifying the nature of the violation) within a specified
reasonable time. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in said
notice, abate the nuisance and permanently cease all violations. The town may
terminate utility service as a result of any violation of any provision of this
title.
   B.   Summary Abatement Upon Immediate Danger: If it is determined by the
superintendent that a public nuisance caused by the violation of this title
exists, and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety or welfare, the town may cause the same to immediately be abated and
charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or
maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. Written notice identifying the
nature of the violation shall be served upon the person causing or maintaining
the nuisance as soon as may be practicable. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-1-10: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
   Any person found to be responsible for accidentally allowing a deleterious
discharge into the sewer system which causes damage to the wastewater treatment
facility and/or receiving body of water shall, in addition to a fine, pay an
amount to cover any damages, both values to be established by the town. (Ord.
SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-1-11: DISCONNECTION OF UTILITY SERVICE:
   Sewer and water utility service to a user of the combined system shall be
disconnected for cause in accordance with the following procedures if all
charges on a monthly sewer and water bill, including, but not limited to, water
and sewer charges, charges for waste collection and disposal services, charges
for waste nuisance abatement set forth in section
3-4-11 of this code, and any applicable penalties are not paid within the time
periods set forth in section
5-4-4 of this title and section
3-4-11 of this code, respectively, or if the user has violated this title or
any of the rules and regulations established by the superintendent pursuant to
section
5-1-6 of this chapter. (Ord. SWO-2001-2, 9-18-2001)
   A.   Pretermination Notice: Written notice of the town’s intention to
discontinue utility service to the user’s premises shall be served upon the
user of the premises, and any interested persons who have requested notice as
provided herein, not less than five (5) working days prior to any disconnection
of sewer and water service to the premises.
      1.   Notice To User: For purposes of this section, service of written
notice shall be deemed adequate as to any person having an ownership, leasehold
or occupancy interest in premises connected to the sewer and water system if
served as provided herein upon the person identified on the township’s account
records as the current user responsible for paying the charges for sewer and
water service to the premises.
      2.   Notice To Other Interested Persons: Any person having an ownership,
leasehold or occupancy interest in premises served by the combined system, but
who is not the user identified on the township’s current account records, will
be served with notice as provided in this subsection A if such person or
persons have filed a written request with the Township for service of any pre-
termination notices affecting identified premises in which they have such an
interest. Such requests shall be on a form to be provided by the Township and
shall state the name, address and telephone number of the interested person and
the nature of the person’s interest in the premises. It is the responsibility
of any such person to notify the Township of any change in this information and
to provide any further information reasonably required by the Superintendent.
   B.   Service Of Pre-Termination Notice: The notice provided for in
subsection A above may be served in one or more of the following ways:
      1.   Personal Service: Notice may be served by personal delivery to the
user, by personal delivery to an occupant of the user’s premises who is not
less than thirteen (13) years of age, or by personal delivery to an employee or
agent in the case of a business, firm, corporation or other entity.
      2.   Mailed Notice: Notice may be served by certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the user at the address currently listed in the
Township’s account records for the premises.
      3.   Posted Notice: Notice may be served by posting in a conspicuous
location on the premises to be disconnected from utility service.
      4.   Interested Persons: Notice may be served upon an interested person
who has requested service of pre-termination notices as provided in subsection
B2 hereof in the same manner as authorized for service on a user.
   C.   Contents Of Notice: Pre-termination notices shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The name of the person (the user) responsible for paying the cost of
water and sewer service to the premises as shown on the current account records
of the Township.
      2.   The street address of the premises to be disconnected from sewer and
water service. In the absence of a street address, the notice shall contain a
description reasonably identifying the premises to be disconnected.
      3.   The date of the notice.
      4.   If applicable, the amount to be paid on the delinquent sewer and
water account to bring it current.
      5.   If applicable, the Township Code section or regulation which has
been violated.
      6.   The date when sewer and water service is to be disconnected if the
delinquent balance due on the account is not first paid, or the violation is
not first corrected.
      7.   The procedures available for disputing the delinquency or violation,
including the name, title, address and phone number of the person to contact
for an informal resolution of the matter. A user or interested party who is not
satisfied with the authorized representative’s decision pursuant to subsection
D. below, may request an informal hearing to dispute the delinquent balance or
violation stated in the disconnection notice pursuant to subsection E. below.
   D.   Informal Resolution: A user or interested party having a complaint,
question or other problem concerning a disconnection notice may schedule a
personal meeting with an authorized representative of the combined system to
seek an informal resolution of the problem stated in the disconnection notice.
The authorized representative may do one or more of the following to resolve
the matter:
      1.   Investigation: Conduct an investigation, including, but not limited
to, a meter check of the subject premises, a check of billings for possible
errors in computation of the disputed bill, or a check of the premises for
leaks or illegal connections.
      2.   Credit Plans: In cases of financial hardship, establish terms and
conditions for an agreed written credit plan in accordance with rules and
regulations established by the Superintendent.
      3.   Account Adjustments: If the amount charged to an account is in
error, adjust the user’s bill accordingly, subject to approval of the
Superintendent and the requirements of subsection
5-4-3L of this Title.
      4.   Agreements To Remedy Violations: In cases of a violation of this
Title or of the Superintendent’s rules and regulations hereunder, establish
terms and conditions for an agreed compliance schedule, subject to approval by
the Superintendent.
      5.   Disconnect For Delinquent Accounts: If there is no merit as to a
dispute concerning the amount charged to an account, sustain the decision to
disconnect sewer and water utility service to the premises and establish a date
when service will be disconnected which shall be not less than five (5) working
days after the decision has been sustained.
      6.   Disconnect For Violations: If there is no merit as to a dispute
concerning a violation of this Title or of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder, sustain the decision to disconnect sewer and water
service to the premises, and establish a date when service will be disconnected
which shall be not less than five (5) working days after the decision has been
sustained.
   E.   Disconnection Hearing: A user or interested party who is not satisfied
with the authorized representative’s decision pursuant to subsection D above,
or who elects to bypass that procedure, may request an informal hearing to
dispute the delinquent balance or violation stated in the disconnection notice.
All requests for a hearing shall be submitted in writing on forms supplied by
the Township for that purpose. If requested, the Superintendent, or the
authorized hearing officer, shall conduct an informal hearing to determine
whether cause exists to disconnect or reconnect sewer and water service to the
user’s premises as provided below:
      1.   Notice Of Informal Hearing: The user or other interested person
shall be notified of the date, time and place where the disconnection hearing
will be held.
      2.   Continuances: A disconnection hearing may be rescheduled for good
cause shown; however, not more than one continuance shall be allowed absent
extraordinary circumstances.
      3.   Opportunity To Be Heard: Both the user and the combined system shall
have the right to be represented by counsel, to present evidence in their
behalf and to examine evidence presented by the other party concerning the
violation and/or delinquent charges described in the disconnection notice. The
strict rules of evidence shall not apply to such hearings.
      4.   Decision: The Superintendent or the authorized hearing officer shall
decide, based on the preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing,
whether sewer and water service to the premises should be disconnected for
failure to pay charges due for sewer and water service to the premises, or for
a violation, or failure to abate a violation, of this Title. The Superintendent
or the authorized hearing officer may also approve a credit plan or compliance
schedule to resolve the dispute.
   F.   Delaying Disconnection: Disconnection of sewer and water utility
service shall be stayed pending completion of the procedures provided in
subsections 5-1-11D and E hereof, but only if such procedures have been
commenced in a timely manner.
   G.   Notice Of Decision:
      1.   Any user or interested party who has requested the initiation of the
procedures provided in subsections 5-1-11D and/or E hereof, and who
participated in such proceedings personally or by a representative, shall be
given written notice of the resulting decision by first class U.S. mail,
postage prepaid.
      2.   Unless continued connection of the premises may reasonably cause an
actual or imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare, sewer and water
service shall not be disconnected less than five (5) working days after mailing
of the notice of decision.
   H.   Reinstatement Of Service: Once disconnected, sewer and water utility
service shall only be reinstated under the following circumstances:
      1.   Payment of the outstanding account balance, including applicable
penalties and interest.
      2.   Remediation of any violations of this Title or of the
Superintendent’s rules and regulations hereunder.
      3.   A written agreement, satisfactory to the Superintendent, to pay the
outstanding account balance or to remedy a violation.
      4.   An order from a court of competent jurisdiction requiring service to
be reinstated.
      5.   Failure of the combined system to give a required pre-termination
notice as provided herein.
      6.   Other good cause, as determined in the sole discretion of the
Superintendent.
   I.   Responsibility Of Owners: In all cases, the owner of premises served by
the combined system shall be liable for all charges for each sewer and water
service account to the premises. In those cases where the owner is not also the
user, the owner shall be jointly and severally liable for all charges for each
sewer and water service account to the premises.
   J.   Interference With Disconnections: It shall be a violation of this title
for any person to interfere with, hinder or otherwise prevent the
superintendent, employees or agents from discontinuing sewer and water service
to any property in the township. Any person violating this provision shall be
fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
   K.   Emergency Disconnections: If, in accordance with subsection
5-1-9B of this chapter, the superintendent causes sewer and water utility
service to be discontinued to any premises, the superintendent shall cause
written notice of the disconnection to be served upon the user and any
interested persons as soon thereafter as practicable. Such notice shall contain
the following information:
      1.   The name of the person responsible for paying the cost of sewer and
water service to the premises as shown on current account records of the
township.
      2.   The street address of the premises at which the violation occurred
and which has been disconnected from sewer and water service. In the absence of
a street address, the notice shall contain a description reasonably identifying
the premises.
      3.   The violation or conditions that resulted in sewer and water service
being disconnected.
      4.   The date, time and place of where the superintendent or the
authorized hearing officer shall conduct a hearing to determine whether sewer
and water service to the premises should be reinstated or remain discontinued.
(Ord. TO-94-3, 3-8-1994; amd. Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-
2022)
5-1-12: PHYSICAL DISCONNECTION OF UTILITY SERVICE LINES:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to physically alter,
tamper or disconnect the water service line or the lateral sanitary sewer
service line connecting any premises or building to the combined system without
a permit issued by the superintendent.
   B.   Performance Guarantee: No permit shall be issued for the disconnection
of utility service lines unless the person applying therefor shall post a cash
performance guarantee with the Superintendent, the refund of which shall be
conditional upon applicant’s obligation to fully and properly perform the
disconnection of the utility service lines in accordance with the requirements
of this section and the conditions of the permit issued by the Superintendent;
to fully and properly restore all excavations made by the applicant, and
restore all streets, sidewalks, sewers, mains, pipes, valves, vaults and other
facilities that may be damaged, destroyed or disrupted as a result of the
performance of such work; and to satisfy any fines imposed upon the applicant
for violation of any permit, ordinance or regulations adopted by the Township.
The performance guarantee deposit shall be in greater of the following amounts,
as applicable.
      1.   Six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) if any street opening or other
excavation is required;
      2.   Four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) if the service to be disconnected
is two inches (2") in diameter or greater;
      3.   Two Thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for all other service
disconnections; or
      4.   One hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the Township Engineer’s
estimated cost of repairing and restoring a service line, any excavation, and
any public facilities to be damaged, destroyed or disrupted by the proposed
work.
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for a permit under this section to disconnect sewer
and water service lines is two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   D.   Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than five
hundred dollars($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day that an offense exists or continues. (Ord. SWO-2008-3, 2-
22-2008; amd. Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-1-13: APPEALS:
   A.   Reconsideration Of Decisions By Superintendent: Any user, permit
applicant or permit holder affected by any decision, action or determination
made by the superintendent interpreting or implementing the provisions of this
title or in any permit issued herein may file with the superintendent a written
request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of the date of such decision,
action or determination, setting forth, in detail, the facts supporting the
user’s request for reconsideration. The superintendent shall render a decision
on the request for reconsideration to the user, permit applicant or permit
holder, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of request.
   B.   Appeal To Board of Trustees: If the Superintendent’s ruling on the
request for reconsideration is unsatisfactory, the person who requested the
reconsideration may, within ten (10) days after notification of the action,
file a written appeal with the Board. The written appeal shall be heard by the
Board within thirty (30) days from the date of filing. The Board shall make a
final ruling on the appeal within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the
hearing.
   C.   Disconnection Procedures: This section shall not be applicable to
procedures for the disconnection of utility service provided for in section
5-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. TO-94-3, 3-8-1994; amd. Ord. SWO-2008-3, 2-22-
2008; Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-1-14: LIABILITY TO TOWN FOR LOSSES:
   Any person violating any provisions of this title shall, in addition to any
penalty or fine which may be assessed against the person, become liable to the
town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation
which the town may suffer as a result thereof. (Ord. SWO-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd.
Ord. SWO-2008-3, 2-22-2008)
5-1-15: OFFICE HOURS:
   The office of the combined system shall be open between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., daily, Monday through Friday,
except when the Town Supervisor determines that said office hours need to be
adjusted due to special circumstances (i.e., weather, public health and other
emergencies). The office shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays and all legal
holidays. (Ord. SWO-2009-3, 5-4-2009; amd. Ord. SWO-2021-3, 9-14-2021)
5-1-16: FISCAL YEAR:
   The fiscal year for the town's combined waterworks and sewerage system shall
begin on April 1 of each year and end on March 31 of the following year. Said
fiscal year shall take effect as of April 1, 1995.
   The town board shall prepare and approve the budget and appropriation
ordinance in accordance with the township waterworks act. (Ord. TO-94-7, 8-9-
1994; amd. Ord. SWO-2008-3, 2-22-2008)
5-1-17: PENALTIES:
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this title shall be
subject to a fine of not less than thirty five dollars ($35.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, the termination of water
service to the premises, the forfeiture of any charges paid or the imposition
of any other penalty which may be imposed by this title or any other applicable
ordinance. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created
by different provisions of this title, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same
person for the same offense; provided, that termination of water service shall
not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being
enforced. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day any duty
prescribed or obligation imposed herein remains unperformed and upon each day
any action forbidden or declared to be unlawful herein continues or is allowed
to continue. (Ord. SWO-2014-8, 12-2-2014)
5-1-18: UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS:
   A.   Tapping And Connection Fee Deposits: Any refundable tapping or
connection fee deposit required under the provisions of this title which is not
refunded within six (6) months after expiration of the permit authorizing the
tap-in or connection, or within six (6) months after completion of the
permitted tap-in or connection work, shall be forfeited to and retained by the
sewer and water fund.
   B.   Customer Security Deposits: Any monies deposited by a customer as
security for the prompt and proper payment of amounts billed to the customer by
the combined system shall be forfeited to and retained by the sewer and water
fund if the customer has not requested a refund of the deposit within six (6)
months after the customer's account has been closed, or has vacated the
customer premises without closing the customer's account; provided, however,
that such security deposit shall first be applied to reduce any amounts due or
owing by the customer to the township. (Ord. TO-2012-4, 3-13-2012)
CHAPTER 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
5-2-1: Requirements For Water Service
5-2-2: Water Taps
5-2-3: Service Pipe Requirements
5-2-4: Inspections
5-2-5: Water Meters
5-2-5-1: Remote Water Meter Replacement Program
5-2-6: Pressurized Systems
5-2-7: Fire Hydrant Use
5-2-8: Separate Water For Fire Protection Purposes
5-2-9: Water Conservation
5-2-10: Disconnection, Restoration Of Service
5-2-11: Excavations Near Water Mains
5-2-12: Tampering With Or Interrupting Service
5-2-13: Responsibility Of Owner Or Occupant
5-2-14: Fire Flow Testing
5-2-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER SERVICE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to install any water supply service pipe, excavate
for the installation of such pipe or repair or replace any such pipe, unless
the water user has first submitted a written application therefor, pursuant to
section
5-1-4 of this title, entered into a service contract pursuant to said section
5-1-4 of this title, and paid all applicable connection fees, security deposits
and delinquent utility charges, if any. Further, such work may only be
performed by Illinois licensed and bonded plumbers pursuant to the
recommendations of the town engineer and the requirements of this code, the
Illinois plumbing code 1 , the Cook County plumbing code and all other
applicable governmental rules, regulations or permits.
   B.   No water shall be turned on for use in any premises until a service
contract has been entered into pursuant to section
5-1-4 of this title, and the requirements of this chapter have been met. (Ord.
SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 320/35.
5-2-2: WATER TAPS:
   A.   Licensed And Bonded Plumbers: Only Illinois licensed and bonded
plumbers shall be permitted to tap the street water main or insert service
cocks therein. All service cocks shall be inserted at or near the top of the
street main and, in no case, nearer than one foot (1') from the bell of the
pipe; except, that when said street main is less than five feet (5') below curb
grade, such tap shall be made in a manner to least expose said service pipe to
damage by frost.
   B.   Giving Notice Of Tapping Date: The tapper shall give at least forty
eight (48) hours' notice of the date, place and time that a water tap is
desired.
   C.   Tapping Requirements: The hole for tapper shall be at least three feet
(3') wide and four feet (4') long for taps up to two inches (2") and shall be
at least four feet (4') wide and six feet (6') long where a cut must be made.
The hole shall be left open until the work has been inspected and approved by
the superintendent. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-2-3: SERVICE PIPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: All materials used in connection with water
service pipes shall be subject to the inspection of authorized representatives
of the combined system and shall be rejected if not of the quality prescribed
in this code. The service pipe and connection must be capable of sustaining a
pressure of one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch for one hour, and
all work must be done in a workmanlike manner.
   B.   Materials:
      1.   All service pipes two inches (2") or less in diameter shall be type
K copper tubing from the street main to the water meter or existing house
service. Only flared joints or compression fittings shall be permitted on
copper service pipe. Service pipe shall not be buried in or covered by any
ground or substance containing stones, glass, cinders or anything that might be
injurious to such pipe.
      2.   All water supply pipes less than two inches (2") in diameter shall
be of type K copper with copper fittings or compression fittings. No steel or
wrought iron pipe or fittings shall be installed in the group. No pipe or
fittings that have been used for any other purpose shall be used for
distributing water.
      3.   Where a service pipe larger than two inches (2") shall be required,
class 250 cast iron pipe shall be used, with a minimum diameter of three inches
(3"). (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
   C.   Stopcock Installation: Each water service pipe shall have a T-handle
roundway stopcock installed in the public right of way not less than six feet
(6') nor more than nine feet (9') from the front property line of the property
served by the water service pipe. The line of the service pipe shall be
approximately at right angles to the water main, and the stopcock shall be
located directly opposite the tap in the main. Each stopcock shall be protected
with a cast iron service stopbox with Water cast on the cover. The stopbox
shall be placed plum and square over the stopcock and level with sidewalk
grade. This subsection shall not apply to water service pipes equipped with a
water meter vault installed in accordance with the directions and
specifications of the Superintendent.
   D.   Placement Of Service Pipe And House Sewer:
      1.   The service pipe and house sewer shall be laid in separate trenches
at least ten feet (10') apart. The service pipe shall be at least five and one-
half feet (5½') below grade level. Sufficient length shall be provided to
prevent fracture by settlement of earth.
      2.   The service pipe on the house side of the curb cock shall not be
covered before it has been inspected and approved by the inspector or an
authorized agent of the combined system.
   E.   Buildings Over Two Stories: The water service pipe shall be of
sufficient size to permit ample and continuous flow of an adequate supply of
water at all times to all floors of the building being served without use of
any pressurized systems or gravity tanks. No service shall be provided to
buildings with more than two (2) stories above grade without the prior review
and approval of the Superintendent, pursuant to the recommendations of the Town
Engineer. The Superintendent, in considering an application for service to
buildings over two (2) stories, shall determine whether an adequate supply of
water can be provided at all times to all floors of such building without the
use of a pressurized system or gravity tank. If a pressurized system or gravity
tank is determined to be necessary, the provisions of Section
5-2-6 of this Chapter shall apply. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord. SWO-93-
1, 5-11-1993; Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-2-4: INSPECTIONS:
   In all cases, the connection to the mains shall be inspected and approved by
the Superintendent before service to the premises will be provided. (Ord. SW-O-
89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-2-5: WATER METERS:
   A.   General Requirements: Water meters shall be required for service pipes
supplying water service to any premises before any water shall be supplied to
such premises. No water meter shall be used by any user until such meter is
duly sealed by the Superintendent. Installation of meter vaults or boxes for
such meters shall only be done and performed by and under the direction of the
Superintendent. Each water meter shall be of a type, design and size specified
by the Superintendent.
   B.   Location: All meters shall be placed either in a precast frost-proof
meter vault with a hinged cover or in the building being served, and such
placement shall be under the direction and supervision of the Superintendent.
All meter vaults shall be made to specifications prescribed by the
Superintendent and shall be located under the Superintendent’s control. Meter
vaults shall be provided in every case where commercial or industrial users are
connected to the water supply of the combined system; provided, however, strict
compliance may be waived by the Town Board where compliance would create an
exceptional hardship due to the cost or difficulty in retrofitting an existing
water service.
   C.   Right To Remove Or Repair Meters; Costs: The Superintendent shall have
the right to remove, repair or replace any water meter installed on user’s
property. The costs of materials used in the repair of any meter shall be
charged to the user, and the costs of all labor in this connection shall be an
expense of the combined system.
   D.   Testing Meters; Costs: In the event of any disagreement as to whether a
water meter is accurately measuring utility service to the premises, the
superintendent may cause the meter to be tested and certified by an independent
testing agency. The cost of such testing and certification shall be borne by
the user of the meter.
   E.   Meter Spread: A meter spread, of the same size as the meter to be
installed, shall be placed on the water service pipe at a place directed by the
superintendent. There shall be at least one shutoff valve on the supply side of
the meter spread. The size of meters shall be prescribed by the superintendent.
All commercial and industrial meters, whether new or replacement, shall be
provided by user at user’s sole expense.
   F.   Temporary Water Service And Meters: Any person or business that desires
to draw water from the Leyden Township water system without having a permanent
water meter in place as required by this section may apply to the
superintendent for permission to draw water from the system for a specified
purpose and a limited period of time through a temporary meter to be installed
under the supervision of the superintendent. The applicant shall post a cash
security deposit or surety bond in an amount equal to two hundred percent
(200%) of the replacement cost of the temporary meter, and shall also pay a
temporary connection fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the right to
connect to the township water system on a temporary basis. The water supply
through the temporary meter shall be disconnected upon expiration or
termination of the permit for the temporary connection; upon installation of a
permanent meter and water service; or upon disconnection of the temporary water
service, whichever occurs first. Water supplied to the temporary water customer
shall be billed and paid for at the water rate applicable to such water
service. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord. SWO-2006-4, 9-12-2006; Ord. SWO-
2022-1, 2-8-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
5-2-5-1: REMOTE WATER METER REPLACEMENT PROGRAM:
   A.   Installation Of Remote Water Meters: All required water meters shall
have the capability of being read from remote locations as of September 1,
2003, and shall be replaced in accordance with this section.
   B.   Residential Meter Replacement Costs: As to residential premises
utilizing residential water meters, the township shall bear the initial costs
for removing an existing water meter which can only be read on the premises and
replacing it with a water meter having remote monitoring capabilities.
   C.   Commercial Meter Replacement Costs: Owners of commercial or industrial
establishments whose premises necessitate the use of commercial water meters
shall bear all costs for removing a water meter which can only be read on the
premises and replacing it with one having remote monitoring capabilities plus
an accompanying pit, if necessary. The township engineer shall determine the
size and type of replacement water meter based on the customer's water usage
characteristics. At their own costs, commercial and industrial water meter
users are further required to install and maintain a reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer inside their premises as part of their commercial water
service in accordance with chapter 5 of this title. The replacement prices for
installation of the appropriate size and type commercial water meters having
remote monitoring capabilities, and for the installation of reduced pressure
principle backflow preventers, are set forth in subsection F of this section.
   D.   Access To Meters: It is the duty of all customers of the combined
system and of all persons, firms or entities having an ownership or occupancy
interest in customer's premises receiving the benefit of sewer and water
service, including their agents, trustees, receivers, successors, grantees,
assigns and representatives, to cooperate with the township's representatives
and contractors to schedule an installation appointment and to provide prompt
and efficient access to the customer's premises for the replacement and
installation of remote water meters. Commercial water meter users are further
required to cooperate with the township's representatives and contractors to
allow access to the premises for maintenance and testing.
   E.   Denied Access Service Charge: If a customer refuses or fails on more
than two (2) occasions to: 1) respond to a request by the township's
representatives or contractors to schedule an installation appointment; 2)
appear at an installation appointment scheduled with the township's
representatives or contractors; or 3) allow the township's representatives or
contractors access to the premises during a scheduled appointment, a thirty
dollar ($30.00) monthly denied access service charge, after the third occasion
in which the customer fails or refuses to allow access to the premises, shall
thereafter be added to the customer's water bill for each and every month until
the customer allows the township's representatives to enter the premises and
install the replacement meter.
   F.   Remote Commercial Water Meter Installation And Replacement Surcharge:
The following charge shall be made for replacing or installing the appropriate
size and type of commercial water meter. In the case of a new water service, or
an improved water service to existing customer's premises, the remote
commercial water meter surcharge shall be paid at the time that the new or
improved water service is approved by the township. In the case where a
customer's existing water meters are being replaced with new remote commercial
meters as part of the commercial water meter replacement program, the charge to
the customer shall be paid by the customer upon installation; provided, that if
a customer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the superintendent that payment
of the charge at the time of installation would be an undue hardship to the
customer, the customer may be allowed to pay the water meter installation and
replacement surcharge request in not more than twelve (12) monthly installments
to be added to the customer's monthly water bill monthly installments,
including interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum.
Compound Meters And Installation Charges
1. 2 inch compound meter with dual RTR and STAR transponder (inside  $1,577.10
installation)
2. 2 inch compound meter with dual RTR and STAR transponder (pit     1,643.00
installation)
3. 3 inch compound meter with dual RTR and STAR transponder (inside  1,614.45
installation)
4. 3 inch compound meter with dual RTR and STAR transponder (pit     1,679.14
installation)
5. 4 inch compound meter with dual RTR and STAR transponder (inside  2,504.81
installation)
6. 4 inch compound meter with dual RTR and STAR transponder (pit     2,570.71
installation)
7. 6 inch compound meter with dual RTR and STAR transponder (inside  3,333.73
installation)
8. 6 inch compound meter with dual RTR and STAR transponder (pit)    3,459.87
Turbine Meters And Installation Charges
9. 2 inch turbine meter with STAR transponder (inside installation)  $ 733.01
10. 2 inch turbine meter with STAR transponder (pit installation)    751.03
11. 3 inch turbine meter with STAR transponder (inside installation) 796.76
12. 3 inch turbine meter with STAR transponder (pit installation)    814.88
13. 4 inch turbine meter with STAR transponder (inside installation) 1,078.01
14. 4 inch turbine meter with STAR transponder (pit installation)    1,096.13
15. 6 inch turbine meter with STAR transponder (inside installation) 2,295.51
16. 6 inch turbine meter with STAR transponder (pit installation)    2,313.63
Magnetic Meters And Installation Charges
17. 2 inch Magnetoflow (magnetic flow meter) with digital LCD
readout, 4-20mA output, circuitry for star-hexagram output at 100    $1,909.38
gallon output. Electrical grounding ring set single port hexagram
transmission unit (wall mount)
18. 3 inch Magnetoflow (magnetic flow meter) with digital LCD
readout, 4-20mA output, circuitry for star-hexagram output at 100    2,063.66
gallon output. Electrical grounding ring set single port hexagram
transmission unit (wall mount)
19. 4 inch Magnetoflow (magnetic flow meter) with digital LCD
readout, 4-20mA output, circuitry for star-hexagram output at 100    2,193.66
gallon output. Electrical grounding ring set single port hexagram
transmission unit (wall mount)
20. 6 inch Magnetoflow (magnetic flow meter) with digital LCD
readout, 4-20mA output, circuitry for star-hexagram output at 100    2,506.52
gallon output. Electrical grounding ring set single port hexagram
transmission unit (wall mount)
RPZ Backflow Preventer Charges
21. 1 inch watts 909 FIP RPZ backflow preventer with BV              $194.31
22. 11/2 inch watts 909 FIP RPZ backflow preventer with BV           194.31
23. 2 inch watts 909 FIP RPZ backflow preventer with BV              194.31
24. 3 inch watts 909 FLG RPZ backflow preventer with BV              194.31
25. 4 inch watts 909 FLG RPZ backflow preventer with NRSRW           194.31
26. 6 inch watts 909 FLG RPZ backflow preventer with NRSRW           194.31
Backflow Preventer Installation Charges
27. Due to unique conditions affecting different commercial water services,
the material and labor charges for installation of the reduced pressure
principle (RPZ) backflow preventer devices will be estimated by the township's
contractor on the initial inspection of the customer's premises, and the
township will notify the customer of the estimated installation charge. The
installation charge to the customer will be the actual cost of labor and
materials used to install the RPZ device.
 
   G.   Violations: Any violation or failure to comply with the terms of this
section shall be cause for disconnection of water service to the customer's
premises. (Ord. SWO-2002-3, 3-12-2002)
5-2-6: PRESSURIZED SYSTEMS:
   No pressurized system, gravity tank or device designed to draw water from
the combined system at a rate greater than that otherwise available at the
stopcock may be installed without the prior review and approval of the
superintendent pursuant to the recommendations of the town engineer.
Pressurized systems will not be considered where alternate means of providing
an adequate water supply are available. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-2-7: FIRE HYDRANT USE:
   Fire hydrants shall not be used to obtain water for construction purposes,
unless special permission is obtained, in writing, from the superintendent. All
such users shall use a fire hydrant water meter and make a security deposit
with the superintendent of an amount equal to the connection charge for a one
inch (1") water service connection. Charges for water used shall be at the
commercial rate provided in subsection
5-4-3D of this title. (Ord. SWO-2014-9, 12-2-2014)
5-2-8: SEPARATE WATER FOR FIRE PROTECTION PURPOSES:
   A separate water supply system may be used for fire protection purposes
only. However, whenever a system of water supply piping, whether inside or
outside of any building, receives its supply from any source other than the
combined system, such system shall be kept entirely separate from and no cross
connections of any kind shall be made with any pipe or system of piping which
receives its supply from the combined system. Water which has once been used
for any purpose shall not be returned to the building water supply system.
Secondary water pipes shall be painted with a distinctive yellow paint. (Ord.
SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-2-9: WATER CONSERVATION:
   A.   Conservation Measures During Emergencies: Whenever the water supply of
the Town is diminished, from any cause whatever, to an amount which, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, is or is likely to become dangerous to the
health, safety and welfare of the public, the Superintendent is authorized and
empowered to establish, implement and enforce emergency regulations on the use
of water from the combined system. Such regulations may provide for the limited
usage of water, limitations on days and hours of water use for some or all
purposes, and the prohibition of specified water uses. Such regulations shall
be issued in the form of a public notice containing such regulations, which
regulations shall be effective immediately upon issuance of such notice or at
such later time as is specified in the notice. Upon issuing such notice, the
Superintendent shall make the contents thereof known to the public by a news
release to local newspapers and media, and may also notify the citizens in any
other practical manner that he/she shall devise. Further, the Superintendent
shall immediately notify all members of the Board of Trustees of the nature of
the emergency and regulations he/she has adopted.
   The emergency regulations of the Superintendent shall remain in full force
and effect until any one of the following shall occur:
      1.   The superintendent determines that the emergency no longer exists
and issues a public notice that the emergency regulations shall no longer
continue in effect.
      2.   The superintendent issues a public notice in accordance with this
title implementing new or modified emergency regulations.
      3.   The town board of trustees modifies, repeals or enacts the emergency
regulations imposed by the superintendent by means of an ordinance or
resolution passed at any regular or special meeting of the town board.
      4.   The first regular meeting of the town board occurs more than thirty
(30) days after the emergency regulations are issued by the superintendent.
   B.   Metered Water Required: All new water services must be metered. Any
existing unmetered water services must be metered as part of any major
remodeling of the premises served by the unmetered services. A "major
remodeling" shall be considered to be any remodeling which involves any new
structural components or modification of existing structural components of a
structure where a building permit is required by the local building authority.
   C.   Water Efficient Plumbing Fixtures: As a condition of receiving an
allocation of Lake Michigan water, the Illinois department of transportation
requires the installation of water efficient plumbing fixtures in all new
construction and in all repair and/or replacement of fixtures or trim.
Accordingly, any plumbing fixtures or trim installed, repaired or replaced in
structures served by the combined system shall meet the following standards:
1. Water closets:
                        
  Tank type             Maximum 3.5 gallons (13.2 liters) per flush
  Flushomatic type      Maximum 3.0 gallons (11.3 liters) per flush
2. Urinals:               
                        
  Tank type             Illegal
  Floor mounted type    Illegal
  Flushometer type      Maximum 1.5 gallons (5.7 liters) per flush
3. Showerheads           Maximum flow 3.0 gallons (11.4 liters) per minute
                         (gpm)
                        
4. Lavatory sink faucets Maximum flow 3.0 gallons (11.4 liters) per minute
                         (gpm)
 
   The maximum flow rate for lavatory faucets is measured with both hot and
cold water supply fully opened. When installed for public use in new
construction or remodeling, these shall be with a metering self-closing type.
      5.   All air conditioning systems installed in new construction or new
remodeling shall be of the closed system type.
      6.   All automatic car wash fixtures shall recycle a minimum of seventy
five percent (75%) of water usages and have a minimum of nine hundred (900)
pounds per square inch of water pressure.
   D.   Lawn Sprinkling Restricted: From May 15 to September 15 of each year,
water from the town water distribution system shall not be used for watering or
sprinkling gardens, lawns, shrubs or other outdoor plants between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-
1989; amd. Ord. SW-O-91-1, 3-12-1991; amd. Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-2-10: DISCONNECTION, RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Disconnection Of Pipes: Where water service pipes are to be
disconnected from the water main in accordance with the provisions of this
title, such disconnection shall be done as near to the main as practicable.
Disconnection of water service pipes may only be performed by officers and
employees of the town of Leyden, or by a licensed plumber contracted by the
superintendent to perform such work.
   B.   Restoration Of Service: No service shall be restored to any premises
until the cost of the disconnection of service, the cost of reconnection and
any other unpaid charges that may still be outstanding have been paid and a
written permit for the restoration of service has been obtained from the
superintendent. If water service has been turned on to any premises in
violation of this chapter, the superintendent shall disconnect the pipes by
which such service is supplied to the premises. (Ord. SWO-2016-3, 9-13-2016)
5-2-11: EXCAVATIONS NEAR WATER MAINS:
   No person shall make any excavation in any street within four and one-half
feet (4 1/2') of a water main while the ground is frozen except by special
permission from the superintendent. Adequate provisions shall be made for
protecting the main from freezing. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-2-12: TAMPERING WITH OR INTERRUPTING SERVICE:
   No person shall tamper with, impair, interrupt or divert the water supply to
any premises, install or remove any device to cause the diversion of the water
supply to any premises or tamper with, repair, remove, relocate or in any way
interfere with any water meter installed on any premises. All persons who own,
occupy or are in possession, charge or control of any premises or who receive
the direct benefit of utility service at such premises shall be held jointly
and severally responsible for any unauthorized tampering or interference, and
the service to such premises shall be cut off for such cause. Any instrument,
apparatus or device used in obtaining utility service on any such premises or
any meter that has been altered, tampered with or bypassed so as to cause a
lack of measurement or inaccurate measurement of utility services shall raise a
rebuttable presumption of a violation of this section. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-
1989)
5-2-13: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT:
   The person owning or occupying or in possession, charge or control of the
premises shall be held responsible for any tampering with the shutoff rod boxes
on the person’s premises and for any unlawful or unauthorized turning on of
service into or upon the premises. The charges required for the restoration of
service shall be paid by the person owning or occupying or in possession,
charge or control of such premises at the time the restoration of service is
sought, regardless of whether such person shall have been the one guilty of
violating the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord.
TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
5-2-14: FIRE FLOW TESTING:
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall open any fire hydrant, make any
connections to or attachments with any fire hydrants or pipes of the township's
water system, or conduct any testing or measuring of the pressure or water flow
from a township fire hydrant or water main without first securing a permit from
the township as provided in this section. The foregoing shall not apply to
authorized employees of the township, nor to authorized fire department
personnel while responding to fire calls.
   B.   An application to conduct flow testing of a township fire hydrant shall
be submitted by a licensed plumber, and shall include the following
information:
      1.   The specific location of the fire hydrant to be tested;
      2.   The purpose of the flow testing;
      3.   If the test is for the purpose of designing and/or serving a
building fire suppression system, the applicant shall provide the township
with: a) location of the property; b) the identity and address of the owner of
the property; c) a copy of the building permit authorizing or requiring the
installation of a fire suppression system on the property; d) the name and
license number of the licensed plumber that will conduct the fire flow testing;
and e) such other information as the superintendent of the township water
system shall require.
      4.   The date and time proposed for the fire flow testing.
   C.   An application for a fire flow testing permit must be filed not less
than five (5) business days prior to the date proposed for the testing.
   D.   The fee for a fire flow testing permit is five hundred dollars
($500.00) and shall be paid at the time that the permit application is filed.
   E.   In addition to the permit application fee, the applicant shall submit a
certified, cashier's or bank check in the amount of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) at the time the permit application is filed to indemnify the
township against damage to the township's fire hydrant, water main or other
township property. In addition, and notwithstanding the foregoing, the
applicant and property owner are responsible for and agree as a condition of
the issuance of a fire flow testing permit to indemnify and hold the township
free and harmless from and against any loss, cost or damage that the township
may incur directly or indirectly as a result of the acts or omissions of the
plumber, property owner or their agents or employees in conducting such fire
flow testing.
   F.   The applicant shall provide the township with: 1) a current certificate
of insurance demonstrating that applicant has commercial general liability
insurance coverage from an Illinois licensed insurer with limits of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), with Leyden Township as an additional
insured, and 2) an additional insured endorsement.
   G.   Fire flow testing may only be conducted with approval of the township
at the dates, times and places indicated in a fire flow testing permit issued
by the superintendent of the township water system. The results of the fire
flow testing shall be certified to the township by the applicant.
   H.   Each and every person, firm or entity that engages in, conducts or
attempts to conduct fire flow testing of a township fire hydrant or water main
without a duly issued permit shall be subject individually to a penalty of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the violation of this section, and shall be
guilty of a theft of utility service.
   I.   If more than one hydrant is to be tested, or if fire flow testing is to
be conducted on more than one day, an additional permit fee in an amount
determined by the highway commissioner shall be paid for each day of testing,
and the amount of the security deposit established pursuant to subsection E of
this section shall be an amount determined by the highway commissioner as
necessary to defray the cost of lost water and additional staff time.
   J.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the
applicant agrees to be responsible and strictly liable for the cost of all
water used or lost during such testing, and for any repair, replacement or
maintenance costs incurred by the township to restore the township water system
to its prior condition or better. (Ord. SWO-2016-2, 8-9-2016; amd. Ord. SWO-
2022-1, 2-8-2022)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
5-3-1: Discharge Of Effluent
5-3-2: Prohibited Discharges
5-3-3: Special Arrangements
5-3-4: New Connections
5-3-5: Industrial Wastes Directed To Public Sewers
5-3-6: Building Sewer Construction And Connections
5-3-1: DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT:
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling
water to any sanitary sewer.
   Stormwater and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved
by the approving authority and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial
cooling water or process water may be discharged, on approval of the approving
authority and other regulatory agencies, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-3-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   No person shall cause or permit a discharge into the sanitary sewers
that would cause a violation of the town's NPDES permit and any modifications
thereof.
   B.   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, that could injure or interfere with any waste treatment or sludge
disposal process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a public
nuisance in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facility.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or in excess of 9.0
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment facilities.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in public sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as but not
limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   C.   The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be
limited in discharges to sanitary sewer systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or will not
otherwise endanger lives, limbs, public health, property or constitute a
nuisance. The approving authority may set limitations more stringent than those
established below if such more stringent limitations are necessary to meet the
above objectives. The approving authority will give consideration to the
quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sanitary sewers, the wastewater treatment
facility and other pertinent factors. Wastes or wastewaters discharged to the
sanitary sewers shall not exceed the following limitations:
      1.   Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees (150o) Fahrenheit (65o Celsius).
      2.   Wastewater containing more than twenty five (25) mg/l of petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral oil origin.
      3.   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease.
      4.   Any unground garbage. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary
sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation
of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when
served by caterers.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, copper, zinc and other toxic
and nonconventional pollutants to such degree that the concentration exceeds
levels specified by Federal, State or local authorities.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the approving
authority or limits established by any Federal or State statute, rule or
regulation.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the approving authority in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
      8.   Any wasters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment
facility effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
      9.   Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or
wastes in the sanitary sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
      10.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment
facility.
         b.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined in Section
5-1-2 of this Title.
         c.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not
limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as but not limited to sodium solutions).
         d.   Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
      11.   Incompatible pollutants in excess of the allowed limits as
determined by local, State or Federal laws and regulations in reference to
pretreatment standards developed by the Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR
403, as amended from time to time.
      12.   Any waters or wastes discharged to the sewer containing over 0.1
mg/l hexqualent chromium per twenty four (24) hours composite.
      13.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees (32o) and one hundred fifty degrees (150o)
Fahrenheit (0o and 65o Celsius).
      14.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
      15.   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      16.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time, except as permitted by the Town in compliance with applicable
State and Federal regulations.
      17.   Cyanide shall not exceed ten (10) mg/l at any time, except as
permitted by the Town in compliance with State and Federal regulations. (Ord.
SW-O-89-1, 8-8-89)
5-3-3: SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS:
   No statement contained in this Title shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement between the approving authority and any person whereby a
waste or unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater
treatment facilities, either before or after pretreatment; provided, that there
is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater treatment facilities by
reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the
Town without recompense by the person; and further provided, that all rates and
provisions set forth in this Title are recognized and adhered to. (Ord. SW-O-
89-1, 8-8-89)
5-3-4: NEW CONNECTIONS:
   New connections to the Town's sanitary sewer system will be allowed only if
there if available capacity. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-89)
5-3-5: INDUSTRIAL WASTES DIRECTED TO PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Submission of Basic Data: The approving authority or MWRD may require
each person who discharges or seeks to discharge industrial wastes to a public
sewer to prepare and file with the approving authority or MWRD, at such times
as it determines, a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the
quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged to the wastewater
treatment facilities. In the case of a new connection, the approving authority
or MWRD may require that this report be prepared prior to making the connection
to the public sewers.
   B.   Industrial Discharges: If any waters or wastes are discharged or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this Chapter and which,
in the judgment of the approving authority of MWRD, have a deleterious effect
upon the wastewater treatment facilities, processes, equipment or receiving
waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or health or constitute a
public nuisance, the approving authority or MWRD may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
this Title.
   C.   Control Manholes and Access Facilities:
      1.   Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall,
at the discretion of the approving authority or MWRD, construct and maintain
one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation,
measurement and sampling of wastes, including sanitary sewage.
      2.   Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in
a manner acceptable to the approving authority and MWRD. If measuring and/or
sampling devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type
acceptable to the approving authority and MWRD.
      3.   Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging the waste, at the person’s expense, and
shall be maintained by the person so as to be in safe condition, accessible and
in proper operating condition at all times.
      4.   Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities
and related equipment shall be approved by the approving authority and MWRD
prior to the beginning of construction.
   D.   Measurement of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing sewer
service charges shall be the metered water consumption of the person as shown
in the records of water meter readings maintained by the Superintendent, except
as noted in subsection E of this Section.
   E.   Metering of Waste: Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged
may be required by the approving authority or MWRD if this volume cannot
otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering
devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and
maintained by the person discharging the wastewater. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the
approving authority and MWRD.
   F.   Waste Sampling:
      1.   Industrial waste discharged into the public sewers shall be subject
to periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration of
said wastes. The determination shall be made by the industry as often as may be
deemed necessary to the approving authority or MWRD.
      2.   Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative
of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either
manually or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the approving
authority and MWRD.
      3.   Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities
shall be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste and shall be
subject to the approval of the approving authority and MWRD. Access to sampling
locations shall be granted to the approving authority, MWRD and their duly
authorized representatives at all times. Every care shall be exercised in the
collection of samples to ensure their preservation in a state comparable to
that at the time the sample was taken.
   G.   Pretreatment: Persons discharging industrial wastes into any public
sewer may be required to pretreat such wastes, if the approving authority or
MWRD determines pretreatment is necessary to protect the wastewater treatment
facilities or prevent the discharge of incompatible pollutants. In that event,
such person shall provide, at their expense, such pretreatment or processing
facilities as may be determined necessary to render wastes acceptable for
admission to the sanitary sewers.
   H.   Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority or MWRD, they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable
grease in amounts in excess of those specified in this title or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority and MWRD
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. In maintaining these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal, which records are subject to review by the approving authority and
MWRD. Disposal of the collected materials performed by owners, personnel or
currently licensed waste disposal firms must be in accordance with currently
acceptable Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) rules and
regulations.
   I.   Measurements, Tests And Analysis: All measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
title shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard
Method” and with the federal regulations of 40 CFR 136, “guidelines
establishing test procedures for analysis of pollutants”, as amended from time
to time. Sampling methods, location, time, durations and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the approving
authority and MWRD.
Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial wastes shall
be made by the person discharging them, or the person’s agent, as designated
and required by the approving authority or MWRD. The approving authority or
MWRD may also make its own analyses of the wastes, and these determinations
shall be binding as a basis for sewer service charges.
   J.   Submission Of Information: Plans, specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed flow equalization, pretreatment or
grease and/or sand interceptor facilities shall be submitted for review and
approval of the approving authority and MWRD prior to the start of their
construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the
public sewers. No construction of such facilities shall commence until said
approval has been granted. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-
13-2022)
5-3-6: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Building Sewer Installation: It shall be unlawful to install any
building sewer or to excavate for installation of such sewer unless the sewer
user has first submitted a written application therefor pursuant to section
5-1-4 of this title, entered into a service contract pursuant to said section
5-1-4 of this title and paid all applicable connection fees, security deposits
and delinquent utility charges, if any. Further, such work may only be
performed by Illinois licensed and bonded plumbers pursuant to the
recommendations of the town engineer, the requirements of the MWRD and the
requirements of this title, the Illinois plumbing code, the Cook County
plumbing code and all other applicable governmental rules, regulations or
permits.
   B.   Separate Sewer Connection Required: A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot, and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building, and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
   C.   Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when, upon examination and test by the
superintendent, they are found to meet all requirements of this title.
   D.   Construction Specifications:
      1.   Materials And Methods Of Construction: The size, slope, alignment,
materials and construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe 1 , jointing, testing and backfilling the
trench shall conform to the requirements of this title, other applicable rules
and regulations of the town, the Illinois plumbing code and the applicable
municipal or county building and plumbing codes.
      2.   Building Sewer Grade: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by
an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
      3.   Excavations: All excavations for the building sewer installation
shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from a hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the superintendent.
   E.   Connections To Public Service:
      1.   Inspection Of Connection: The person making connection to a public
sewer shall notify the superintendent within forty eight (48) hours when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
trench shall be left open for inspection by the superintendent. The connection
shall be inspected and approved by the superintendent if it conforms to the
requirements of this title.
      2.   Conformance To Plumbing Codes: The connection of the building sewer
into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of this title, the
Illinois plumbing code, any applicable municipal or county building and
plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the town. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent or a
representative before installation.
   F.   Surface Runoff: No person shall make connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which is connected
directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer. All existing downspouts or
groundwater drains, etc., connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer
shall be disconnected within ninety (90) days of the date of an official
written notice from the superintendent.
   G.   Liability Of Owner For Costs: All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the person
making the connection.
   H.   Building Sewer Disconnection Or Removal: Where building sewers are to
be disconnected from the township sanitary sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this title, such disconnection shall be done as near to the
mainline sewer as practicable. Disconnection of building sewers may only be
performed by officers and employees of the town of Leyden, or by a licensed
plumber contracted by the superintendent to perform such work. (Ord. SWO-2016-
3, 9-13-2016; amd. Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  5-2-3D of this title.
CHAPTER 4
RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Service Charges Defined
5-4-2: Basis For Sewer Service Charges
5-4-3: Combined System Service Charges Established
5-4-4: Billing And Paying For Services
5-4-5: Disposition Of Revenue
5-4-6: Credit Card Acceptance Program
5-4-1: SERVICE CHARGES DEFINED:
   A.   Combined System Service Charges: Combined system service charges shall
be the charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the combined system.
The combined system service charge shall consist of a wastewater service charge
for use of the wastewater facilities, water service charge for the use of the
water facilities, plus a debt service charge.
   The combined system charge, wastewater service charge, water service charge
and debt service charge shall be set in accordance with the formulas contained
in section
5-4-3 of this chapter and shall be set in amounts sufficient to produce
revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance of the combined system,
to provide an adequate depreciation reserve and to pay the debt service of the
combined system, which debt service shall include the principal, interest and
coverage of all outstanding bonds of the combined system.
   B.   Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge shall consist
of the total of the basic sewer user charge and, where applicable, the capital
improvement charge and a surcharge.
   C.   Water Service Charge: The water service charge shall consist of the
total of the basic water user charge and, where applicable, the capital
improvement charge. (Ord. SW-O-89-1, 8-8-1989)
   D.   Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge shall consist of an amount
sufficient to pay the principal of an interest upon the outstanding revenue
bonds, if any, as may be authorized and issued by ordinance of the town board
from time to time. (Ord. SWO-96-3, 11-4-1996)
5-4-2: BASIS FOR SEWER SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   Sewer Users Served By Combined System Water Meters: There is hereby
levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having
a connection with the wastewater collection system and being served with water
solely by the combined system a sewer service charge based, in part, on the
quantity of water used, as measured by the water meter used upon the premises.
   B.   Sewer Users Served By Private Wells: If any person discharging
wastewater into the public sanitary sewers procures any part or all of their
water from sources other than the combined system, all or part of which is
discharged into the sanitary sewers, the person shall have water meters
installed, if required by the combined system, at the person’s expense for the
purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these sources. Where
sewer meters are already installed, new water meters will not be required. The
water meters shall be furnished by the combined system and installed under its
supervision, all costs being at the expense of the person requiring the meter.
The combined system will charge for each meter a rental charge set by the
combined system to compensate for the cost of furnishing and serving the meter.
The rental charge shall be billed at the time the sewer service charge is
billed.
   C.   Deduct Meters: If a user feels that a significant amount of metered
water does not reach the sanitary sewer, the user may choose of one of the
following options:
      1.   The user may request the approving authority to have such additional
meters or metered services installed as are necessary to calculate the volume
of water not discharged to the sanitary sewer (i.e., a “deduct” meter), or the
user may request the approving authority to have a meter installed to measure
the actual amount of sewage discharged to the sanitary sewer (i.e., a “sewage”
meter). Requests for a second meter or metered services must be made, in
writing, to the superintendent. In the event the approving authority agrees to
such installations, the customer shall be charged all costs attendant thereto,
including, but not limited to, a meter yoke for each meter (to be installed by
a licensed plumber), meter rental (the meter shall be owned by the combined
system and shall be subject to access and inspection by the Superintendent and
an authorized representatives at all reasonable times) in an amount set
annually by the approving authority, remote reading device(s) if necessary and
labor and miscellaneous parts and supplies. No provision shall be made, nor
shall any means be taken, to route water from any “deduct” meter to the
customer’s general distribution system. In addition to the general penalties
set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title, any violation of this subsection will
result in nullification of the deduct readings and removal of the deduct water.
      2.   In the event it is physically impractical or impossible to install
metering equipment, the user may request the approving authority to take such
means as it deems necessary to formulate an estimate of the amount of water not
being discharged into the sanitary sewerage system or, conversely, the amount
of actual sewage discharged thereto.
Neither of the options set forth in this subsection shall be applicable or
available to customers for “reasons” which are attendant to use of water for
the filling of pools or watering of lawns and outdoor greenery.
   D.   Basis For Wastewater Service Charges: The wastewater service charge for
the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the Town
shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance.
      1.   The basic sewer user charge shall be based on water usage as
recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following
normal domestic concentrations:
         a.   A five (5) day, twenty degree Celsius (20 C) biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
         b.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred fifty milligrams
per liter (250 mg/l).
         c.   An ammonia nitrogen concentration of sixteen milligrams per liter
(16 mg/l).
      2.   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement
and shall be computed as follows:
         a.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS, pounds of BOD, pounds
of ammonia nitrogen.
         b.   Estimate the number of sewer users.
         c.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year,
for all work categories.
         d.   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement
(OM&R) costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids,
BOD, ammonia nitrogen and fixed costs.
         e.   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage
strength.
         f.   Compute surcharge costs per pound per one thousand (1,000)
gallons in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
         g.   Compute fixed charge by dividing the total fixed costs by the
number of users.
   E.   Reassignment Of Sewer Users: The approving authority will reassign
sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater
sampling programs or other related information indicate a change of categories
is necessary.
   F.   Disposition Of Septic Tank Sludge And Holding Tank Sewage:
      1.   Permit Requirements: No person in the business of gathering and
disposing of septic tank sludge or holding tank sewage shall transfer such
material into any disposal area or public sewer, unless a written permit for
disposal has been first obtained from the Superintendent and the MWRD. Written
application for this permit shall be made to the Superintendent and shall state
the name and address of the applicant, the number of its disposal units and the
make, model and license number of each unit. Permits shall be nontransferable
except in the case of replacement of the disposal unit for which a permit shall
have been originally issued. The permit may be obtained upon payment of a fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per calendar year. The time and place of
disposal will be designated by the approving authority. The approving authority
may impose such conditions as it deems necessary on any permit granted.
The approving authority may impose such conditions as it deems necessary on any
permit granted.
      2.   Insurance Required: Any person or part disposing of septic tank
sludge or holding tank sewage agrees to carry public liability insurance in an
amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to protect any
and all persons or property from injury and/or damage caused in any way or
manner by any act, or the failure to act, by the person or party and any of its
employees. The person(s) shall furnish a certificate certifying such insurance
to be in full force and effect.
      3.   Discharges Regulated: All materials disposed of into the treatment
system shall be of domestic origin, or compatible pollutants only, and the
person(s) agrees that he will comply with the provisions of any and all
applicable ordinances of the Town and shall not deposit or drain any gasoline,
oil, acid, alkali, grease, rags, waste, volatile or flammable liquids or other
deleterious substances into the public sewers nor allow any earth, sand or
other solid material to pass into any part of the wastewater treatment
facilities.
      4.   Nonliability Of Town: The person(s) disposing wastes agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the Town from any and all liability and claims for
damages arising out of or resulting from work and labor performed.
   G.   Charge For Toxic Pollutants: Any person discharging toxic pollutants
which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the
Town’s wastewater treatment facility shall pay for such increased costs as may
be determined by the approving authority. (Ord. SWO-89-1, 8-8-1989; amd. Ord.
SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
5-4-3: COMBINED SYSTEM SERVICE CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Rate Classifications:
      1.   Each residential dwelling unit within an individual building
containing not more than three (3) separate dwelling units shall be charged at
the residential rate for water and sewer use.
      2.   All buildings and properties owned by a nonprofit tax-exempt
organization that are exclusively used for multifamily senior housing,
qualified for the Illinois Affordable Housing Tax Credit (20 ILCS 3805/7.28, as
may be amended), and contain more than three (3) separate dwelling units,
including each residential dwelling until within said buildings and properties,
shall be charged at the residential rate for water and sewer use.
      3.   All buildings and properties owned and occupied by a taxing district
for governmental, Municipal, library or school use shall be charged at the
Municipal rate for water and sewer use.
      4.   All buildings and properties occupied by a charitable, religious or
not for profit organization that is an exempt organization under section 501(c)
of the Internal Revenue Code, and actually and exclusively used for charitable,
religious or beneficent purposes, shall be charged at the Municipal rate for
water and sewer use.
      5.   All buildings, properties and customers which are not classified
within the residential or Municipal rate classifications, shall be classified
as commercial customers and charged at the commercial rate for water and sewer
use.
      6.   Each residential dwelling unit, Municipal rate customer premises and
commercial rate customer premises that is verified to be vacant and unoccupied
for more than ninety (90) days, or is currently suspended from water service or
sewer service, shall be charged the reactivation fee as noted in F.3. of this
section.
   B.   Residential Rate: Effective with the billing cycle commencing July 1,
2025:
      1.   The minimum combined water use and sewer service charge for all
residential rate customers is hereby fixed and established as forty dollars and
fifty-nine cents ($40.59) per monthly billing period, based upon actual or
estimated meter readings of water furnished to the user for the monthly billing
period up to, but not exceeding, three thousand (3,000) gallons.
      2.   The water and sewer user charge for usage in excess of three
thousand (3,000) gallons of water furnished a month shall be at the following
rates:
         a.   Water user charge: Eleven dollars and ninety-two cents ($11.92)
per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
         b.   Sewer user charge: One dollar and sixty-one cents ($1.61) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons.
   C.   Municipal Rate: Effective with the billing cycle commencing July 1,
2025:
      1.   The minimum combined water use and sewer service charge for all
Municipal rate customers is hereby fixed and established as forty-six dollars
and sixty-two cents ($46.62) per monthly billing period, based upon actual or
estimated meter readings of water furnished to the user for the monthly billing
period up to, but not exceeding, three thousand (3,000) gallons.
      2.   The water and sewer user charge for usage in excess of three
thousand (3,000) gallons of water furnished a month shall be at the following
rates:
         a.   Water user charge: Thirteen dollars and forty-three cents
($13.43) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
         b.   Sewer user charge: Two dollars and eleven cents ($2.11) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons.
   D.   Commercial Rate: Effective with the billing cycle commencing July 1,
2025:
      1.   The minimum combined water use and sewer service charge for all
commercial rate customers is hereby fixed and established as one hundred twenty
dollars and eighteen cents ($120.18) per monthly billing period, based upon
actual or estimated meter readings of water furnished to the user for the
monthly billing period up to, but not exceeding, three thousand (3,000)
gallons.
      2.   The water and sewer user charge for usage in excess of three
thousand (3,000) gallons of water furnished a month shall be at the following
rates:
         a.   Water user charge: Eighteen dollars and sixty-two cents ($18.62)
per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
         b.   Sewer user charge: Two dollars and eleven cents ($2.11) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons.
   E.   Suspended Rate: Effective with the billing cycle commencing July 15,
2020:
      1.   The water user charge for all residential and Municipal suspended
rate customers is hereby fixed and established as twenty dollars ($20.00) per
monthly billing period.
      2.   The water user charge for all commercial suspended rate customers is
hereby fixed and established as forty dollars ($40.00) per monthly billing
period.
      3.   The sewer user charge for residential and Municipal suspended rate
customers shall be five dollars ($5.00) per month.
      4.   The sewer user charge for all commercial suspended rate customers
shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per month.
   F.   Service Charges: The following charges shall be effective with the
billing cycle commencing July 15, 2020, and shall be applied to all customers:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for missed appointments to turn on
water service. An appointment will not be considered missed if the customer
calls the main number of the Township (847-455-8616) during business hours not
later than one (1) full business day prior to the turn on appointment to cancel
or reschedule the appointment.
      2.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for missed appointments for meter
inspection. An appointment will not be considered missed if the customer calls
the main number of the Township (847-455-8616) during business hours not later
than one (1) full business day prior to the meter inspection to cancel or
reschedule the appointment.
      3.   The reactivation of service to the premises of a suspended rate
account shall be subject to payment of the account balance associated with the
premises, and a reconnection fee as follows:
         a.   Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for accounts with a balance
due of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
         b.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for accounts with a balance due
between five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
         c.   One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for accounts with a
balance due of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
      4.   The fee for replacing a missing or damaged water meter is six
hundred fifty dollars ($650.00).
      5.   The fee for replacing a missing or damaged MTU is four hundred fifty
dollars ($450.00).
      6.   The fee for unauthorized removal or tampering with a meter or MTU
shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and no more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus the applicable replacement fee.
      7.   Water service to a residential dwelling unit, Municipal rate
customer premises or commercial rate customer premises may be terminated for a
period of time upon written request and payment of a five hundred dollar
($500.00) winterization fee.
   G.   Sanitary Sewer Service Only Rate: Effective with the billing cycle
commencing July 1, 2025, the minimum sewer service charge is hereby fixed and
established as four hundred five dollars and forty-six cents ($405.46) per
monthly billing period for all Municipal and commercial rate customers who only
receive sanitary sewer service.
   H.   Senior Freeze Minimum Monthly Rate: Effective with the billing cycle
commencing July 1, 2025:
      1.   The minimum combined water use and sewer service charge for all
residential rate customers receiving a senior freeze exemption on their second
installment residential Real Estate Tax bill is hereby fixed and established as
thirty dollars and eighty-one cents ($30.81) per monthly billing period, based
upon actual or estimated meter reading of water furnished to the user for the
monthly billing period up to, but not exceeding, three thousand (3,000)
gallons.
      2.   Application for the senior freeze minimum monthly rate is required
annually for the rate applied each January 1 through December 31. The senior
freeze minimum monthly rate application period for each year starts on each
December 15 of the prior year and closes on January 31 of the next year (e.g.,
December 15, 2022, through January 31, 2023).
      3.   Transfer of owner interest at any time will immediately move the
monthly minimum rate to the rate established in subsection B.1. of this
section.
   I.   Connection Fees: The charge for each initial connection to the combined
system shall be based upon the diameter of the pipe furnishing water service,
as follows:
 
1 inch diameter     $1,500.00
1 1/2 inch diameter $2,500.00
2 inch diameter     $4,000.00
3 inch diameter     $5,000.00
4 inch diameter     $7,500.00
6 inch diameter     $10,500.00
8 inch diameter     $14,000.00
 
   J.   Additional Connection And Disconnection Fees:
      1.   Additional Connection Fees: The charge for each connection after the
initial connection to the combined system shall be the cost incurred by the
Superintendent in making such connection.
      2.   Disconnection Fees: The cost of building sewer and water service
line disconnections from the combined system performed by the Township shall be
as follows:
 
Residential building sewer and/or water $2,500.00
service line
Commercial building sewers and/or water $5,000.00, or time and material cost
service lines                           plus $500.00, whichever is greater
Fire suppression systems                $5,000.00, or time and material cost
                                        plus $500.00, whichever is greater
When contracted by Township             Contractor fee plus 10%
 
   K.   Estimated Charges; Interest On Unpaid Bills:
      1.   In cases where it shall be found that a water or sewer meter has
registered incorrectly or has stopped because of malfunctioning equipment, the
charges and payments for sewer and water services shall be made on an estimate
prepared by the Superintendent based upon the average of four (4) preceding
readings of such meter, excluding excessive or obviously substantial deficient
readings. Where such meter has been installed for less than one (1) year or
where less than four (4) competent readings exist, such estimate may be based
upon a lesser number of the four (4) preceding readings of such meter prior to
such incorrect or stopped registration. Where such readings shall be found
excessive or substantially deficient, the Superintendent is authorized to
establish a billing which shall be due and payable when billed. The
Superintendent may also include a reasonable charge for interest on unpaid
sewer and water charges at a rate not to exceed 1.5% per month.
      2.   Estimated Charges; Interest On Unpaid Bills: In cases where it shall
be found that a water or sewer meter has been tampered with or where any
instrument, device or apparatus has been installed that causes diversion,
interference, or inaccurate measurement of utility services, the charges and
payments for sewer and water services shall be made on an estimate prepared by
the Superintendent based upon the average of four (4) preceding readings of
such meter, excluding excessive or obviously substantial deficient readings.
Where such meter has been installed for less than one (1) year where less than
four (4) competent readings exist, such estimate may be based upon a lesser
number of the four (4) preceding readings of such meter prior to such
tampering. Where such readings shall be found excessive or substantially
deficient, the Superintendent is authorized to establish a billing which shall
be due and payable when billed. The Superintendent may also include a
reasonable charge for interest on unpaid sewer and water charges at a rate not
to exceed 5% per month.
   L.   Adjustments: No Town employee is authorized to adjust bills for sewer
and water service from that required by application of the appropriate charges
to actual meter readings, except as may be authorized in writing by the
Superintendent. The Superintendent may, in writing, authorize adjustments to a
user’s bill, if the Superintendent determines that the actual meter readings
are excessive, the appropriate charges were not correctly applied to actual
meter readings, or the adjustments are otherwise appropriate in the
Superintendent’s judgment.
   M.   Water Surcharge; Exclusive Service Violations: In cases where it shall
be found that a user of the combined system is taking water service from
another utility system or source in violation of subsection
5-1-5 A. of this title, a surcharge shall be imposed and charged to the user on
all estimated quantities of water that such user receives or previously
received from such other utility or source at the water user charge rate set
forth in subsection B.1. of this section.
   N.   Changes In Status Of Not For Profit Customers:
      1.   All not for profit organizations that desire to be charged for sewer
and water service at the municipal rate provided in this section shall submit a
written application and any supporting material required by the township to
establish to the satisfaction of the township that: a) the buildings or
properties occupied by the applicant are actually and exclusively used for
charitable, religious or beneficent purposes, and b) that the applicant is a
qualified organization under section 501(c) of the internal revenue code.
      2.   All buildings, properties and customers that are classified as not
for profit organizations and uses and that are charged at the municipal rate
shall be reclassified as commercial customers and charged at the commercial
rate for water and sewer use at such time as:
         a.   The customer loses its 501(c) status;
         b.   The building or property is no longer used exclusively for
charitable, religious or beneficent purposes; or
         c.   The organization is unable to establish to the satisfaction of
the township that it is entitled to be charged at the municipal rate for water
and sewer use as provided under subsection A3 of this section.
      3.   Any organization that has applied and received the municipal rate
for water and sewer use as a not for profit organization under this section
shall notify the township supervisor in writing within five (5) business days
of any change in its status under section 501(c) of the internal revenue code,
of any change in its use or occupancy of a building or property that is
receiving water charged at the municipal rate, or of any other circumstance or
event that disqualifies the organization from receiving sewer and water service
from the township at the municipal rate provided in subsection A3 of this
section.
      4.   Failure of a water customer to give written notice to the township
as required under subsection N3 of this section is a violation of this section
which shall result in an enforcement surcharge of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) being added to the customer’s current account, in addition to any
other fees or charges that may be due from the customer. An adjusted water bill
shall be issued to the customer charging the customer the difference between
the commercial rate and the municipal rate for customer’s water and sewer use
for the period of time that the customer was not eligible to be charged at the
municipal rate for water and sewer use, together with interest at the rate of
1.5% for each month, or part of a month, that the customer was disqualified
from receiving sewer and water service at the municipal rate.
(Ord. SWO-2012-3, 3-13-2012; amd. Ord. SWO-2012-4, 4-10-2012; Ord. SWO-2012-5,
12-4-2012; Ord. SWO-2014-1, 2-11-2014; Ord. SWO-2014-3, 3-11-2014; Ord. SWO-
2014-7, 12-2-2014; Ord. SWO-2015-1, 1-13-2015; Ord. SWO-2015-4, 12-1-2015; Ord.
SWO-2016-3, 9-13-2016; Ord. SWO-2017-2, 5-9-2017; Ord. SWO-2018-4, 5-8-2018;
Ord. SWO-2019-3, 7-9-2019; Ord. SWO-2020-2, 7-7-2020; Ord. SWO-2022-1, 2-8-
2022; Ord. SWO-2022-3, 6-14-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022; Ord. SWO-2023-3,
11-14-2023; Ord. SWO-2024-6, 6-11-2024; Ord. SWO-2024-9, 10-8-2024; Ord. SWO-
2024-10, 11-12-2024; Ord. SWO-2025-3, 6-10-2025)
5-4-4: BILLING AND PAYING FOR SERVICES:
   A.   Billing Period: The superintendent shall bill users for sewer and water
service on a monthly basis, said charges to be based on the amount registered
by the user's water meter for the billing period, or an estimate of the amount
of water provided to the customer's premises when the user's water meter has
not been read.
   B.   Access To Meters; Reading Meters: The superintendent shall cause all
water meters of users to be read at least once every three (3) months. It is
the duty of all customers of the combined system and of all persons, firms or
entities having an ownership or occupancy interest in customer's premises
receiving the benefit of sewer and water service, including their agents,
trustees, receivers, successors, grantees, assigns and representatives, to
provide prompt and efficient access to the user's water meter. In the case of
water meters that are in locations that are not accessible to the
superintendent, it is the customer's duty to provide keys to permit access to
the water meter by the town's meter readers, or to be present to provide prompt
access to the water meter upon request by the town's meter readers. Failure to
provide prompt and efficient access to the user's water meter is cause for
termination of sewer and water utility service from the combined system.
Repeated failure to provide prompt access to the user's water meter is cause
for the Superintendent to relocate the water meter, or to provide one or more
additional water meters, at locations on or about the customer's premises that
are accessible to the Superintendent, the cost of which shall be an additional
charge to the user.
   C.   Bill For Sewer And Water Service: Charges for sewer and water service
shall be paid at the Town Hall within fifteen (15) days after the billing date
on the user's bill. All other charges shall be due and payable when billed.
   D.   Combined Bills For Sewer And Water Service And For Garbage Collection
And Disposal Service: Charges for garbage collection and disposal services
provided and made available to owners of any single-family, duplex and two-
family apartment buildings in the Leyden Township Special Refuse Collection and
Disposal District, and any charges for the abatement of a nuisance as provided
in section
3-4-10 of this Code, shall be added to and collected as part of the sewer and
water bill issued for such property and shall be paid at the Town Hall within
fifteen (15) days after the billing date on the user's bill.
   E.   Late Charges: A late charge amount equal to five percent (5%) of the
bill shall be added and charged on any bill for sewer and water service, on any
combined bill for sewer and water service and for garbage collection and
disposal service, and on any bill for abatement of a nuisance as provided in
section
3-4-10 of this Code, that remains unpaid for more than fifteen (15) days after
the billing due date. An additional five percent (5%) monthly late fee shall be
added and charged for each subsequent month or part thereof that such bill
remains unpaid. Any partial payments of a delinquent bill shall first be
applied to late charges and penalties, and then to the principal amount of the
charges. If applicable, late charges shall include the cost of recording liens
against the customer's premises. Change of ownership or occupancy of customer's
premises shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
   F.   Disconnection of Utility Service For Failure To Pay Bill: Any user who
has not paid the charges billed for sewer and water service, for garbage and
disposal service as provided in Section
3-4-11 of this Code, for nuisance abatement as provided in Section
3-4-10 of this Code, or any penalties for violations of Chapters 1 and 3 of
Article 4 of this Code ("Public Ways and Property"), within thirty (30) days of
the date of the issuance of the bill for such services or penalties may have
the user's utility service cut off by the Superintendent in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this title.
   G.   The charges billed by the Town for sewer and water service, for garbage
and disposal service as provided in Section
3-4-11 of this Code, for nuisance abatement as provided in Section
3-4-10 of this Code, or any penalties for violations of Chapters 1 and 3 of
Article 4 of this Code ("Public Ways and Property"), shall be a debt to the
Town. All persons, firms or entities having an ownership or occupancy interest
in premises receiving the benefit of sewer and water service, including their
agents, trustees, receivers, successors, grantees, assigns and representatives,
are jointly and severally responsible for the payment of all charges billed to
the user and due the Town.
   H.   Lien For Charges: Charges for services that are not paid within fifteen
(15) days after they are due shall be deemed delinquent. Charges that are not
paid within thirty (30) days after they are due shall be a lien against the
real estate being served and shall be subject to enforcement and collection as
provided by law. Change of ownership or occupancy of customer's premises shall
not be cause for reducing or eliminating charges for sewer and water service or
for garbage collection and disposal services.
   I.   Notice Of Delinquency: At least five (5) working days before any action
is taken to enforce the lien or collect the debt for delinquent charges, the
Superintendent shall send or deliver a written notice of delinquency to owner
or occupant of the premises upon or for which service was supplied, which
notice shall state the amount of delinquent charges. Failure to provide or
receive such notice, however, shall not affect the validity of the debt or any
judgment secured or lien filed to collect the debt.
   J.   Enforcement Of Lien: The lien for delinquent charges may be enforced in
the manner set forth below and in any other manner authorized by statute.
      1.   Notice of the lien shall be filed in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Cook County (or in the Office of the Registrar of Titles of Cook
County if the property affected is registered under the torrens system). The
notice of lien shall be verified by the affidavit of the Superintendent or any
subordinate of the Superintendent familiar with the facts and shall consist of
a statement setting forth the following:
         a.   A description of the premises or real estate sufficient for
identification thereof upon or for which the services underlying the charges
were supplied;
         b.   The amount or amounts of money due for the services supplied; and
         c.   The date or dates when such amount or amounts became delinquent.
      2.   Upon the filing of the notice of lien, the town may foreclose the
lien in like manner and in like effect as the foreclosure of mortgages on real
estate.
   K.   Sale Of Property:
      1.   It is the obligation of real estate purchasers to establish credit
and a sewer and water account in their name upon the purchase of real estate or
customer's premises served by the combined system, and to ensure that charges
for sewer and water service provided to the premises, or for garbage collection
and disposal service provided to the premises, have been paid prior to the
transfer of legal or beneficial title or interest in the property or customer's
premises.
      2.   It is the responsibility of the real estate seller, and the customer
if different than the real estate seller, to pay all charges due for sewer and
water service provided to the premises and for garbage collection and disposal
service provided to the premises, and to close the sewer and water account
prior to the transfer of legal or beneficial title or interest in the property
or customer's premises. Payoff statements will be provided upon request.
      3.   Failure of a real estate purchaser to establish credit and a new
sewer and water account within thirty (30) days of transfer of legal or
beneficial title or interest in the customer premises will result in a default
account transfer charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for failure to timely
establish a new sewer and water account with responsibility for sewer and water
service to the customer premises.
   L.   Security Deposit:
      1.   The town reserves the right at any time to require a new or existing
customer to provide a credit reference. As a condition to continuing sewer and
water service to a customer, or reinstating sewer and water service that has
been disconnected as provided in this title, the superintendent may require a
deposit to secure full and timely payment of the customer's account if an
account is delinquent, paid with a bad check, or if the customer otherwise
fails to establish or maintain good credit with the town.
      2.   Landlords shall be required to establish and maintain a security
deposit to secure full and timely payment of the customer's account if an
account is held in the name of a tenant.
   M.   Action To Collect Debt: The town may file an action in the circuit
court of Cook County to recover money due for services from the combined
system, for garbage collection and disposal service provided to the premises,
or for nuisance abatement as provided in section
3-4-10 of this code, plus a reasonable attorney fee to be fixed by the court. A
judgment entered in such a civil action operates as a release and waiver of the
lien upon the real estate for the amount of judgment.
   N.   Release Of Lien: Any lien, claim for lien or suit to foreclose the lien
shall be released, discharged or dismissed upon payment of the charges, court
costs, recording fees, and all other expenditures made or incurred by the town
in perfecting and enforcing its lien.
   O.   NSF Charges; Payment With Good Funds: If a check, draft or other
instrument is tendered to the town in payment of a bill for sewer and water
service, and such check, draft or other instrument is not honored upon
presentment for payment, a charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be
added to the customer's charges for sewer and water service. Following
disconnection of sewer and water service, or payment of a bill for sewer and
water service with a bad or NSF check, draft or instrument, the superintendent
may require the customer to pay all outstanding and future charges with a
certified check, bank check, cashier's check, U.S. post office money order, or
cash.
   P.   Charges For Reinstating Service: Any user who has not timely paid the
charges billed for services under this section, and who has had utility service
to the user's property cut off as a result of such nonpayment, shall make an
appointment with the Superintendent to reinstate utility service upon payment
of all such charges. The charge for reinstating sewer and water utility service
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per service.
   Q.   Accounting Directive: The corporate authorities of Leyden Township have
determined that the compounding of user charges, penalties and delinquent
charges imposed on vacant properties pursuant to this code during the severe
economic downturn of recent years has resulted in unanticipated large
delinquent accounts due to the township, which delinquencies may adversely
affect the marketability of such vacant parcels, and which may in turn
adversely affect the value of neighboring properties. Having further determined
that large uncollectible delinquencies distort the financial reporting of the
combined system, the board of trustees do hereby authorize and direct the
superintendent and treasurer of the combined system to reduce and mark down the
delinquent account balances of properties served by the combined system as
follows:
      1.   All residential and municipal rate customer accounts with a
delinquent account balance in excess of sixty five thousand dollars
($65,000.00) as of the end of the billing period terminating on or before April
30, 2019, and which: a) have been vacant and unoccupied for more than six (6)
months; b) are not consuming any water as determined by the most recent meter
reading, shall be reduced and restated as having an outstanding account balance
of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) as of May 1, 2019.
      2.   All commercial rate customer accounts with a delinquent account
balance in excess of sixty five thousand dollars ($65,000.00) as of the end of
the billing period terminating on or before April 30, 2019, and which:
         a.   Have been vacant and unoccupied for more than six (6) months;
         b.   Are not consuming any water as determined by the most recent
meter reading, shall be reduced and restated as having an outstanding account
balance of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) as of May 1, 2019.
   Notwithstanding subsection
5-4-3 J. of this chapter, the superintendent is authorized to adjust and
compromise the amount required to satisfy the delinquent accounts described in
this subsection.
(Ord. SWO-2001-2, 9-18-2001; amd. Ord. SWO-2009-3, 5-4-2009; Ord. SWO-2012-5,
12-4-2012; Ord. SWO-2013-3, 4-16-2013; Ord. SWO-2014-10, 12-2-2014; Ord. SWO-
2014-11, 12-2-2014; Ord. 2019-2, 5-14-2019; Ord. SWO-2020-2, 7-7-2020; Ord.
SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022; Ord. SWO-2024-5, 5-14-2024)
5-4-5: DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
   All revenues derived from the operation of the combined system, including
all revenues derived from the combined system charges, shall be deposited in
the waterworks and sewerage fund. (Ord. SWO-89-1, 8-8-1989)
5-4-6: CREDIT CARD ACCEPTANCE PROGRAM:
   The superintendent is authorized to accept payments of the service charges
due from customers under the provisions of this chapter, including garbage
collection and disposal charges, by accepting credit card payments as provided
herein.
   A.   The superintendent is authorized to enter into agreements with one or
more financial institutions or other service providers to facilitate the
acceptance and processing of credit card payments for the satisfaction of
service charges under this chapter. Such agreements may include a discount fee
to cover the costs, fees, assessments or surcharges imposed by the service
provider.
   B.   A convenience fee may be imposed upon the customer making payment by
credit card in an amount not to exceed the discount or processing fee incurred
by the township by its acceptance of the customer's credit card payments.
   C.   Subject to regulations established by the superintendent, a customer
may pay all outstanding bills for sewer and water service, including any fees,
penalties and interest that may be due, and any convenience fee imposed upon
credit card payments, by charging such amount to a credit card accepted by the
township or by the financial institution or other service provider contracted
by the township to facilitate the acceptance and processing of credit card
payments. (Ord. SWO-2002-2, 2-12-2002)
CHAPTER 5
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROLS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Enforcement
5-5-2: General Policy
5-5-3: Definitions
5-5-4: Water System
5-5-5: Cross-Connection Prohibited
5-5-6: Survey And Investigations
5-5-7: Where Cross-Control Protection Is Required
5-5-8: Type Of Backflow Prevention Device Required
5-5-9: Backflow Prevention Devices
5-5-10: Inspection And Maintenance
5-5-11: Booster Pumps
5-5-12: Inspection Fee
5-5-13: Compliance Required
5-5-14: Disconnection Of Service
5-5-1: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of
the Superintendent, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent shall give notice
to the water customer to install such approved device immediately. The water
customer shall, at the customer’s own expense, install such an approved device
at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code,
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable Town
regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and Town regulations.
   B.   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the Town may enter the supply or distribution system of the
Town, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method
of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Superintendent and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or
as often as the Superintendent shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys
shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5)
years.
   D.   The approved cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI) shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the Town for
the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and the
Superintendent or an authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the Town for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection control
inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so
served shall furnish to the Superintendent any information which he may request
regarding the piping systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent,
be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
Chapter.
   E.   The Superintendent is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter is known to exist and to take such other
precautionary measures as the Superintendent may deem necessary to eliminate
any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains.
Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have
been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter
and all costs associated with the disconnection and reconnection to the public
system shall be born by the customer. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994; amd. Ord.
SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
5-5-2: GENERAL POLICY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      2.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable water and non-
potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable quality.
      3.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination of pollution of the
public and consumer’s potable water systems.
   B.   Application: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the Town.
   C.   Policy: The Superintendent shall be responsible for protection of the
public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage
of contaminants through the customer’s water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the Superintendent or an authorized representative, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
supply system, the Superintendent shall give notice to the consumer to install
such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the
premises. The consumer, after due written notice and within the prescribed time
indicated on the notice, shall install such approved device or devices at the
consumer’s own expense; failure or refusal on the part of the consumer to
install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have
been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing and repair by this Chapter for a period of at least five (5) years. The
Superintendent may require the consumer to submit a cross- connection
inspection report to the Superintendent to assist in determining whether or not
service line protection will be required. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994; amd. Ord.
SWO-2022-1, 2-8-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
5-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this Chapter. If a phrase or term is not specifically defined in this
Chapter and is defined in the Illinois Environmental Protection Act or the
regulations or rules issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or
the Illinois Pollution Control Board then the word, phrase or term shall have
the same definition.
   AGENCY: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation or their equivalent.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the Town does not have control.
   BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distribution pipes of the public water supply system or other potable water
system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water
supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which contains
stores, offices, or businesses engaged in trade, sales, and/or services.
   CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER'S OR CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system serving the
premises, commencing at the outlet side of the service pipe shutoff valve
location. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.
   CONTAMINANT: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, any odor or any form of
energy which, when present in the public water supply system, may cause the
water to degrade so that the applicable water quality standards are not met or
physical illness or injury to persons consuming the water could result.
   CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, where there may
be a flow from one system into the other.
   A.   Direct cross-connection means a cross- connection formed when a water
system is physically joined to a source of an unknown or unsafe substance.
   B.   Indirect cross-connection means a cross- connection through which an
unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a
potable water system.
   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR OR CCCDI: A person who has
successfully completed Agency-sponsored training and certification to install
and test backflow devices.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under or meeting the requirements of ASSE Standard
1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located
at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the
watertightness of each check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP OR AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through
the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim
of the receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that can be expected to result in death or
significant injury, illness or physical impairment.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which houses
mechanical, trade and/or manufacturing activities.
   INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with the requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890, and as amended from time to time.
   INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which houses
activities for social, health, educational, or religious purposes such as
hospitals, sanitariums, correctional facilities, schools, churches, or
charitable organizations or agencies.
   NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the applicable State law and regulations.
   PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from a main in the street, alley or at
the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble, from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTANT: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, any odor or form of energy
which, when present in the public water supply system, may cause the water to
be aesthetically degraded to the senses of taste, sight or smell without
tending to cause any actual physical illness or injury to persons consuming the
water.
   POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the potability of the water.
   POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of applicable State law
and regulations for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of a water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer's potable water system. Process fluids include
but are not limited to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters;
   B.   Process waters;
   C.   Used waters originating from the public water system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality;
   D.   Cooling waters;
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems;
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public by the Town, including wells and well
structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs,
storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or
intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general
domestic use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under or meeting the requirements of ASSE
Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure.
In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by
discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between
the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include
tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each
device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the consumer.
   SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross- connection control devices and methods located
within that customer's piping system. The survey must be written on a form
approved by the Town.
   SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
   USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the Supervisor. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994)
5-5-4: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   The water system within the Town shall be considered as made up of two
(2) parts: the public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   B.   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system up to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
   C.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   D.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   E.   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994)
5-5-5: CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the public water supply
enters the public water supply unless such private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have
been approved by the Superintendent and the Agency.
   B.   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any arrangement or
connection by which a pollutant or contaminant may enter the public water
supply.
   C.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where cross- connection control devices
or methods which meet the requirements of this Chapter and any applicable State
law or regulation are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   D.   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Town or
the Agency. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994)
5-5-6: SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to cause a survey to be made
at least every two (2) years of properties served by the public water supply to
determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may
exist. This survey shall be an inventory of water uses by service connection
and is not intended to include a visual inspection of piping or plumbing
systems. Surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and
shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the
Superintendent shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
   B.   The Superintendent or a CCCDI may inspect the premises of all consumers
to ascertain the presence or absence of cross- connections within the premises,
to inspect and test cross- connection control devices within the premises and
for the purposes of verifying information submitted pursuant to this Chapter.
If the owners or occupants of the premises do not voluntarily allow the
Superintendent or a CCCDI ready access upon presentation of credentials at
reasonable times to all parts of said premises for the purpose of inspecting,
sampling, examining and photocopying records required to be kept by this
Chapter and the performance of their other duties, then the Superintendent or
the CCCDI shall apply for the issuance of a search warrant which will allow
such inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying and the performance of
any of their other duties. If the Superintendent or the CCCDI finds that it is
necessary to set up on the premises devices that are necessary to conduct
sampling and monitoring operations, the Superintendent shall request permission
from the consumer to set up such devices. If the consumer refuses to grant such
permission, the Superintendent or CCCDI shall apply to the appropriate court
for a warrant or order which will allow such devices to be set up on the
premises.
   C.   Water customers which are commercial, institutional or industrial
establishments shall conduct annual surveys of water use practices on the
customer's premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-
connections to the customer's water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could backflow into the public water supply system. All cross-
connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing License Law, 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 320/3(l), as now or hereafter amended.
   D.   The consumer shall prevent backflow into the public water system by
ensuring that:
      1.   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross- connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
      2.   Cross-connection control devices are installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross-connection control devices are inspected at least annually by
a CCCDI. The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      4.   All cross-connection control devices are tested and records made and
maintained as follows:
         a.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         b.   Records submitted to the Town shall be available for inspection
by Town personnel and Agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4(e) as now or hereafter amended.
         c.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the
most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
         d.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            (1)   Date of each test;
            (2)   Name and number of person performing the test;
            (3)   Test results;
            (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
            (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
            (6)   Service performed and date completed. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-
1994)
5-5-7: WHERE CROSS-CONTROL PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
   A.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where, because of
operations upon or the use of the premises, there is an actual or potential
hazard that a contaminant, pollutant or other substance which may affect the
potability of the public water supply may flow from the service line directly
or indirectly into the public water supply system.
   B.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent and the source
is approved by the Agency.
      2.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Superintendent.
      3.   Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine
whether or not cross-connections exist.
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
      5.   Premises having a history of two (2) or more cross-connections being
established or reestablished within a ten (10) year period.
   C.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Car washes.
      10.   Commercial or industrial establishments which process or
manufacture materials that are considered to be contaminants or pollutants.
(Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994)
5-5-8: TYPE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE REQUIRED:
   When a backflow prevention device is required, the type of device shall be
as follows:
   A.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
   B.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a pollutant, contaminant or
other substance that could cause a system hazard or a health hazard.
   C.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated or polluted with substances that
could cause a hazard not dangerous to health. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994)
   D.   Where the public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for
a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall
be installed on fire sprinkler systems connected to the public water supply per
the Illinois Plumbing Code or other government agency, whichever is more
stringent when: (Ord. SWO-2018-2, 2-13-2018)
      1.   The sprinkler system contains antifreeze, fire retardant and/or
other chemicals;
      2.   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
      3.   Water flows into the fire safety system by gravity from a nonpotable
source; or
      4.   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to the
sprinkler system.
   E.   The type of protection required unless otherwise specified in this
section shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-
1994)
5-5-9: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by or be the equivalent of devices or methods
approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the
University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American
Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards Institute or
certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with
applicable industry specification.
   B.   All approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed in
accordance with 35 Illinois Administrative Code 653.802, and only as specified
by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of
Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society of
Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards Institute. Maintenance as
recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed.
Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site. (Ord. SWO-94-2,
10-11-1994)
5-5-10: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which a
backflow prevention device required by this chapter is installed to have the
backflow prevention device inspected, tested, maintained and repaired in
accordance with the following schedule or as specified in the manufacturer's
manual if the manual provides for more frequent inspections, testing or
maintenance.
      1.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter to document that a proper
vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the service line
and the flood level rim of the receptacle. Corrections to improper or bypassed
air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and
required service performed within fifteen (15) days.
      3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer,
and required service performed within five (5) days.
   B.   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   C.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   D.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      1.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      3.   Test results;
      4.   Repairs or servicing required;
      5.   Repairs and date completed; and
      6.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   E.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this chapter are found
to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer within five (5) days, provided, however, that if the device cannot be
repaired or replaced within five (5) days because of unavailability of parts,
materials or labor, it shall be repaired or replaced as soon thereafter as
possible.
   F.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994)
5-5-11: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-
off device in proper working order and to certify to the Superintendent at
least once a year that the device is operable. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994)
5-5-12: INSPECTION FEE:
   Whenever an inspection required or otherwise provided for under this chapter
is made by or on behalf of the Town, the owner or occupant of the premises
shall pay a fee to the Town of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for such
inspection. (Ord. SWO-2018-2, 2-13-2018)
5-5-13: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Consumers must comply with this chapter in order to continue to receive
water service from the public water supply system. (Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994)
   B.   If the public water supply is contaminated or polluted by backsiphoned
backpressured material or backflow, and if the contamination or pollution
occurs through an improperly installed, maintained or repaired backflow
prevention device, or because a backflow prevention device has been bypassed,
or because a required backflow prevention device was removed or not installed,
then the consumer responsible shall, in addition to any fines or other amounts
due, pay to the Town any and all costs incurred in removing the contaminant or
pollutant from the public water supply system, including the cost of effecting
compliance with and enforcing this chapter. (Ord. SWO-2018-2, 2-13-2018)
5-5-14: DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Violation: The premises of a consumer who violates a provision of this
chapter may be disconnected from the public water supply system as provided in
this section.
   B.   Procedures For Immediate Disconnection:
      1.   Contamination Of Public Water Supply: Any consumer is subject to
having the premises immediately disconnected from the public water supply
system whenever immediate disconnection is required to halt or prevent any
pollutant or contaminant from flowing from the premises into the public water
supply system which reasonably appears to the Superintendent to present a
severe health hazard.
      2.   Notice To Halt Contamination: The Superintendent shall have the
authority, after informal notice to the consumer, to immediately and
effectively halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants or contaminants to the
public water supply system that reasonably appears to present a severe health
hazard. When the Superintendent determines that such an emergency situation
exists, the Superintendent shall issue a verbal order (followed immediately by
a written order) to the consumer, stating the problem and requiring immediate
cessation of the discharge. The Superintendent’s actions may include the
disconnection of water service. Methods of informal notice shall include, but
not be limited to, any of the following: personal conversation between the
consumer and Town employees, telephone calls, letters, hand-delivered messages
or notices posted at the consumer’s premises or point of discharge.
      3.   Right To Request Hearing: Any consumer who is disconnected pursuant
to subsection B.1. of this section, shall have the right to request an informal
hearing before the Superintendent or an authorized representative at which time
the consumer shall be given the opportunity to show cause as to why the
consumer should not be disconnected from the public water supply system. Such
hearing shall commence within seven (7) days after a written request for the
hearing is received by the Superintendent. Such hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures contained in subsection C. of this section.
   C.   Procedures For Disconnection In Nonemergency Situations:
      1.   The Superintendent may order any consumer who causes or allows any
condition to occur which violates the provisions of this chapter to show cause
why the premises where the condition occurred should not be disconnected from
the public water supply system. A notice shall be served on the consumer
specifying the time and place of a hearing regarding the violation, the reasons
why the action is to be taken, the proposed action and directing the consumer
to show cause why the premises should not be disconnected. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
      2.   The Superintendent may conduct the hearing and take the evidence or
may designate the Town Attorney to:
         a.   Issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony
of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in
such hearing;
         b.   Take the evidence;
         c.   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the
Superintendent for action thereon.
      3.   After the Superintendent has reviewed the evidence, he/she may issue
an order to the consumer directing either: that the premises be disconnected
from the public water supply system; or, that following a specified time, the
premises shall be disconnected and water service discontinued, unless the
condition causing the violation is corrected.
      4.   Following an order to disconnect, the Superintendent shall cause
whatever action is needed to be taken in order to disconnect the consumer’s
premises from the public water supply system.
   D.   Appeal Procedure: If the consumer believes the Superintendent’s ruling
is erroneous, the consumer may, within ten (10) days after notification of the
determination, file a written appeal with the Town Clerk to be heard by the
Board of Trustees. The written appeal shall state the specific basis for the
alleged error. The written appeal shall be heard by the Board within thirty
(30) days from the date of filing. The Board shall make a final ruling on the
appeal within twenty-one (21) days from the date of hearing. No appeal shall be
heard or allowed unless the consumer deposits with the Town Clerk, a certified
or cashier’s check payable to the Town in an amount equivalent to the estimated
cost of complying with the Superintendent’s ruling, said cost to be determined
by the Town Engineer. Such check shall be deposited within seven (7) days of
the filing of the written appeal and shall serve as a bond guaranteeing
compliance should the appeal be denied in whole or in part.
   E.   Restoration Of Water Service: If water service is disconnected pursuant
to this section, water service shall not be restored to the premises until such
time as the condition which caused the violation is corrected and a
reconnection fee paid to the Town based on the diameter of the pipe furnishing
water service, as follows:
 
1-inch diameter or less    $ 100.00
11/2-inch diameter or less 100.00
2-inch diameter or less    175.00
3-inch diameter or less    300.00
4-inch diameter or less    600.00
6-inch diameter or less    1,000.00
8-inch diameter or less    1,600.00
 
(Ord. SWO-94-2, 10-11-1994; amd. Ord. SWO-2018-2, 2-13-2018; Ord. SWO-2022-1,
2-8-2022; Ord. TO-2022-13, 9-13-2022)
TITLE 6
TOWNSHIP PARKS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
TOWNSHIP PARKS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Closing Hours
6-1-2: Trespass
6-1-1: CLOSING HOURS:
   A.   From May 1 through September 30, all Township parks shall be closed to
the public between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M., central time.
   B.   From October 1 through April 30, all Township parks shall be closed to
the public between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M., central time.
   C.   Written notice forbidding entry during the hours when Township parks
are closed to the public shall be conspicuously posted at the main entrance to
such parks. (Ord. TO-2021-11, 10-12-2021)
6-1-2: TRESPASS:
   A.   No person shall, without authority, knowingly enter or remain on the
premises of any Township park during the hours that the park is closed to the
public.
   B.   No person is authorized to remain on the premises of a Township park
who commits or threatens to commit, while on the premises, any offense
punishable under the Illinois Criminal Code against property, against another
person, or against public health, safety or decency.
   C.   No person shall remain on the premises of a Township park after being
notified personally to leave the premises. (Ord. TO-2021-11, 10-12-2021)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
6-2-1: General Prohibition
6-2-2: Rental Of Township Facilities
6-2-3: Requirements For Sale Or Delivery Of Alcoholic Beverages
6-2-1: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
The sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages in any Township building is
prohibited except as authorized by this chapter. (Ord. TO-2021-11, 10-12-2021)
6-2-2: RENTAL OF TOWNSHIP FACILITIES:
Any person desiring to use a Township facility for an event or activity
involving the sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages shall submit an
application for rental of the Township facility on a form to be provided by the
Township. Such person shall provide such additional information as may be
required by the Town Supervisor. The use of a Township facility, if approved by
the Town Supervisor, shall be strictly in conformance with the terms and
conditions of the rental agreement for the facility and any further
requirements imposed by the Town Supervisor. (Ord. TO-2021-11, 10-12-2021)
6-2-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR SALE OR DELIVERY OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   No sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages is permitted in any Township
facility without the express written approval of the Town Supervisor.
   B.   Any person, firm or entity ("user") who intents to sell, serve or
deliver alcoholic beverages in a Township facility, subject to approval of the
Town Supervisor, shall first comply with all applicable requirement of the
liquor control ordinance of the municipality or county having jurisdiction over
the Township facility to be rented, including the provision of dramshop
insurance. The Township shall be an additional named insured on the dramshop
insurance policy. The user shall provide evidence that the user has complied
with these requirements not less than one (1) business day prior to the
scheduled event. (Ord. TO-2021-11, 10-12-2021)
