VILLAGE CODE
of
LISLE, ILLINOIS
1979
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-5181, passed November 3, 2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Lisle, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2025-5181, passed November 3, 2025. Ordinances of
the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ord 2026-5195
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 7, OF THE VILLAGE OF LISLE CODE,
ADOPTING THE 2024 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Lisle (the “Village”) is an Illinois non-home rule
municipality organized and operating under the Illinois Constitution (Ill.
Const., Art. VII, Sec. 7) and the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1 et
seq.); and
 
WHEREAS, the Illinois Capital Development Board Act (20 ILCS 3105/10.09-5)
requires the Capital Development Board to adopt rules implementing a statewide
Energy Code; and
 
WHEREAS, the Illinois Capital Development Board has adopted the 2024
International Energy Conservation Code with amendments; and
 
WHEREAS, the Mayor and Village of Lisle Board of Trustees have determined it
necessary to adopt the 2024 International Energy Conservation Code, as amended
by the State of Illinois, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations
for the construction, alteration, equipment, use and occupancy, location and
maintenance of building construction in accordance with proper energy
conservation methods; and
 
WHEREAS, Section 1-2-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-3.1) and
Section 10.18 of the Capital Development Board Act (20 ILCS 3105/10.18) require
the Village to provide to the Capital Development Board, at 30 days prior to
the adoption of any amendment to a code that establishes construction related
regulation, an identification of the code, by title and edition, and the
proposed local amendment thereto; and
 
WHEREAS, Section 2 and Section 5 of the Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records
Act (50 ILCS 220/2, 50 ILCS 220/5) require the Village to, at least 15 days
prior to the adoption of an ordinance amending a code incorporated by
reference, to file with the Village Clerk three copies of the code and the
amendments thereto so that such codes and amendments may be made available for
public use, inspection, and examination; and
 
WHEREAS, the Village has complied in all respects with the statutory
requirements set forth in the preceding two paragraphs.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Lisle, County of DuPage, Illinois as follows:
 
SECTION 1: The foregoing recitals shall be, and are hereby, incorporated into
and made a part of this Ordinance as if fully set forth in this Section.
 
SECTION 2: Title 4, Chapter 7, of the Village of Lisle Code of Ordinances is
hereby amended as shown on Exhibit 1, attached hereto and, by this reference,
incorporated herein (additions in underline, deletions in strikethrough).
 
SECTION 3: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect following its
passage and approval as required by law.
 
SECTION 4: Any prior order, resolution, policy or ordinance of the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Lisle in conflict with the provisions of this
Ordinance, shall be and hereby are, repealed to the extent of such conflict.
 
SECTION 5: The Village Clerk is hereby authorized to publish this ordinance in
book or pamphlet form or such other form which is permitted or required
pursuant to applicable law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Village Board of the Village of Lisle on this 12th
day of January 2026.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4196_3725x720.jpg]
 
ATTEST:
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/ 0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4201_3725x768.jpg]           IMAGES/0-0-0-4204_2247x2247.jpg]
 
 
Ayes: Trustees Duffy, Sima, Grau, Lesniak, McGovern, and Olson
Nays: None
Absent: None
Abstain: None
 
 
 
Published by the Village Clerk, in pamphlet form, by authority of the corporate
authorities of the Village of Lisle on the 12 of January, 2026.
 
 
Exhibit 1
 
 
CHAPTER 7
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
 
SECTION:
4-7-1: Adoption
 
4-7-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 2024 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (Energy
Conservation Code), as deleted, modified, or amended by the State of Illinois,
for the purpose of establishing minimum requirements to provide a reasonable
level of safety, health, property protection and general welfare by regulating
and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation, and maintenance or use of mechanical equipment or systems
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth.
(Ord. 2021-4942, 1-3-2022; amd. Ord. 2024-5053, 2-19-2024)
 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 80-956
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE
   OF THE VILLAGE OF LISLE, ILLINOIS
   BE IT ORDAINED by the president and board of trustees of the village of
Lisle, DuPage County, Illinois, an Illinois municipal corporation, as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the village
code of the village of Lisle, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
under the direction of the governing body of the village, containing all
ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the village as enacted by the president and board of trustees.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official village code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Hereafter, each
such new provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and
the insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the code, three
(3) copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk,
certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times
that said office is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official
village code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some of the provisions have been deliberately eliminated by
the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official village code. All
ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the village code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the
official village code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of the village code of the village of Lisle, Illinois.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. Ordinances of a general nature
adopted subsequent to preparation of the village code of Lisle, Illinois by
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. up to and including the date of adoption of this
ordinance and not forwarded for inclusion in said code to Sterling Codifiers,
Inc. shall remain in full force and effect. Three (3) copies attached to said
code shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open and shall, as soon as may be practicable, be codified in the
manner specified in section 2 hereof.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in pamphlet form by order of the president and
board of trustees.
   Section 7: The validity or invalidity of any section, paragraph, clause,
provision, term, phrase, sentence, segment or word of this ordinance shall in
no way affect the validity or invalidity of any other section, clause,
provision, term, phrase, sentence, segment or word of this ordinance. In the
event any such section, paragraph, clause, provision, term, sentence, segment
or word is held to be unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of remaining portions of this ordinance or any part hereof. The
corporate authorities hereby declared that they would have passed each section,
paragraph, clause, provision, term, sentence, segment or word hereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, paragraphs,
clauses, provisions, terms, sentences, segments or words, subsections or
phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid, ineffective or void.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by ordinance enacted by the corporate authorities, this code is
hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code.
This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the LISLE VILLAGE CODE, and
it is hereby published by authority of the board of trustees and shall be kept
up to date as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the village attorney, acting for
said village board of trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this code by title in any legal document. (1979 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1979 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers by the business office manager and the said ordinance material shall
be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each
such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in
each individual copy of the village code. (1979 Code; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-
1994)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required to
constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud
any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1979 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
corporate authorities. The business office manager shall see that the
replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in
the office of the business office manager. Any person having in his custody an
official copy of this code shall make every effort to maintain this code in an
up to date and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new
or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him
through the office of the business office manager. Said code books, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the
business office manager when directed so to do by order of the corporate
authorities. (1979 Code; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries, and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the village; and all special ordinances. (1979 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1979 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1979 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The corporate authorities hereby declare that
they would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases
be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1979 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions Of Words And Terms
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such changes to the village's ordinances are not meant to amend
the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1979 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the board of trustees of the
village of Lisle.
CODE: The village code of Lisle, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The county of DuPage, state of Illinois.
DOWNTOWN AREA: Shall include all property located generally within the
following boundaries: Beginning at the southeast corner of Division Street and
Center Street and following a line going westerly along the south border of
Division Street and continuing along the south lot lines of the property
located on the south side of Lisle Place to Illinois Route 53; then south along
the east side of Route 53 to the south lot line of the property located at 4930
Lincoln Avenue (Route 53) extended to the east side of Route 53; then westerly
along the south lot line of 4930 Lincoln Avenue (Route 53) to the DuPage River;
then north along the DuPage River to the Burlington Railroad right-of-way; then
northeast along the southern edge of the Burlington Railroad right-of- way to
the southeast corner of the Burlington Railroad right- of-way and Route 53;
then north along the east side of Route 53 to the northeast corner of Route 53
and Southport Avenue; then easterly along the north side of Southport Avenue to
the western lot lines of the properties located on the west side of Main Street
with addresses of 4600, 4602, 4604 and 4606 Main Street; then north along the
western lot lines of said properties to Lacey Avenue; then easterly along the
south side of Lacey Avenue to the eastern lot lines of property located on the
east side of Main Street with addresses of 4601, 4603, 4605 and 4607 Main
Street; then south along the eastern lot lines of said properties located on
the east side of Main Street to the north side of Southport Avenue; then
westerly to the northeast corner of Southport Avenue and Lacey Avenue; then
southeasterly on the east side of Lacey Avenue to the southern lot line of the
property located at 4622 Lacey Avenue as extended to the east side of Lacey
Avenue; then west along the south lot line of property located at 4622 Lacey
Avenue to the eastern lot line of property located at 979 Ogden Avenue; then
south following approximately the east lot line of property located at 979
Ogden Avenue as extended and along the east boundary of the commuter parking
lot to the south lot line of the Burlington Railroad right-of-way; then
southwesterly to the northeast corner of Center Avenue and Front Street; then
south along the east side of Center Avenue to the southeast corner of Center
Avenue and Division Street.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Lisle".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May 1 and end on
April 30 of each year.
ILLINOIS REVISED STATUTES/SMITH-HURD ANNOTATED STATUTES: As of January 1, 1993,
any reference to either the "Illinois Revised Statutes" or the "Smith-Hurd
Annotated Statutes" within this code shall mean the "Illinois Compiled
Statutes", and any reference to a particular provision of either the "Illinois
Revised Statutes" or the "Smith-Hurd Annotated Statutes" shall mean the
corresponding provision of the "Illinois Compiled Statutes".
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NEGLIGENT (NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE OR NEGLIGENTLY): Imports a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Lisle".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
SMITH-HURD ANNOTATED STATUTES/ILLINOIS REVISED STATUTES: See definition of
Illinois Revised Statutes/Smith-Hurd Annotated Statutes.
STATE: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the state of Illinois.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle, DuPage County, state of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The president of the village may be referred to as "mayor"
or "president" of the village 1 .
WHOLESALER, WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The terms "written" or "in writing" may include printing
and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written
signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or
bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or
in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (Ord. 146, 2-5-1963; amd.
1979 Code; Ord. 93-2370, 3-15-1993; Ord. 2002-3434, 11-18-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2.1.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1979 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-5: Collection Of Fines, Fees And Other Sums
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be fined
as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for any one offense, excepting any specific section of this code
wherein the maximum fine is limited to a different amount, and said person may
be confined in the village or county jail for a period of not more than six (6)
months 1 . (Ord. 95-2690, 10-16-1995; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued to him by the village may be revoked by a court of
competent jurisdiction or by the board of trustees. (1979 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action is of a continuing
nature, is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1979 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
To the fullest extent permitted by the constitution of the state of Illinois of
1970 and all other applicable laws, each of the following officials, employees,
agents or representatives of the village:
   President;
   Each member of the village board (i.e., each trustee);
   Village manager and each assistant or acting village manager;
   Village clerk and each deputy or acting village clerk or recording
secretary;
   Village collector;
   Village engineer who acts in the capacity of a salaried employee in a
position so created and designated by the corporate authorities;
   Finance director;
   Chief of police;
   Building and zoning commissioner;
   Superintendent of sewer and water department;
   Superintendent of street department;
   Purchasing/personnel manager;
   Community service officer;
   Plumbing inspector;
   Each member of any board or commission of the village established pursuant
to applicable law or by ordinance or resolution of the village; (Ord. 715, 10-
18-1977; amd. Ord. 82-1027, 1-5-1982; Ord. 84-1252, 12-3-1984; Ord. 86-1502,
12-1-1986, eff. 1-6-1987) shall be indemnified, defended and held harmless by
the village from and against all liabilities, expenses of investigation,
judgments and amounts paid in settlement which may be imposed upon, come due,
or which are reasonably incurred or paid by such official, employee, agent or
representative in connection with or resulting from any claim made against him
or her or any action, suit, proceeding or investigation in which he or she may
be involved, by reason of his or her being or having been such official, or
such employee, or such agent or representative of the village, whether or not
he or she continues to be such official, employee, agent or representative at
the time of such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation provided,
however, that the foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
   (A)   Any liability or cost with respect to any matter as to which such
official or employee is finally adjudged to be guilty of bad faith, or actual
malice, or wilful and wanton misconduct in the performance of his duties as
such official, employee, agent or representative;
   (B)   Any payment, expense or cost arising out of a settlement of any claim,
action, suit or proceeding, unless: 1) such settlement shall be approved by the
court having jurisdiction over such claim, action, suit or proceeding, with
express knowledge of the existence of the indemnification provided hereby, or
2) such settlement shall have been made upon the written opinion of independent
legal counsel selected by the village corporate authorities, to the effect that
there is no reasonable ground for any finding of bad faith, or of actual
malice, or wilful and wanton misconduct on the part of such official, employee,
agent or representative and that the anticipated cost of such settlement will
not substantially exceed the estimated cost and expense of defending such
claim, action, suit or proceeding to a final conclusion;
   (C)   Any liability or judgment payable to the village itself;
   (D)   The cost of independent legal representation in any such action, suit
or proceeding if the village offers or otherwise indicates its willingness to
provide an adequate legal defense with respect to such claim, action, suit,
proceeding or investigation.
The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any other
rights to which such official or employee may otherwise be entitled as a matter
of law. The indemnified persons aforesaid shall have the right to counsel of
their choice in the event counsel retained by the village is unable or declines
representation for any reason or the circumstances necessitate the employment
of independent counsel. (Ord. 715, 10-18-1977)
1-4-5: COLLECTION OF FINES, FEES AND OTHER SUMS:
All fines, fees, charges, interest or other sums due to the village shall be
debts owed to the village and shall be collectible as such. If any such sums
are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of any invoice sent by the
village, the village may charge interest at a rate as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” on all past due amounts. (Ord. 96-2721, 1-2-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-
4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 5
PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Meetings Of The Board
1-5-2: President As Mayor
1-5-3: Compensation Of President And Trustees
1-5-4: Time Of Taking Office
1-5-5:   Rules For Village Board Of Trustees Conduct
1-5-1: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
   (A)   Regular Meetings:
      1.   The regular meetings of the corporate authorities of the village
shall be held at the village hall on each and every first and third Monday of
every calendar month, except when the date for such meeting may fall on a
public holiday, in which case the meeting shall be held on an alternate date as
determined by the corporate authorities. All regular meetings of the corporate
authorities shall convene at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. unless otherwise ordered
by said corporate authorities. (Ord. 2011-4389, 6-6-2011)
      2.   Annual notice of the time and place of the regular meetings of the
corporate authorities or any formally created advisory groups shall be posted
in the village hall and sent to any registered news media.
      3.   Notice of any permanent change in the meeting date of the corporate
authorities, committees, subcommittees or advisory groups will be published in
a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days before such change.
Notice of such change will also be posted in the village hall and sent to any
registered news media.
   (B)   Reconvened Meetings:
      1.   Any reconvened meeting may be held for the purpose of completing the
unfinished business of a regular meeting at such time or times as may be
determined by the corporate authorities.
      2.   No notice of a reconvened meeting will be given if the original
meeting is open to the public and is to be reconvened within twenty four (24)
hours; or if an announcement of the time and place of the reconvened meeting is
made at the original meeting and there is no change in the agenda. (Ord. 86-
1483, 10-6-1986)
      3.   If the reconvened meeting does not meet the above requirements then
notice of the time and place and an agenda of such meeting will be posted at
the village hall and given to any registered news media at least forty eight
(48) hours before the reconvened meeting.
   (C)   Rescheduled Meeting: Notice of the time and place and an agenda of any
rescheduled meeting will be posted at the village hall and sent to any
registered news media at least forty eight (48) hours before the rescheduled
meeting. (Ord. 2011-4389, 6-6-2011)
   (D)   Special And Emergency Meetings:
      1.   Special meetings of the corporate authorities may be called by the
president or any three (3) members of the board of trustees by submitting to
the village clerk or village manager a written or oral request for such special
meeting stating the time, place, nature and subject matter of such meeting.
Emergency meetings may also be called in the same manner. (Ord. 86-1483, 10-6-
1986)
      2.   Notice of the time and place and an agenda of the special meeting
shall be sent to the president and board of trustees, posted at the village
hall and furnished to any registered news media at least forty eight (48) hours
before the special meeting. Notice of the time and place of an emergency
meeting will be given to the president and board of trustees, to any registered
media and by posting such notice at the village hall as soon as practicable,
but in any event prior to the holding of such meeting. (Ord. 2011-4389, 6-6-
2011)
      3.   The provisions hereof requiring notice to the president and board of
trustees may be waived should all members of said board and the president be
present at such emergency or special meeting; provided however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent the holding of a meeting by unanimous
consent of the president and board of trustees.
   (E)   Minutes Of Meetings:
      1.   Written minutes of all executive committee meetings shall be taken.
Such minutes will include the date, time and place of such meeting; the members
of the public body recorded as either present or absent; and a general
description of all matters proposed, discussed, or decided, and a record of any
votes taken.
      2.   The minutes of meetings open to the public shall be available for
public inspection within seven (7) days of the approval of such minutes by the
Corporate Authorities.
      3.   The minutes of meetings closed to the public will be available only
after the Corporate Authorities determine that it is no longer necessary to
protect the public interest or the privacy of the individual by keeping them
confidential.
   (F)   Open Meetings: Meetings of the Corporate Authorities of every kind and
nature shall be open to the public, except where specifically exempted by State
law 1 .
   (G)   Rules and Procedures
       1.   Village Board Meeting
         (a)   Parliamentary Procedure: Meetings will be conducted following
these rules of Protocols and Procedures. For all matters not governed by these
rules, matters of the Village Board of Trustees will be governed by the most
recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order. In the case of an inconsistency or
conflict between these rules and Robert's Rules of Order, these rules will
apply and control. If a matter is not covered by these rules, then Robert's
Rules of Order will apply and control.
          (b)   Questions of Order, Decisions: All questions of order will be
addressed to, and decided by, the Mayor. The Mayor will decide all questions of
parliamentary procedure without debate. The decision of the Mayor may be
appealed to the Village Board of Trustees by motion stating the question be
appealed.
          (c)   Agenda Items or New Initiatives: The agenda is prepared by the
Village Manager at the direction of the Mayor. If a Trustee is interested in
having the Board of Trustees consider a new initiative (which may or may not
require the expenditure of staff time) placed on the agenda, the matter must
first be presented at a regular Committee of the Whole meeting per Rule 2d.
      When a Trustee raises a topic at the Village Board of Trustees meeting,
the Mayor may choose to discuss it and general next steps, acknowledge the
request and take it under advisement for a future agenda item, or direct that
the item be placed on a Committee of the Whole meeting agenda.
          (d)   The Floor: A Trustee will not speak until recognized by the
Mayor, who will decide who has the floor. Trustees always should act to ensure
the meeting is conducted in a smooth and orderly manner. Trustees will address
all comments and discussions through the Mayor. All remarks should be addressed
to the merits of the pending matter. No trustee shall speak more than twice on
the same question without majority consent of the Village Board; nor more than
once until every member wishing to speak shall have spoken.
          (e)   Roll Call Votes: A roll call vote of "ayes" and "nays" will be
taken and recorded in the minutes of proceedings for all ordinances and for all
resolutions or motions that create any liability against or obligation on the
part of the Village, or for the expenditure or appropriation of Village money,
or for approval of expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of any member of the
corporate authorities, and in all other instances where requests therefore are
made by any Trustee.
      The mayor can vote on an ordinance, resolution, or motion: 1. when needed
to break a tie; 2. when three of the trustees have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution, or motion, even absent a tie vote; or 3. when the
Municipal Code requires a vote of greater than a majority of the corporate
authorities to adopt an ordinance, resolution, or motion.
          (f)   Subsidiary Motions: When a motion is pending before the Village
Board of Trustees, no other motion will be considered except one of the
following motions:
            (1)   To adjourn
            (2)   To lay on the table
            (3)   To call the previous question, which, if seconded and
approved by a 2/3 vote, will end debate on a topic
            (4)   To postpone indefinitely
            (5)   To postpone to a definite time
            (6)   To amend the motion
            (7)   To Adjourn: A motion to adjourn is always in order except
when:
               a.   A member is in possession of the floor
               b.   A motion on the main question is pending
               c.   A motion to reconsider is pending
         (g)   Confidentiality: The Mayor, Trustees and any staff present will
keep confidential all matters and documents discussed in Executive Session or
otherwise designated as confidential. That confidentiality will be kept until
the Village Board of Trustees has officially declared the matter or document no
longer is confidential. To this end, minutes of Executive Sessions should be
reviewed regularly to determine if they should be released to the public.
         (h)   Village board and Village Clerk comments will be included on the
agenda.
       2.   Committee of the Whole Meetings
         (a)   Time of Meeting: The Committee of the Whole meeting shall be
held at a time and place approved in the annual Board meeting schedule, or as
otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees.
          (b)   Conduct of Committee of the Whole: The atmosphere in these
meetings is intended to be more informal, and public comment shall be allowed
for each agenda item. To the extent practicable, the rules set forth in Section
1-5-1 (G) Rules and Procedures for Village Board meetings, shall be followed
for the Committee of the Whole.
         (c)   Items Before Committee of the Whole: Matters coming before the
committee from an advisory body, such as the plan commission, or village
manager shall may be presented to the committee of the whole prior to being
considered by the village board. A representative of the advisory body shall
attend the committee of the whole meeting at such time as the recommendation of
the body is discussed. The representative may be a Village staff member. This
representative should be prepared to present the recommendation and answer
questions.
         (d)   Agenda: Order of the Agenda:
            (1)   Agenda items. Public comment shall be permitted on agenda
items. Comments are limited to five (5) minutes per speaker unless the mayor
grants leave for additional time.
            (2)   Request for future committee of the whole agenda items from
trustees. An item will be placed on the next Committee of the Whole if three
trustees concur with the request. An item will be placed on the next Committee
of the Whole if two trustees concur with the request if no staff report is
required.
            (3)   Village board and Village Clerk comments.
         Trustees may speak only once unless granted leave from the village
president.
         The agenda is prepared by the Village Manager at the direction of the
Mayor.
      (H)   Smoking Prohibited: Henceforth, it shall be unlawful for any person
to use or ignite any smoking materials such as, but not limited to, cigarettes,
cigars, pipes and other smoking paraphernalia which give off by combustion,
smoke of any kind or nature whatsoever in or about rooms and hallways adjoining
rooms wherein regular and special meetings or public hearings of the Corporate
Authorities, Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals are being conducted.
It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to cause to be printed and to post
in conspicuous places, within and about rooms wherein such meetings are
normally conducted, adequate "No Smoking" signs indicating the existence of
this regulation, the fact that smoking is prohibited and warning as to the
nature of the possible penalty for violation of this provision.
Any person found to have violated the provisions of this subsection shall be
fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each violation.
      (I)   Public Participation: Public participation at Village meetings is
encouraged. A period of time at each meeting of the Village Board shall be made
available for public comments. Public participation is subject to the following
rules:
         1.   Comments related to a specific agenda item shall occur during
discussion of the item rather than the time allotted for public comment,
provided that comment is allowed during the time of discussion of the item or
in the course of a duly convened public hearing. If no public comment will be
allowed during the specific agenda item discussion, then individuals will be
allowed to speak about the item during the time allotted for public comment.
         2.   For speakers desiring to use audio or visual equipment in
connection with a presentation, arrangements for such use must be made with the
Village Manager's Office in advance of the meeting.
         3.   In the interest of promoting the efficient conduct of public
business, speakers should refrain from repeating their own testimony and
comments, and should refrain from repeating testimony and comments that have
previously been provided to the Village Board by other individuals.
         4.   Time allotted to public comment may be used to present questions
to the Village Board; however, responses to questions will be addressed after
the meeting has concluded.
         5.   A person shall be permitted to speak once upon being recognized
by the Chairperson. The person shall stand (if possible) at the designated
podium, and state his/her name prior to making comments.
         6.   Individual comments are limited to five (5) minutes per person,
unless the Mayor reduces the allotted time if numerous people wish to speak. If
individuals are attending the meeting as a group, a spokesperson for the group
should be appointed to speak to avoid repetitive comments. Speaker time limits
may be enforced by the Mayor.
         7.   Each speaker must maintain civility and cannot disrupt an orderly
meeting by using obscene or threatening language or gestures. Statements made
to the Village Board shall be directed to entire Village Board and not any one
member of the Village Board. Any person who poses a threat to public safety
will be removed from the meeting.
         8.   Any person shall be permitted to address the Village Board at any
time via mail to Village Board, c/o Village Manager's Office, 925 Burlington
Avenue, Lisle, IL 60532-1838, or by email correspondence to the Village
Manager's Office. (Ord. 86-1483, 10-6-1986; amd. Ord. 89-1785, 1-3-1989; Ord.
2018-4796, 10-15-2018; Ord. 2021-4903, 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021;
Ord. 2021-4928, 11-15-2021; Ord. 2023-5014, 6-5-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1.01 et seq.
1-5-2: PRESIDENT AS MAYOR:
The President of the Village may be referred to as Mayor of the Village, and
whenever reference in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village refers to
the Mayor, such term shall also mean the President of the Village. (Ord. 158,
12-17-1963)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION OF PRESIDENT AND TRUSTEES:
   (A)   President: The compensation of the President of the Village is hereby
fixed in the amount of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month, which does not
include the additional sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month which
shall be paid the President for his services rendered as Liquor Commissioner.
   (B)   Trustees: The compensation of each member of the Board of Trustees of
the Village shall be a fixed amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month.
   Increases or decreases in salaries shall not take effect during the present
term of the President and each member of the Board of Trustees, but shall take
effect from and after the expiration of the respective terms of the President
and present members of the Board of Trustees, and shall apply only to their
successors in office, individually, following the passage and approval hereof.
(Ord. 95-2712, 12-4-1995)
1-5-4: TIME OF TAKING OFFICE:
The terms of elected Village officers shall commence at the first regular or
special meeting of the Corporate Authorities during the month of May following
the proclamation of the results of the regular Municipal election at which the
officers were elected and the Village's receipt of said proclamation from the
County. Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
Municipal officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the
oath or affirmation required by the Illinois Constitution. The subscribed oath
or affirmation shall be filed in the Office of the Municipal Clerk. Municipal
officers shall hold office until their successors are elected and have
qualified. (Ord. 2007-4106, 4-2-2007)
1-5-5: RULES FOR VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES CONDUCT:
   (A)   Prohibition On Acting As Representative Of The Village: Trustees may
not represent that they have the authority to act on behalf of the Village
unless and except when authorized in advance to do so by the Village Board of
Trustees or the Mayor. Trustees are discouraged from attending any appointed
Village Board or Commission meeting to advocate in favor of or in opposition to
an issue, or on behalf of petitioners unless expressly disclosed to the Village
Board of Trustees or unless the matter before the Village Board or Commission
relates to the Trustee's property or business. This type of activity can serve
to preempt, and otherwise undermine, the work of the Board or Commission and
its citizen volunteer members. Every statement and activity related to Village
business should be considered carefully, for all of them may have an impact on
the Village.
    (B)   No Improper Influence: The Mayor and Trustees shall refrain from
using their positions to influence the deliberations or decisions of Village
Staff, Boards, Commissions, or non-Village Board of Trustees subcommittees of
the Village for an improper or illegal purpose.
   (C)   No Commitment Of Village Resources: No Trustee shall commit the use of
Village Staff or other Village resources. All requests shall be directed to the
Village Manager.
   (D)   No Direction Of Village Staff: Trustees shall not direct Village Staff
in the conduct of the duties performed by Village Staff. If a Village Board of
Trustees member wishes to discuss an operational or administrative matter, it
may be discussed with a Department Head or the Village Manager.
   (E)   Employee Performance Issues: Any concerns by Trustees regarding the
behavior or performance of Village Staff shall be directed to the Village
Manager privately and not shared with anyone other than the Village Manager,
Mayor or Village Attorney.
   (F)   Compliance With OMA: Trustees shall comply with the provisions of the
Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/) at all times, including use of email and social
media. (Ord. 2021-4903, 5-3-2021)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE MANAGER
SECTION:
1-6-1: Office Created, Appointment
1-6-2: Powers And Duties
1-6-3: Absence, Removal Of Village Manager
1-6-4: Assistants
1-6-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of village manager,
an executive office of the village. Said village manager shall be appointed by
the president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and
said employment shall be subject to the terms and conditions of an employment
agreement entered into between said appointee and the corporate authorities,
the terms of said agreement to take precedence over any other provisions
contained in this code to the contrary. The village manager shall be the direct
representative of the corporate authorities in the transaction of all village
business and in all matters concerning the citizens of the village. (Ord. 577,
5-20-1975; amd. 1979 Code)
   (B)   Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village
manager shall take the oath of office required of the village officials as
provided by statute, and shall give a bond in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for the faithful performance of the duties of the office. (Ord.
92-2303, 8-17-1992)
1-6-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the village manager to
supervise and coordinate the work of all the departments of the village
government and to report directly to the president and board of trustees.
   (B)   As a representative of the corporate authorities of the village, the
village manager shall have the power to direct or to stop any local improvement
or public work being undertaken by the village if direction is required or if
the work is being carried out in an improper manner. The village manager is to
receive all complaints, suggestions, requests, applications, petitions and
other correspondence or communications directed to the corporate authorities
and wherever possible to adjust matters which do not require direct action of
the corporate authorities. The village manager is responsible for the
maintenance and upkeep of the village office complex and all village owned real
estate.
   (C)   The village manager shall have the responsibility for the hiring and
discharge of all village employees other than those under the board of fire and
police commissioners or other tenure of office laws. (Ord. 577, 5-20-1975)
   (D)   As custodian of all funds of the village, the village manager shall
have the following duties:
      1.   The village manager shall have custody of all village funds, which
funds shall be deposited in such depository or depositories as are specified
from time to time by the board, and shall perform such other duties as may be
required by statute or ordinance.
      2.   The village manager shall not recognize nor pay any claim except
upon a warrant or cash order drawn upon the village manager, signed by the
president and countersigned by the village clerk, and stating the particular
fund and the appropriation to which the warrant is chargeable and the person to
whom payable. No money shall be paid by the village manager other than upon
such warrants so drawn except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
   All interest on village funds due from depositories or other sources shall
be credited to the account of the village.
      3.   The village manager shall keep such books and accounts as may be
required by the village board.
      4.   The village manager shall render monthly reports showing the state
of the treasury at the termination of each month; and such other reports as may
be required by ordinance, statute or the village board. (Ord. 86-1502, 12-1-
1986, eff. 1-7-1987)
   (E)   The village manager shall be responsible for the overall management of
budget expenditures for the budget year, keeping expenditures within budget as
from time to time amended and as provided for in applicable state statutes. In
addition, the village manager shall have the overall responsibility for all
matters involving budgetary issues including, but not limited to, the
overseeing of the budget preparation, budget amendments, budget changes,
expenditures, revenues, etc. (Ord. 99-3118, 5-17-1999)
1-6-3: ABSENCE, REMOVAL OF VILLAGE MANAGER:
In the case of the continued absence or disability of the village manager, the
president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may
designate a qualified administrative officer of the village to perform the
duties of the manager during such absence or disability.
The village manager may, at any time, be removed from office by the president
by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (Ord. 577, 5-20-
1975)
1-6-4: ASSISTANTS:
The village manager may designate such number of qualified administrative
officials of the village as assistants, to aid said manager in the performance
of his duties and responsibilities. Each such assistant shall have specific
duties and responsibilities delegated to him by the village manager, upon
approval of the corporate authorities. (1979 Code)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Village Clerk And Deputy Clerk
1-7-2: Village Prosecutor
1-7-3: Community Service Officer
1-7-4: Building And Zoning Commissioner
1-7-5: Plumbing Inspector
1-7-6: Superintendent Of Sewer And Water Department
1-7-7: Building Inspector
1-7-8: Bond Required
1-7-1: VILLAGE CLERK AND DEPUTY CLERK:
   (A)   Village Clerk: The village clerk shall be compensated for attendance
at the meetings of the president and board of trustees, both regular and
special, and other duties as required by statute. The base annual compensation
of said clerk shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) payable bimonthly.
(Ord. 89-1826, 4-3-1989)
   (B)   Deputy Clerk: The village clerk, when authorized by the corporate
authorities, may appoint two (2) deputy clerks who need not be residents of the
village. The deputy clerk shall have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by law to be executed by the village clerk, and affix the
seal of the clerk thereto whenever required. In signing any document, the
deputy clerks shall sign the name of the village clerk followed by the word
"By" and the deputy clerk's own name and the words "Deputy Clerk". The powers
and duties described in this subsection shall be exercised only in the absence
of the village clerk from the place where the village clerk's office is
maintained, and only when either: 1) written direction has been given by the
village clerk to such deputy to exercise such power, or 2) the corporate
authorities have determined by resolution that the village clerk is temporarily
or permanently incapacitated to perform such functions. When duly authorized as
provided in this subsection, the signature affixed by any such deputy clerk in
the manner provided in this subsection on any document, including, without
limitation, to contracts, bonds, or other obligations of the village, such
documents shall have the same effect as if the documents so executed had been
signed by the village clerk in person. In the event of a planned absence by the
deputy clerk, for any time not to exceed a total of six (6) months within any
twelve (12) month period, or an unplanned absence where the deputy clerk is
expected to return within six (6) months, the village clerk is authorized to
appoint an interim deputy clerk. The appointment of the interim deputy clerk
expires on the predetermined date upon which the deputy clerk will return to
work from the intended absence or upon the date of the clerk's return to work
from an unplanned absence. (Ord. 2005-3971, 12-5-2005)
   (C)   Duties: Any duties of the village clerk which are referenced in this
code, and are not mandated by Illinois statutes to be performed by the village
clerk shall be performed by a designee of the village manager. (Ord. 89-1826,
4-3-1989)
   (D)   Publication Of Ordinances: The village clerk is hereby authorized to
publish all ordinances in book or pamphlet form, or such other form which is
permitted or required pursuant to applicable law. (Ord. 93-2441, 11-1-1993)
1-7-2: VILLAGE PROSECUTOR:
   (A)   Creation, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of Village
Prosecutor. The Village prosecutor, Village attorney and other attorneys
representing the Village shall be attorneys admitted by license to practice in
the state of Illinois by the Supreme Court of Illinois. Said attorneys shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Oath, Bond Of Office: The Village prosecutor shall take the oath of
office required by the Village officials, as provided by statute, and shall be
bonded in the amount determined by the Village Board.
   (C)   Duties: The Village prosecutor shall prosecute on behalf of the people
of the Village any and all suits or actions arising out of the violation of any
quasi-criminal ordinance of the Village, or for the violation of any ordinance
providing for the payment of a fine. The Village prosecutor shall keep a docket
of all matters handled by him on behalf of the Village, in which docket he
shall note all steps taken by him in each matter, and upon expiration of his
term of office, resignation or removal therefrom, he shall forthwith turn over
to his successor in office or to the Village Clerk all such records.
   (D)   Reports: The Village prosecutor shall make a report to the Mayor and
Board of Trustees during the year as required by said Mayor and Board of
Trustees and on or before the first Monday in February of each year make a
summary report in writing on the cases handled by him during the preceding
year.
   (E)   Compensation: The Village prosecutor's, the Village attorney's and
other attorney fees shall be as the corporate authorities shall from time to
time establish by proper action. (Ord. 2023-5000, 3-6-2023)
1-7-3: COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER:
   (A)   Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of community
service officer of the village, who shall be appointed by the village manager,
subject to the approval and consent of the mayor and board of trustees.
   (B)   Oath Of Office: The community service officer shall take the oath of
office required of village officials, as provided by statute.
   (C)   Bond: The community service officer shall be bonded in the amount
determined by the village board.
   (D)   Duties: The community service officer shall enforce the village
regulatory ordinances, including, but not limited to, those involving parking,
motor vehicle licensing and control, animal control, junk, garbage and weed
control, and building and zoning ordinances, as directed by the chief of
police. He shall perform investigations, issue citations, answer complaints,
impound stray, vicious and biting animals, make arrangements for the care or
destruction of such animals; maintain records and formulate data and shall take
all other reasonable and lawful action to effect compliance with said village
ordinances; and shall perform other related and necessary duties as directed by
the chief of police.
   (E)   Reports: The community service officer shall make a monthly summary
report in writing to the chief of police on the matters handled by him during
each preceding month.
   (F)   Control: The community service officer shall be an employee of the
village and shall not be subject to control of the board of fire and police
commissioners of the village.
   (G)   Transportation: The community service officer shall be furnished with
transportation by the village during working hours when and if such
transportation is available.
   (H)   Compensation: The community service officer shall receive a salary as
established by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 622, 3-2-1976; amd. Ord.
84-1252, 12-3-1984)
1-7-4: BUILDING AND ZONING COMMISSIONER:
   (A)   Creation, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of building
and zoning commissioner of the village, who shall be appointed by the village
manager.
   (B)   Oath, Bond Of Office: The building and zoning commissioner shall take
the oath of office required of the village officials as provided by statute,
and shall be bonded in the amount determined by the village board.
   (C)   Duties: The building and zoning commissioner shall enforce the village
building code and zoning ordinance; receive applications for and issue building
permits and occupancy certificates; conduct inspections of buildings,
structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the ordinances of the
village; issue complaints to be served on violators and shall perform such
other duties as from time to time designated by the president and board of
trustees.
   (D)   Reports: The building and zoning commissioner shall make a report to
the president and board of trustees and/or village manager during the year as
required by said president and board, and on or before the first Monday in
February of each year, he shall make a summary report in writing on the matters
handled by him during the preceding year.
   (E)   Compensation: The salary of the building and zoning commissioner shall
be as established from time to time by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord.
84-1203, 5-7-1984; amd. Ord. 84-1252, 12-3-1984)
1-7-5: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
There is hereby established the position of plumbing inspector for the village,
who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the board of
trustees, and who shall perform the duties and functions as set forth by the
job title classification description policy, as adopted from time to time by
the corporate authorities 1 . (Ord. 412, 3-7-1972)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-15-1 of this title.
1-7-6: SUPERINTENDENT OF SEWER AND WATER DEPARTMENT:
   (A)   Office Created: There is hereby created the position of superintendent
of sewer and water department, which position shall be held by the assistant
building inspector. (Ord. 327, 11-4-1969; amd. Ord. 1252, 12-3-1984)
   (B)   Duties: The duties of said superintendent shall be as follows:
      1.   To investigate all complaints regarding sanitary sewer service;
      2.   To set up a regular maintenance program consisting of inspection of
all manholes within the system at least twice annually;
      3.   To arrange for temporary and/or emergency repairs using authorized
contractors at stated rates. Any repairs in excess of a probable expenditure
amount, as established by the village, must be reported to the chairman of the
sewer committee prior to approval of said repairs to be made;
      4.   To inspect all sanitary and storm sewers prior to backfill in order
to ensure proper pitch and that proper materials are being used;
      5.   To spot check the village periodically to determine if proper rates
are being collected;
      6.   To file a monthly report with the chairman of the sewer committee;
and
      7.   Any other duties as from time to time become apparent and require
attention. (Ord. 327, 11-4-1969)
   (C)   Compensation: The compensation of the superintendent shall be as set
forth by action of the corporate authorities as from time to time taken. (1979
Code)
1-7-7: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
   (A)   Creation, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of building
inspector, who shall be appointed by the village manager.
   (B)   Duties: The building inspector shall be authorized to enforce all
village regulatory ordinances, including, but not limited to, those involving
parking, motor vehicle licensing and control, animal control, junk, garbage and
weed control and building and zoning ordinances. In connection therewith, the
building inspector shall be authorized to perform investigations, issue
citations, answer complaints, and impound stray, vicious and biting animals,
make arrangements for the care or destruction of such animals, maintain records
and formulate data and shall take all other reasonable and lawful action to
effect compliance with said village ordinances. Further, the building inspector
shall conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with the ordinances of the village, issue complaints to be
served on violators and shall perform such other duties as from time to time
designated by the president and board of trustees.
   (C)   Compensation: The compensation of the building inspector shall be as
set forth by action of the corporate authorities, as from time to time taken.
(Ord. 85-1308, 7-1-1985)
1-7-8: BOND REQUIRED:
The following shall be considered officials of the village and shall take the
oath of office required of village officials and give a bond for the faithful
performance of the duties of the office, as provided by statute. The required
bonds shall be in the following amounts:
Village president                            $ 10,000.00
Village manager                              1,000,000.00
Village clerk                                10,000.00
Deputy village clerk                         5,000.00
Finance director                             100,000.00
Village prosecutor                           5,000.00
Building and zoning commissioner             50,000.00
Planning commissioner                        5,000.00
Zoning board of appeals member               5,000.00
Chief of police                              50,000.00
Board of fire and police commissioner        50,000.00
Police pension board                         100,000.00
Community service officer                    5,000.00
Superintendent of sewer and water department 5,000.00
Village engineer                             5,000.00
Plumbing inspector                           5,000.00
Building inspector                           5,000.00
Budget officer                               50,000.00
 
(Ord. 92-2303, 8-17-1992)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE BUDGET PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-8-1: Budget Procedure Adopted
1-8-2: Municipal Budget Officer
1-8-3: Preparation Of Budget
1-8-4: Annual Budget
1-8-1: BUDGET PROCEDURE ADOPTED:
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10 is hereby adopted as
the budgetary procedure for the village. (Ord. 79-837, 2-27-1979)
1-8-2: MUNICIPAL BUDGET OFFICER:
   (A)   Appointment: There is hereby established the office of budget officer
of the village. The budget officer shall be designated by the mayor, with the
approval of the corporate authorities.
The budget officer shall take oath and shall, before entering upon the duties
of the office of budget officer, execute a bond with the security of a penal
sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Said bond shall be in a form and
from a surety acceptable to the village attorney. (Ord. 99-3117, 5-17-1999)
   (B)   Powers And Duties: The budget officer shall have the following powers
and duties:
      1.   Permit and encourage the use of efficient planning, budgeting,
auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management procedures;
      2.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-2-9.3, and any amendments thereto;
      3.   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments,
commissions and boards which relate to monies received by the village, its
departments, commissions and boards and paid out by the village, its
departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable, amounts
owed by or to the village and its departments, commissions and boards;
      4.   Obtain such additional information from the village, its
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the budget officer for
purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by
the village, its departments, commissions and boards in the form required by
the budget officer. Any department, commission or board which refuses to make
such information available as is requested of it by the budget officer shall
not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the
village until such department, commission or board shall comply in full with
the request of the budget officer;
      5.   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no
expenditures are made by the village, its departments, commissions and boards
except those as authorized by the village budget; (Ord. 336, 3-17-1970)
      6.   Revise the annual budget, including the power to delete, add to,
change or create subclasses within object classes budgeted previously and to
transfer sums from one line item to another, so long as the total fund expenses
for that fund do not change. (Ord. 86-1442, 7-21-1986)
1-8-3: PREPARATION OF BUDGET:
The budget officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of
revenues available to the village for the fiscal year for which the budget is
drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the village and all of its
departments, commissions and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure
recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good
fiscal management practices. The budget shall contain actual or estimated
revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years immediately preceding the
fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. Each budget shall show the
specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made. (Ord. 336,
3-17-1970)
1-8-4: ANNUAL BUDGET:
During the last quarter of each fiscal year, as required by statute 1 , the
president and board of trustees shall enact a budget in which shall be itemized
all anticipated expenditures to be met during the coming year other than those
payable from bond issues and all anticipated revenues to be received or accrued
during the coming year.
Passage of the annual budget by the president and board of trustees as herein
provided shall be deemed passage of the annual appropriation ordinance as
required by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9. (Ord. 336, 3-17-1970)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.
CHAPTER 8A
VILLAGE FINANCES
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Village Funds
1-8A-2: Returned Checks Service Charge
1-8A-1: VILLAGE FUNDS:
All village funds are to be placed in banks and savings and loan institutions,
U.S. governmental securities or other institutions as from time to time set
forth by ordinance adopted by the mayor and board of trustees, and may be
invested pursuant to the provisions of state law.
All warrants drawn on the municipal treasury shall be signed by the president
and countersigned by the village clerk, said warrants stating the particular
fund and the appropriation to which the warrant is chargeable and the person to
whom same is payable. (Ord. 39, 4-15-1958; amd. 1979 Code)
1-8A-2: RETURNED CHECKS SERVICE CHARGE:
Any person who pays or attempts to pay any bill, fine, charge or fee of the
village by the submission of any check which is subsequently returned to the
village unpaid by reason of insufficient funds or by reason of a stop order on
said check, shall be liable to the village for a service charge as established
by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each and every check so returned. Said service charge shall be
paid before the bill, fine, charge or fee for which said check was returned, is
considered paid. Provided further, that any person who pays or attempts to pay
any bill, fine, charge or fee of the village by means of any check which is
subsequently returned unpaid to the village by reason of a nonexistent or
closed account shall be fined for each and every such offense a sum as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20 of this code. In the event one or more checks of any person
are so returned, such person may be issued a written notice of the provisions
of this section and no further payment shall be accepted from such person
except in the form of cash, certified check, cashier's check or money order
drawn to the order of the village.
(Ord. 2016-4678, 10-3-2016; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 9
PROCEDURE FOR PURCHASING AND LETTING CONTRACTS
SECTION:
1-9-1: General
1-9-2: Competitive Bidding
1-9-3: Purchasing Authority And Contract Award
1-9-4: Performance And Payment Bonds
1-9-1: GENERAL:
   (A)   Compliance With Chapter And Purchasing Manual: The procurement and
purchase of all construction, repair, and maintenance projects; supplies; and
services by or on behalf of the village must comply with all of the provisions
of this chapter and the village's purchasing manual. In the event of a conflict
between a provision of this chapter and a provision of the purchasing manual,
this chapter will control.
   (B)   Amendment Of Purchasing Manual: The village manager is authorized to
amend the purchasing manual from time to time, so long as the provisions of the
amendments to the purchasing manual do not conflict with any provision of this
chapter.
   (C)   Administration And Enforcement Of Purchasing Manual And Procedures:
The village finance director is responsible for administering and enforcing all
of the provisions of this chapter and of the purchasing manual. (Ord. 2019-
4847, 11-18-2019)
1-9-2: COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-9-
1 of the Illinois municipal code, any work or other public improvement contract
that may exceed the value of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be
let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner set forth in the village's
purchasing manual.
   (B)   "Responsible bidder" for construction contracts means a bidder for
public works construction contracts advertised, awarded, and financed, in whole
or in part, with Village public funds, excluding projects on private property;
and who meets all of the job specifications, the following applicable criteria,
and submits evidence of such compliance.
      1.   All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in Illinois, and
all local ordinances; and not in conflict with any state or federal law.
      2.   Holds a Federal Employer Tax Identification Number or Social
Security Number (for individuals).
      3.   Compliance with provisions of Section 2000 of Chapter 21, TITLE 42
OF THE United States Code and Federal Executive Order No. `11246 as amended By
Executive Order No. 11375 (known as the Equal Opportunity Employer provisions).
      4.   Compliance with all provisions and exemptions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act, including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and
retirement for those trades covered in the Act.
      5.   Disclosure of the name and address of each subcontractor from whom
the contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of the
project prior to the subcontractor commencing work on the project.
      6.   The bidder and all bidder's subcontractors must participate in
active apprenticeship and training programs approved and registered with the
U.S. Department of Labor's Office of Apprenticeship for each of the trades of
work contemplated under the awarded contract.
      7.   All contractors and subcontractors are required to turn in certified
payrolls as specified in Illinois Public Act 94-0515, and follow all provisions
of the Employee Classification Act, 820 ILCS 185/1, et seq.
      8.   All Bidders must provide three (3) projects of a similar nature as
being performed in the immediate past five (5) years with the name, address,
and telephone number of the contact person having knowledge of the project or
three (3) references (name, address, and telephone number) with knowledge of
the integrity and business practices of the contractor. (Ord. 2019-4847, 11-18-
2019; amd. Ord. 2022-4945, 2-21-2022)
1-9-3: PURCHASING AUTHORITY AND CONTRACT AWARD:
   (A)   The village board must authorize and award all contracts for purchases
of construction, repair, and maintenance projects; supplies; and services that
meet or exceed the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
   (B)   The village manager or his/her designee may authorize and award all
contracts for purchases of construction, repair, and maintenance projects;
supplies; and services that do not exceed the amount of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00). (Ord. 2019-4847, 11-18-2019)
1-9-4: PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS:
   (A)   All bidders selected by the village to perform construction work that
is subject to the Illinois public construction bond act, 30 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 550/0.01 et seq., must, before the commencement of any work, submit to
the village a performance bond and a labor and material payment bond that each
comply with the requirements of the Illinois public construction bond act, as
this act may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   All other bidders, vendors, contractors, and consultants selected by
the village must, before commencing performance under any contract with the
village, submit to the village a performance security and a labor and material
payment security if, and when, required by, and in accordance with, the
purchasing manual. (Ord. 2019-4847, 11-18-2019)
CHAPTER 10
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-10-1: Conduct Of Village Elections
1-10-1: CONDUCT OF VILLAGE ELECTIONS:
All elections conducted within the village shall be conducted in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the Illinois municipal code 1  and the
Illinois election code 2 as are now or may hereafter be, from time to time,
amended. (Ord. 81-992, 6-2-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS.
2 2. 10 ILCS.
CHAPTER 11
ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND
SECTION:
1-11-1: Village Participation
1-11-1: VILLAGE PARTICIPATION:
The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois municipal
retirement fund, effective January 1, 1972, and the village clerk is hereby
directed to promptly file a certified copy of these provisions with the board
of trustees of said Illinois municipal retirement fund. (Ord. 403, 12-28-1971)
CHAPTER 12
ANNEXATION
SECTION:
1-12-1: Authority
1-12-2: Declaration Of Policy
1-12-3: Voluntary Annexations
1-12-4: Involuntary Annexations
1-12-5: Water Or Sewer Connection
1-12-6: Amendments
1-12-7: Fees
1-12-1: AUTHORITY:
Annexation of any property to the Village shall be made in accordance with the
requirements and procedures of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/7-1-1 et.
seq.), as amended from time to time. (2022-4989, 12-5-2022)
1-12-2: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It shall be the policy of the Village of Lisle to review and consider
annexations individually according to Illinois statutes, the terms and
conditions of the policies set forth herein and the uniqueness of each parcel
of real estate. The Board of Trustees may consider many factors when
considering annexation of a parcel, including the circumstances, benefits,
costs, and existing conditions.
All decisions to annex shall be at the discretion of the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Lisle and any decision regarding annexation does not set a
precedent for future consideration of any other annexations. (2022-4989, 12-5-
2022)
1-12-3: VOLUNTARY ANNEXATIONS:
   (A)   It is the policy of the Village of Lisle to consider most favorably
the voluntary annexation of property that is contiguous to the Village when
such annexation is initiated by the property owner.
   (B)   It is the policy of the Village of Lisle to pursue voluntary
annexation of property that meets the following factors for consideration:
      1.   Annexation will increase the Village's revenue in the form of real
estate tax receipts, local share of state income tax, motor fuel funds,
retailer's occupation tax, or other sources.
      2.   The current land use is one that is necessary within the boundaries
of the Village for purposes of a balanced economy.
      3.   Annexation of the property will provide strategic benefit to
facilitate orderly future growth.
      4.   Annexation will result in more logical and consistent boundaries for
the Village.
      5.   The property has been contiguous to the Village boundary for a
lengthy period of time.
      6.   The property directly benefits from Village's water distribution
system, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, road network, or other
Village services.
      7.   Annexation will not require service agreements between the Village
and other taxing bodies.
      8.   Annexation will not significantly extend travel distances or
response times for Village police services.
      9.   Annexation will not result in operational challenges that reduce
current service levels to existing Village properties, residents, and
businesses. (2022-4989, 12-5-2022)
1-12-4: INVOLUNTARY ANNEXATIONS:
   (A)   It is the policy of the Village of Lisle to pursue involuntary
annexation of property when said annexation meets the following factors for
consideration:
      1.   Annexation will increase the Village's revenue in the form of real
estate tax receipts, local share of state income tax, motor fuel funds,
retailer's occupation tax, or other sources.
      2.   The current land use is one that is necessary within the boundaries
of the Village for purposes of a balanced economy.
      3.   Annexation of the property will provide strategic benefit to
facilitate orderly future growth.
      4.   Annexation will result in more logical and consistent boundaries for
the Village.
      5.   The property has been contiguous to the Village boundary for a
lengthy period of time.
      6.   The property directly benefits from Village's water distribution
system, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, road network, or other
Village services.
      7.   Annexation will not require service agreements between the Village
and other taxing bodies.
      8.   Annexation will not significantly extend travel distances or
response times for Village police services.
      9.   Annexation will not result in operational challenges that reduce
current service levels to existing Village properties, residents, and
businesses. (2022-4989, 12-5-2022)
1-12-5: WATER OR SEWER CONNECTION:
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the Village of Lisle to require annexation
of property that is contiguous to the Village's corporate boundary when said
property is connecting to the Village's water distribution system or sanitary
sewer system.
   (B)   It shall be the policy of the Village of Lisle to require execution of
an agreement for annexation (pre-annexation agreement) when a property located
within the Village's planning boundary, but is not currently contiguous to the
Village's corporate boundary, is connecting the Village's water distribution
system or sanitary sewer system. (2022-4989, 12-5-2022)
1-12-6: AMENDMENTS:
A petition for an amendment to any existing annexation agreement shall be heard
and considered in the same manner as and is provided for original agreements.
(2022-4989, 12-5-2022)
1-12-7: FEES:
Annexation fees shall be as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
(2022-4989, 12-5-2022)
CHAPTER 13
REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURES
SECTION:
1-13-1: Definitions
1-13-2: Applications; Requirements
1-13-3: Violations, Penalty
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AGENT: A person authorized to act for another person or corporation.
APPLICANT: One who applies for any benefits on behalf of himself or some other
entity.
BENEFICIAL INTEREST: Any interest in a land trust.
BENEFICIARY: Any person, corporation, or other entity having a beneficial
interest in a land trust.
CORPORATION: A body of persons authorized by law to act together as a single
person, and, for the purpose of this chapter, includes any association, joint
stock company, syndicate or partnership.
LAND TRUST: An express agreement whereby the legal and equitable title to real
estate is held by a trustee for the benefit of beneficiaries who have the
exclusive right to manage and control said real estate.
LESSEE: One who has an interest in real estate by virtue of a lease.
NOMINEE: One designated to act for another, with limited authority.
OPTION HOLDER: One having the right to purchase real estate upon compliance
with conditions named in a contract.
STOCKHOLDER: One owning certificates of stock in a corporation or membership in
an association, joint stock company, syndicate, or partnership. (Ord. 460, 4-3-
1973; amd. Ord. 497, 2-5-1974)
1-13-2: APPLICATIONS; REQUIREMENTS:
Any application to the village board of trustees or any village boards and
commissions for authorization, benefit, license, permit, variation, zoning
amendment, planned unit development or for any annexation relating to real
estate shall be signed by the owner, lessee, option holder, agent or nominee of
either.
   (A)   If the application is made by a person other than the fee owner, it
shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner that the person signing the
application has authority to make the application; and the application shall
disclose the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and
owner.
   (B)   If the applicant or the owner is a corporation, the application shall
disclose the names and addresses of the officers, directors, registered agent,
and those shareholders or members owning in excess of five percent (5%) of the
outstanding stock or interest in the corporation.
   (C)   If the applicant is a trustee, the full name, address, telephone
number, and the extent of the interest of each beneficiary must be disclosed.
   (D)   If the applicant is a beneficiary, nominee, or option holder, the
application must disclose the name, address and telephone number of those
persons or entities for whom he is acting, and if it is a corporation, the
provisions of subsection (B) of this section shall be complied with. (Ord. 460,
4-3-1973; amd. Ord. 497, 2-5-1974)
   (E)   In all applications the applicant shall present proof of ownership or
interest in the affected property (i.e., deed, title commitment, title
insurance policy, lease, contract). Applications being considered which have
been initiated by the village shall be exempt from the requirements of this
subsection. (Ord. 96-2812, 9-3-1996)
1-13-3: VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
Any person making a false or incomplete statement in the application shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a penalty as set out under section
1-4-1 of this title.
After a statement is determined to be falsified, missing or incorrect, a
written notice of the omission or falsification shall be sent to the applicant;
each day that elapses until the date the required information is furnished or
corrected shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 460, 4-3-1973; amd. Ord.
497, 2-5-1974)
CHAPTER 14
RECOVERY OF PROFESSIONAL FEES
SECTION:
1-14-1: Reimbursement Of Fees
1-14-1: REIMBURSEMENT OF FEES:
In the event that it is necessary for the village to retain the services of a
professional, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, planners,
architects, surveyors, traffic or drainage experts, or other consultants, in
connection with any petitioner's request for the village to consider or
otherwise take action upon any zoning change, special use, planned unit
development, variation from village code, subdivision or other improvement or
development upon real property, then the petitioner and the owner of the
property shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of such professional
fees and reimbursement shall be made to the village within thirty (30) days of
receipt of an invoice for same. In addition, any expenses incurred, including,
but not limited to, mailing and copying, as a result of any such request,
application, or development application shall be reimbursed to the village in
the same manner. Further, any professional fees incurred as a direct or
indirect result of a party requesting a professional opinion or otherwise
requesting relief or assistance from the village, whether or not related to
real property, shall be reimbursed in accordance with this section if, in the
discretion of the village, a professional opinion is desired. (Ord. 89-1799, 2-
6-1989)
Failure to reimburse the village in accordance with this subsection may, in the
village's discretion, result in the refusal of any board, committee or other
governing body to consider or take action upon any further requests from a
petitioner or owner who has failed to pay in full all amounts due under this
section. Further, the village may deny any application for a grading, building
or other permit if such amounts have not been paid in full and the village may
elect to file a lien against any real property associated with such a
petitioner's request. Interest in the amount of a percentage, as established by
the village, per month shall accrue on all sums outstanding for thirty (30)
days or more.
When any professional services contemplated by this section are rendered by the
village staff, including any staff engineers, or services performed by the
assistant village manager, then, the party making the request shall reimburse
the village for its costs incurred by providing the professional services of
the village staff, at the rate as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
The village manager or his designee, is hereby authorized to assign requests
for professional services to village staff or to consultants as the village
manager deems appropriate.
(Ord. 85-1366, 12-2-1985; amd. Ord. 89-1799, 2-6-1989; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-
2021)
CHAPTER 15
VILLAGE PERSONNEL POLICIES
SECTION:
1-15-1: Job Titles, Classifications And Descriptions
1-15-2: Salary And Hourly Wage Schedules
1-15-1: JOB TITLES, CLASSIFICATIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS:
Job titles, classification and description for certain village employees shall
be as set forth in that certain document entitled "Job Title, Classifications
And Descriptions", dated on or about May 1 and updated annually, said document
hereby made a part of this code by reference, and said document being on file
at all times in the village offices for public inspection. (Ord. 2007-4135, 8-
20-2007)
1-15-2: SALARY AND HOURLY WAGE SCHEDULES:
Minimum and maximum salaries and hourly wages for certain village employees
shall be as set forth in that certain document entitled "Departmental Position
Designation And Salary Structure", dated on or about May 1 and updated
annually, said document hereby made a part of this code by reference, and said
document being on file at all times in the village offices for public
inspection. (Ord. 2007-4135, 8-20-2007)
CHAPTER 16
PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
SECTION:
1-16-1: Wage Rates For Public Works Contracts
1-16-1: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any one under
contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended 1 , the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and the
workmen engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of the village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the DuPage County area, as
determined by the department of labor of the state as of June 2, 1980, a copy
of that determination being incorporated herein by reference. The definition of
any terms appearing in this chapter which are also used in the aforesaid act
shall be the same as in said act.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing
rate of wages, as herein ascertained, to any work or employment except public
works construction of this village to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
The village clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of the village this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage, and said clerk shall mail a copy of this determination
to any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed, or file, their names and addresses,
requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates, and the
particular class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates, and
shall promptly file a certified copy of this chapter with both the secretary of
state and the department of labor of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 80-938, 7-1-
1980)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 17
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
SECTION:
1-17-1: Rules And Procedures
1-17-1: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
   (A)   The village of Lisle shall provide access to public records as
required by the Illinois freedom of information act, 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 140/1 et seq., as amended.
   (B)   All requests for inspection or copies of public records must be
submitted in writing in accordance with the village of Lisle freedom of
information act policy, which policy is available for inspection at the village
of Lisle business office. (Ord. 2010-4295, 1-4-2010, eff. retroactive to 1-1-
2010)
CHAPTER 18
EMPLOYEE ETHICS
SECTION:
1-18-1: Regulations
1-18-1: REGULATIONS:
   (A)   The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2 of the state
officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of this
governmental entity to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited under the act, by
any officer or any employee is hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited by the act, to an officer
or employee is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by
any officer or employee is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
enactment which regulates the conduct of officers and employees. To the extent
that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this
section, however, the provisions of this section shall prevail in accordance
with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption shall not be incorporated into this
section by reference without formal action by this governmental entity.
   (I)   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action if
the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
   (J)   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act,
or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by this governmental entity.
(Ord. 2005-3895, 2-21-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
CHAPTER 19
ELIGIBILITY UNDER THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT
SECTION:
1-19-1: Purpose
1-19-2: Application For PSEBA Benefits
1-19-3: Application Review Process
1-19-4: Administrative Composition
1-19-5: Administrative Hearing
1-19-6: PSEBA Benefits Granted
1-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of an employee for the benefits enumerated under
the public safety employee benefits act 1 . All benefits provided to employees
pursuant to the public safety employee benefits act ("act") will be consistent
with the act. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
1-19-2: APPLICATION FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
A PSEBA benefit application form prepared by the village shall be the standard
form required for PSEBA benefit applicants (hereafter the "applicant") to
utilize to request benefits under PSEBA. The form shall be completed and
executed by the requesting applicant and delivered to the village manager. The
applicant shall provide, along with the application, any medical records
regarding the injury, any decision by a governing public safety pension board
and supporting documentation related to such pension board decision, any
decision by the Illinois workers' compensation commission, and any additional
pertinent documentation that the applicant wants to have considered or that is
requested by the village. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
1-19-3: APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a fully completed and executed PSEBA benefit
application, the village manager shall review the application and supporting
documentation, and if necessary complete additional fact finding and/or
investigation.
   (B)   The village manager shall make a written recommendation, including
reasons for the recommendation, to the village board within forty five (45)
calendar days after the later of the following:
      1.   The submission of the relevant documentation; or
      2.   The completion of the such additional fact finding or investigation
as deemed necessary or appropriate by the village manager.
   (C)   The village manager's written recommendation shall state whether:
      1.   The applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA; or
      2.   A hearing should be convened in order to determine whether or not
the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA and shall inform the
applicant, in writing, of the decision and the reasons for the decision.
   (D)   If the village manager recommends that the applicant is eligible for
benefits under PSEBA, the recommendation shall be presented to the village
board at the next regularly scheduled village board meeting (subject to notice
provision of the open meetings act).
   (E)   The village board shall make a determination that:
      1.   The applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA; or
      2.   An administrative hearing should be convened in order to determine
whether or not the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. (Ord. 2016-
4676, 9-12-2016)
1-19-4: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
If the village board determines that a hearing should be convened, the system
of the administrative hearing shall be comprised of a hearing officer whose
power and authority and limitations are as follows:
   (A)   Power Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall have all of
the powers granted to him under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
      1.   Preside over all village hearings involving the public safety
employee benefits act 1 ;
      2.   Administer oaths;
      3.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under the public safety employee benefits act 2 ;
      4.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
      5.   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
      6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing;
      7.   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a
written finding of fact, decision and order.
   (B)   Appointment Of The Hearing Officer: The mayor with the consent of the
board of trustees is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position
of a hearing officer for each and every individual hearing that shall come
before this village. In making said selection, the mayor shall consider all
pertinent information, including, at a minimum:
      1.   The candidate's ability to comply with the job description as set
forth herein;
      2.   Background and performance data made available to the mayor on file
with the village or otherwise obtained by the village;
      3.   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
state of Illinois for at least three (3) years and have knowledge of and
experience in employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of
evidence, and administrative practice. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
2 2. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
1-19-5: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the
subject public safety employee is eligible for benefits under the public safety
employee benefits act 1 . If the employee is found eligible, the employee
benefits shall be consistent with the act.
   (A)   Time And Date: Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place as
established by the village with appropriate notice served upon the public
safety employee.
   (B)   Record: All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court
reporter.
   (C)   Procedures: The village and the petitioning public safety employee
shall be entitled to representation by counsel at said hearing and may present
witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may cross examine opposing
witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance
of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents.
   (D)   Evidence: The rules of evidence as set forth in the Illinois code of
civil procedure shall apply.
   (E)   Final Determination: The determination by the hearing officer of
whether the petitioning public safety employee is eligible for the benefits
under the public safety employee benefits act 1 shall constitute a final
determination for the purpose of judicial review under the common law writ of
certiorari. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
1-19-6: PSEBA BENEFITS GRANTED:
If the applicant is determined to be eligible for PSEBA benefits, the applicant
will be eligible to receive continued health coverage consistent with PSEBA
under the village's basic group health insurance plan. The basic group plan
shall be the least expensive plan offered by the village employees at the time
the PSEBA benefits are awarded.
If an applicant becomes eligible to receive health insurance benefits from
another source, including, but not limited to, medicare, the applicant's PSEBA
coverage may be reduced or eliminated as determined by the village consistent
with PSEBA. The village reserves the right on an annual basis to have the
applicant provide an affidavit affirming continued eligibility for PSEBA
benefits. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
CHAPTER 20
FEES, FINES, INSURANCE, GUARANTEES, AND REGULATORY MEASURES
SECTION:
1-20-1: Fees
1-20-2: Fines
1-20-3: Insurance Requirements
1-20-4: Guarantee Requirements
1-20-5: Regulatory Measures (Rep. by Ord. 2021-4936, 12-6-2021)
1-20-1: FEES:
Title Classification Fee Code Section
Title          Classification                                                                  Fee                Code
                                                                                                                  Section
Title 1:                                                                                                         
Administration
              ANNEXATION FEES                                                                                   1-12-7
              Petition for annexation                                                         $250.00             
              Annexation agreements and annexation agreement amendments                       $1,250.00           
              Ordinance recording fee                                                         $130.00             
              Public hearing legal publication fee                                            $190.00             
               Reimbursement of professional fees associated with zoning change, special use,  100% Village
              planned unit development, variation from village code, subdivision or other     incurred expenses  1-14-1
               improvement or development upon real property
Title 3:
Business                                                                                                         
Regulations
              Annual license late fee                                                         $50.00             3-1-4
                                                                                                                  (B)
              Annual license fee                                                                                3-1-7
              Amusements:                                                                                        
              Billiard halls                                                                  $25.00/table        
              Bowling alleys                                                                  $15.00 per lane     
              Circuses and carnivals                                                          $50.00/day          
              Juke box                                                                        $50.00              
              Exhibition boxing and wrestling                                                 3% gross revenue    
              Golf driving ranges                                                             $200.00             
              Miniature golf course                                                           $200.00             
              Psychics, fortune-tellers, palm readers, and similar businesses and occupations $200.00             
              Skating rinks                                                                   $200.00             
              Movie theaters                                                                  $1,000.00           
              All exhibitions, shows, performances, or entertainments                         $20.00/day          
              Food Dealers:                                                                                      
              Bakery shop                                                                     $50.00              
              Caterers                                                                        $125.00             
              Preparation and/or serving of food at a location other than the principal place $125.00             
               of business
              Food processing and manufacturing, including any preparation, processing,       $125.00             
               manufacturing, or packaging of foodstuffs, fruit or meats or meat products
              Fruit store                                                                     $125.00             
              Grocery stores, meat markets and delicatessens                                  $150.00             
              Ice cream, frozen yogurt, or frozen custard parlor; soda fountain               $50.00              
              Milk and milk products delivery service                                         $100.00             
              Restaurants; carry out only                                                     $50.00              
              Restaurants - Dine In Only:                                                                        
                 1 to 50 seats                                                             $75.00              
                 51 to 100 seats                                                           $125.00             
                 101 to 200 seats                                                          $175.00             
                 201 to 300 seats                                                          $225.00             
                 301 seats and over                                                                           
                    Banquet facility (stand alone)                                      $500.00             
              Drive-in restaurants - minimum - $100.00                                                           
              Vending concessions truck, food or drink                                        $50.00/truck        
              Vending machine                                                                 $25.00              
              Other Businesses And Occupations:                                                                  
              Advertisers (outdoor)                                                           $125.00             
              Antique dealers (see cross-reference to Sec.                                    $100.00             
               3-2-2 of this code)
              Auctioneers                                                                     $565.00             
              Per day, not exceeding 20 days                                                  $35.00/day          
              Dry cleaners:                                                                                      
              Plant                                                                           $50.00              
              Outlet or receiving station                                                     $50.00              
              Dog kennels                                                                     $50.00              
              Electrical contractor                                                           $50.00              
              Feed/seed stores                                                                $50.00              
              Florist or greenhouse                                                           $50.00              
              Garage or auto repair                                                           $110.00             
              Gasoline service station                                                        $110.00             
              Handbill distributors (per person)                                              $10.00              
              Hospitals                                                                       $200.00             
              House movers                                                                    $375.00             
              Itinerant merchants; per day                                                    $60.00              
              In addition, for a period greater than one month, but less than 120 days        $375.00             
              Laundries                                                                       $50.00              
              Laundrettes                                                                     $50.00              
              Lisle commuter parking lot mobile concessionaires                                                  
              Merchandiser (see cross-reference to Sec.                                       $200.00 per month   
               7-8-2(C) of this code) - $2,400.00
              Livery service (see cross-reference to Sec.                                                        
               3-8-14 of this code)
              Lodging and rooming houses                                                      $50.00              
              Lumberyards or sales establishments                                             $150.00             
              Machine shops                                                                   $125.00             
              Motels or hotels                                                                $50.00              
              Nursing and convalescent homes                                                  $125.00             
              Paint store                                                                     $50.00              
              Petroleum and petroleum product dealers                                         $125.00             
              Printing shop                                                                   $50.00              
              Septic tank cleaners                                                            $50.00              
              Tanning salon                                                                   $50.00              
              Tobacco, alternative nicotine, electronic cigarette, and vape dealers                             3-16-5
              Primary Tobacco Dealer                                                          $500.00             
              Accessory Tobacco Dealer                                                        $250.00             
              Tobacco vending; per machine                                                    $150.00             
              Undertaking establishments                                                      $75.00              
              Initial first year non-refundable application fee (all classes except Class 7)  $1,000.00          3-2-7
              New Manager Application                                                         $75.00              
              Annual Liquor License Fees:                                                                        
                 First Application                                                         $1,000.00           
                 First BYO Application                                                     $75.00              
                 Class 1                                                                   $2,500.00           
                 Class 2                                                                   $2,500.00           
                 Class 3                                                                   $1,250.00           
                 Class 4                                                                   $1,800.00           
                 Class 5                                                                   $1,800.00           
                 Class 6                                                                   $500.00             
                 Class 7                                                                   $1,800.00           
                 Class 8                                                                   $1,250.00           
                 Class 9                                                                   $75.00              
                 Class 10                                                                  $200.00             
              New Manager Application                                                         $75.00             3-2-9
                                                                                                                  (B)
              New officer/owner application fee                                               $150.00             
              Antique, secondhand, or junk dealers                                            $100.00            3-3-2
              Late fee; additional late fee                                                   $50.00              
              Commercial solicitation application fee                                         $45.00             3-4-3
                                                                                                                  (B)
              Non commercial solicitation                                                     No fee              
              Solicitation on highways per occurrence                                         $1,000.00          3-4-8
                                                                                                                  (D)
              Solicitation at train station per occurrence                                    $2,000.00          3-4-9
                                                                                                                  (B)
              Peddlers of foodstuffs, annual license fee                                      $25.00             3-5-2
              Scavengers, license and franchise fees                                                            3-6-4
                 Residential                                                               $2,000.00           
                 Commercial                                                                $500.00             
                 Commercial- recycling only                                                $250.00             
              Junk removal service license fee                                                $100.00             
              Taxi, limousine companies; initial and annual                                   $200.00            3-8-14
              Automatic dry-cleaning machines, annual license fee                             $50.00             3-9-3
                 Fee per machine in excess of 5                                            $25.00              
              Electric utility tax imposed                                                                      3-11-2
                                                                                                                  (A)
                 Per kilowatt hour for first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a mon$0.54               
                 Per kilowatt hour for next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a mon$0.35               
                 Per kilowatt hour for next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a mon$0.32               
                 Per kilowatt hour for next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a   $0.31               
               month
                 Per kilowatt hour for next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a   $0.30               
               month
                 Per kilowatt hour for next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a $0.28               
               month
                 Per kilowatt hour for next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a $0.28               
               month
                 Per kilowatt hour for next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a$0.27               
               month
                 Per kilowatt hour for all electricity used or consumed in excess of       $0.27               
               20,000,000 kilowatt hours in a month
              Coin-operated amusement devices, annual license fee per proprietor and operator $50.00             3-13-3
              License fee per coin-operated device or machine                                 $50.00             3-13-4
              Raffle license fee                                                              $10.00             3-14-8
              Going out of business or removal sales, license fee                             $25.00             3-17-3
              Renewal license fee                                                             $25.00             3-17-16
              Tattooing and body piercing establishments, annual license fee                  $100.00            3-18-15
              Sexually oriented business                                                                        3-19-9
                 Initial and renewal application for sexually-oriented business license    $1,000.00           
                 Business license fee                                                      $1,000.00           
                 Initial and renewal application fee for sexually- oriented business employ$1,000.00           
               license
              New certificate of registration                                                 $40.00             3-20-7
              Late registration                                                               $40.00              
              Commercial filming                                                              $75.00             3-25-2
              Special events                                                                  $75.00             3-26-2
              Vending devices (per device)                                                    $25.00             3-27-1
              Newspaper dispensing device                                                     $50.00             3-28-4
                                                                                                                  (C)
                 Late fee                                                                  $50.00             3-28-4
                                                                                                                  (D)
              Lisle commuter rail station concession license (per month)                      $200.00            3-29-2
Title 4:
Building                                                                                                         
Regulations
              The building permit fees listed below are applicable to Title 4, Chapters 1-12.                    
              BUILDING PERMIT FEES                                                                               
              Minimum Building Permit Fee                                                     $85.00              
              Construction of a building, structure, or addition. Per $1,000 of stated cost                      
               of construction or per square foot per floor, whichever is greater.
                 Per $1,000 stated cost of construction                                    $10.00              
                 One and Two Family Accessory (shed, attached and detached garage, utility)$0.60               
               per square foot.
                 One and Two Family, per floor; per square foot                            $1.49               
                 One and Two Family Unfinished Basement; per square foot                   $0.24               
                 Multi-Family, per floor; per square foot                                  $1.63               
                 Commercial, per floor; per square foot                                    $2.25               
                 Commercial Shell Only Deduction                                           20%                 
              New or Replacement Windows, Doors and/or Siding                                 $85.00              
              New or Replacement Water Heater                                                 $85.00              
              New or Replacement Furnace and/or Air Conditioner                               $85.00              
              Reroof                                                                                             
                 One and Two Family Residential; per unit                                  $85.00              
                 All other                                                                 $375.00             
              Installation Deck                                                               $175.00             
              Installation Patio                                                              $125.00             
              Installation Fence                                                              $85.00              
              Solar                                                                                              
                 One and Two Family Residential                                            $200.00             
                 All Other (per $1,000 cost of construction)                               $12.50              
              Alterations or Remodeling of Building or Structure - One and Two Family (per    $10.00              
               $1,000 cost of construction)
              Alterations or Remodeling of Building or Structure - All other (per $1,000 cost $12.50              
               of construction)
              Interior Demolition (per square foot)                                           $0.15               
              Demolition                                                                      $500.00             
              Parking Lot Sealcoating and Striping                                            $150.00             
              Parking Lot Repair and Resurfacing (base plus per square foot)                                     
                 Base                                                                      $150.00             
                 Per square foot                                                           $4.00               
              Low voltage(voice date) systems non-residential (per device; $150 minimum)      $5.00               
              Modular Furniture Systems                                                                          
                 1-100 work stations (per station)                                         $25.00              
                 101 or more work stations (per station)                                   $15.00              
              Electrical Service Upgrade                                                      $100.00             
              Lawn Irrigation (per $1,000 cost of construction)                               $10.00              
              Installation of Driveway and / or Driveway Approach                             $85.00              
              Occupancy Permit - Life Safety Review & Inspection (base plus per sq. foot)                        
                 Base                                                                      $85.00              
                 Per Square foot                                                           $0.02               
              In-ground Swimming pool (per $1,000 cost of construction)                       $12.50              
              Above ground Swimming Pool                                                      $175.00             
              Tent or Canopy (per tent or canopy)                                             $85.00              
                                                                                                                
              PLAN REVIEW FEES                                                                                   
              1st and 2nd Review                                                              10% Building        
                                                                                               permit fee
              Each Additional Plan Review                                                     5% building permit  
                                                                                               fee
              Minimum Plan Review Fee                                                         $50.00              
              Re-review and approved plan alterations (per sheet)                             $50.00              
                                                                                                                
              ELEVATOR PERMIT FEES                                                                               
              Elevator - New (per elevator)                                                   $250.00             
              Elevator - Repair or alteration work (per elevator)                             $150.00             
              Elevator - Annual Inspection fee (per elevator)                                 $100.00             
                                                                                                                
              FIRE SPRINKLER, DETECTION, AND ALARM SYSTEMS                                                       
              Permit Fee                                                                      $150.00             
              Fire Sprinkler - NFPA 13 and 13R Plan Review and Inspection Fees                                   
                 a. 1 - 20 Sprinkler Heads (minimum fee) (2 inspections)                   $510.00             
                 b. 21 - 50 Sprinkler Heads (3 inspections)                                $950.00             
                 c. 51 - 100 Sprinkler Heads (3 inspections)                               $1,155.00           
                 d. 101 - 150 Sprinkler Heads (3 inspections)                              $1,340.00           
                 e. 151 - 200 Sprinkler Heads (3 inspections)                              $1,430.00           
                 f. 201 - 300 Sprinkler Heads (3 inspections)                              $1,505.00           
                 g. 301 - 400 Sprinkler Heads (3 inspections)                              $1,750.00           
                 h. 401 - 500 Sprinkler Heads (3 inspections)                              $1,870.00           
                 i. Additional fee for each sprinkler over 500 Ea. (3 inspections)                            
                    Base                                                                $1,870.00           
                    Per Sprinkler Head                                                  $2.45               
                 j. Sprinkler As-Built Drawings                                            $110.00             
              Fire Sprinkler - NFPA 13D Plan Review and Inspection Fees                                          
                 a. 1 - 20 Sprinkler Heads (minimum fee) (2 inspections)                   $415.00             
                 b. 21 - 40 Sprinkler Heads (2 inspections)                                $460.00             
                 c. 41 - 60 Sprinkler Heads (2 inspections)                                $470.00             
                 d. 61 - 80 Sprinkler Heads (2 inspections)                                $480.00             
                 e. 81 - 100 Sprinkler Heads (2 inspections)                               $485.00             
                 f. Additional fee for each sprinkler over 100 Ea. (2 inspections)                            
                    Base                                                                $485.00             
                    Per Sprinkler Head                                                  $2.00               
                 g. Sprinkler As-Built Drawings                                            $110.00             
              Restaurant Mechanical Hood and Duct and Paint Spray Booth Systems Plan Review                      
               and Inspection Fees (per exhaust hood)
                 a. Restaurant Mechanical Hood and Duct (per hood) (4 inspections)         $985.00             
                 b. Each additional hood reviewed at the same time and in the same building$500.00             
                 c. Restaurant Mechanical Hood and Duct and Paint Spray Booth Systems As-  $110.00             
               Built Drawings
              Smoke Control, Management, Exhaust Systems Plan Review and Inspection Fees (per                    
               system)
                 a. Minimum Fee                                                            $1,700.00           
                 b. Smoke Control, Management, Exhaust Systems As- Built Drawings          $110.00             
              Dry Chemical/Clean Agents Plan Review and Inspection Fees                                          
                 a. Less than 5,000 Cubic Feet (2 inspections)                             $1,045.00           
                 b. 5,001 to 10,000 Cubic Feet (2 inspections)                             $1,245.00           
                 c. Over 10,000 Cubic Feet (2 inspections)                                                    
                    Base                                                                $1,245.00           
                    Per Cubic Foot                                                      $0.15               
                    Dry Chemical or Clean Agent As-Built Drawings                       $110.00             
              Wet Chemical Systems Plan Review and Inspection Fees                                               
                 a. 1 - 10 Nozzles (2 inspections)                                         $575.00             
                 b. 11 - 20 Nozzles (2 inspections)                                        $770.00             
                 c. 21 - 30 Nozzles (2 inspection)                                         $935.00             
                 d. Over 30 Nozzles (2 inspections)                                                           
                    Base                                                                $935.00             
                    Per Nozzle                                                          $17.60              
              Wet Chemical System As-Built Drawings                                           $85.00              
              Standpipe, Fire Pumps and Underground Water Main Systems Plan Review and                           
               Inspection Fees
              Standpipe Systems (per standpipe) (2 inspections)                               $630.00             
              Fire Pumps (per fire pump) (1 inspection)                                       $545.00             
              Fire Protection Water Tanks (2 inspections)                                     $800.00             
              Underground Fire Protection Water Main; per hydrant or lead-in                                     
                 a. Up to 5 hydrants or lead-ins at same complex (2 inspections)           $800.00             
                 b. 6 to 10 hydrants or lead- ins at same complex (2 inspections)          $890.00             
                 c. 11 or more hydrants or lead-ins at same complex (2 inspections)        $990.00             
                 d. Standpipe, Fire Pumps and Underground Water Main System As-built Drawin$110.00             
              Fire Detection and Alarm Systems - Plan Review and Inspection Fees                                 
                 a. 1 - 20 Devices (2 inspections)                                         $465.00             
                 b. 21 - 40 Devices (3 inspections)                                        $875.00             
                 c. 41 - 60 Devices (3 inspections)                                        $1,195.00           
                 d. 61 - 80 Devices (3 inspections)                                        $1,385.00           
                 e. 81 - 100 Devices (3 inspections)                                       $1,595.00           
                 f. Over 100 Devices (3 inspections)                                                          
                    Base                                                                $1,595.00           
                    Per Device                                                          $9.10               
                 g. Alarm As-Built Drawings                                                $110.00             
              SIGN PERMIT FEES                                                                                   
                                                                                               $100.00 per sign
              All signs requiring a permit (the greater of $100 per sign or 1.5% cost of      face or 1.5% of     
               construction)                                                                   cost of
                                                                                               construction
              Temporary Signs                                                                 $85.00              
Title 5:
Zoning                                                                                                           
Regulations
              Tree preservation fee-in-lieu (per tree)                                        $400.00            5-12-14
                                                                                                                  (H)
                                                                                                                
              ZONING ORDINANCE FEES                                                                             5-17-3
               5-17-3(2)                                                                                          (B)
              Public Hearing Sign Fee                                                         $15.00              
              Public Hearing Mail Notification Fee                                            $25.00              
              Public Hearing Legal Publication Fee                                            $190.00             
              Ordinance Recording Fee                                                         $130.00             
              Text Amendment                                                                  $1.250.00           
              Map Amendment (per map amendment)                                               $750.00             
              Special Use Permit (per special use permit)                                     $750.00             
              PUD and Major Changes to PUD                                                    $1,250.00           
              Minor Changes to PUD                                                            $500.00             
              Administrative Variance (per variance)                                          $150.00             
              Variance (Residential; per variance)                                            $300.00             
              Variance (Nonresidential; per variance)                                         $500.00             
              Zoning Verification Letter                                                      $50.00              
Title 6:
Subdivision                                                                                                      
Regulations
              SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE FEES                                                                        6-3-3
                                                                                                                  (B)
              Preliminary plat of subdivision                                                 $750.00             
              Final plat of subdivision                                                       $750.00             
              Preliminarily and final plat of subdivision                                     $1,500.00           
              Plat of consolidation                                                           $250.00             
              Waivers and modifications                                                       $500.00             
              Dedication or vacation of village easement                                      $250.00             
              Dedication or vacation of village right-of-way                                  $250.00             
              Village easement encroachment license                                           $250.00             
              Text amendment                                                                  $1,250.00           
              Public hearing legal publication                                                $190.00             
              Ordinance recording fee                                                         $130.00             
              Plat recording fee                                                              $190.00             
                                                                                                                
              CONTRIBUTION FEES                                                                                  
              Fair market value (per acre)                                                    $162,000.00        6-6-5
                                                                                                                  (A)
                 Library contribution fees                                                                   6-6-7
              Detached single family dwelling                                                                    
                 3 bedrooms or less                                                        $100.00             
                 4 bedrooms                                                                $125.00             
                 5 bedrooms or more                                                        $175.00             
              Apartments                                                                                         
                 1 bedroom or studio                                                       $50.00              
                 2 bedroom                                                                 $75.00              
                 3 bedroom or more                                                         $100.00             
              Attached single family dwelling                                                                    
                 1 bedroom                                                                 $50.00              
                 2 bedroom                                                                 $75.00              
                 3 bedroom or more                                                         $100.00             
                                                                                                                
Title 7:
Public Ways                                                                                                      
And Property
              Right-of-Way Permit Fee                                                         $150.00            7-1-6
                                                                                                                  (H)
                                                                                                                
              SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES FEES                                                                    7-2-9
              Application fee for up to 5 small wireless facilities                           $500.00             
              Each small wireless facility over 5                                             $100.00             
              New pole (i.e. not a co-location) installation application for small wireless   $1,000.00           
               facility
              Annual recurring rental rate per small wireless facility (per facility)         $270.00             
                                                                                                                
              ENCROACHMENTS AND PRIVATE USE                                                                      
              Mailbox reimbursement                                                           $75.00             7-3-5
                                                                                                                  (A)5
                                                                                                                
              WATER CONNECTION FEES                                                                              
              Inspection Fees:                                                                                  7-4-4
                 Per connection                                                            $75.00              
                 Per dwelling unit in a multifamily structure                              $15.00              
              Connection fees:                                                                                  7-4-5
                                                                                                                  (A)
                 Meter size (in inches and not including cost of meter and outside reading                    
               device):
                    3/4                                                                 $620.00             
                    1                                                                   $860.00             
                    1-1/2                                                               $1,290.00           
                    2                                                                   $1,880.00           
                    3                                                                   $3,860.00           
                    4                                                                   $5,580.00           
                    6                                                                   $12,870.00          
                    Per inch greater than 6                                             $2,580.00           
              Multi-family and commercial connection fees. Cost per additional unit serviced  $300.00            7-4-5
               by meter connection                                                                                (C)
              Lot front frontage connection fee (per foot of lot frontage)                    $95.00             7-4-5
                                                                                                                  (D)
              Connection fees for sprinklers (per inch of water line)                         $75.00             7-4-5
                                                                                                                  (F)
              Annual sprinkler service charge                                                 $25.00              
              Woodridge Estates special lot connection fees (per lot)                         $5,335.00          7-4-5
                                                                                                                  (H)
                                                                                                                
              WATER RATES                                                                                        
              Residential in-village water rates:                                                               7-4-6
                                                                                                                  (A)
                                                                                               Bi-monthly fixed
                 Meter size:                                                               scaled meter        
                                                                                               charge
                 < = 1" meter                                                              $7.09               
                 1.5" meter                                                                $24.82              
                 2" meter                                                                  $46.09              
                 3" meter                                                                  $85.09              
                 > = 4" meter                                                              $101.30             
                 Volumetric water rate (per 1,000 gallons)                                 $7.38               
              Residential out-of-village water rates:                                                           7-4-6
                                                                                                                  (B)
                                                                                               Bi-monthly fixed
                 Meter size:                                                               scaled meter        
                                                                                               charge
                 < = 1" meter                                                              $9.22               
                 1.5" meter                                                                $32.27              
                 2" meter                                                                  $59.93              
                 3" meter                                                                  $110.62             
                 > = 4" meter                                                              $131.68             
                 Volumetric water rate (per 1,000 gallons)                                 $9.53               
                                                                                               Rate established
                                                                                               in Sec.
                                                                                               7-4-6(A) shall be
              Public ways and property. Village waterworks system, temporary construction     increased 200%,    7-4-6
               contractors water rates                                                         plus               (D)3(a)
                                                                                               administrative fee
                                                                                               of $5.00 per full
                                                                                               up
              Reconnection fee after water cut- off                                           $75.00             7-4-7
                                                                                                                  (B)2
                 Outside of business hours/holidays                                        $150.00             
                                                                                                                
              WATER METER CHARGE                                                                                 
              Water meter charges:                                                                              7-4-8
                                                                                                                  (A)
                 3/4" meter                                                                $333.00             
                 1" meter                                                                  $426.00             
                 1-1/2" single family meter                                                $788.00             
                 1-1/2" commercial/multi- family meter                                     $1,447.00           
                 2" single family meter                                                    $1,035.00           
                 2" commercial/multi-family meter                                          $1,720.00           
                 3" meter                                                                  $2,377.00           
                 4" meter                                                                  $3,956.00           
                 6" meter                                                                  $6,481.00           
              Water meter installation fee                                                    $75.00             7-4-8
                                                                                                                  (B)
              Violations of water use restrictions                                            $100.00            7-4-19
                                                                                                                  (D)
                                                                                                                
              SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEES                                                                     
              Inspection fees:                                                                                  7-5-5
                 Per connection                                                            $75.00              
                 Per dwelling unit in a multifamily structure                              $15.00              
              Connection fees:                                                                                  7-5-6
                                                                                                                  (B)
                 In-village connection fee                                                 $2,242.00           
                 Out-of-village connection fee                                             $2,742.00           
              Lot front frontage connection fee (per foot of lot frontage)                    $95.00             7-5-6
                                                                                                                  (D)
              DuPage County maximum sewer connection fee (per residential equivalent)         $2,042.00          7-5-6
                                                                                                                  (G)
                                                                                                                
              SANITARY SEWER RATES                                                                               
              Residential in-village sanitary sewer rates:                                                      7-5-7
              Non-metered per unit                                                            Bi-monthly flat     
                                                                                               rate: $6.00
                                                                                               Bi-monthly fixed
                 Meter size:                                                               scaled meter        
                                                                                               charge
                 < = 1" meter                                                              $1.23               
                 1.5" meter                                                                $4.34               
                 2" meter                                                                  $8.04               
                 3" meter                                                                  $14.86              
                 > = 4" meter                                                              $17.68              
                 Volumetric water rate (per 1,000 gallons)                                 $0.66               
              Residential out-of-village sanitary sewer rates:                                                   
                                                                                               Bi-monthly fixed
                 Meter size:                                                               scaled meter        
                                                                                               charge: $10.00
                 < = 1" meter                                                              $1.61               
                 1.5" meter                                                                $5.64               
                 2" meter                                                                  $10.47              
                 3" meter                                                                  $19.31              
                 > = 4" meter                                                              $22.99              
                 Volumetric water rate (per 1,000 gallons)                                 $1.09               
              Village sanitary sewer system, billing single-family users:                                       7-5-8
                                                                                                                  (A)
                 Reconnection fee after service cut-off                                    $1,000.00           
              Village sanitary sewer system, all other uses:                                                    7-5-8
                                                                                                                  (B)
                 Reconnection fee after service cut-off                                    $1,000.00           
                                                                                                                
              PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PERMIT FEES                                                                    7-6-6
                                                                                               2.0% engineer's
              Plan review                                                                     estimated probable  
                                                                                               cost
                                                                                               1.0% engineer's
              Construction oversight                                                          estimated probable  
                                                                                               cost
Title 9:
Police                                                                                                           
Regulations
              Keeping of backyard chickens; permit fee                                        $85.00             9-3-14
              Impoundment fee (per day plus 100% costs incurred)                              $10.00              
              Motor Vehicle Towing Rates:                                                                       9-9-10
                 Light duty tow                                                            $150.00             
                 Heavy duty tow                                                            $180.00             
                 Heavy duty extended service tow-per hour                                  $180.00             
                 Service call                                                              $50.00              
              Winching/Uprighting Vehicle:                                                                       
                 First half hour                                                           $35.00              
                 Each additional half hour                                                 $25.00              
              Standby:                                                                                           
                 Light duty tow/half hour on scene - included, each additional half hour   $30.00              
                 Heavy duty/truck                                                          $50.00              
              Clean Up Fee:                                                                                      
                 Per accident                                                              $25.00              
              Storage:                                                                                           
                 First 24 hours                                                            $0.00               
                 After 24 hours:                                                                              
                    Light duty                                                          $45.00              
                    Light duty after hours release                                      $50.00              
              Mileage:                                                                                           
                 Within village limits or to designated storage facility:                                     
                    First 10 miles                                                      $0.00               
                    Light duty                                                          $4.00 mile          
                    Heavy duty                                                          $5.00 mile          
              Extra Manpower For Offloading, Etc.                                                                
                 Heavy duty                                                                $40.00 hour         
Title 10:
Traffic                                                                                                          
Regulations
              EV Charging Stations (Public)                                                                     10-2-8
                 First two hours                                                           Free                
                 After two hours                                                           $20/hour            
              Traffic regulations, parking meter zone fees                                                      10-3-3
                                                                                                                  (C)
              Zone I - No fee 2:00 p.m. to midnight - Monday - Friday - all day Saturday and  $0.25               
               Sunday (per hour)
              Zone II - No fee 2:00 p.m. to midnight - Monday - Friday - all day Saturday and $0.25               
               Sunday (per hour)
              Municipal parking lots, parking permit fees, due dates, late fees                                 10-4-3
                                                                                                                  (C)
              Category 1 (Lots A through E)                                                                      
                 Per quarter                                                               $180.00             
                 Per month                                                                 $60.00              
                 Per day during day                                                        $3.00               
                 Overnight (Monday - Friday)                                               $6.00               
               Category 4 (Lot G) - $22.50 per permit per quarter year for central business
              district owners, operators, employees and residents of central business                            
               district; Category 1 permit fees shall apply to all others
              Nonrefundable administration fee                                                                  10-4-3
                                                                                                                  (D)(1)
                 Non-resident                                                              $15.00              
                 Resident                                                                  $0.00               
              Municipal parking lots, cancellation and refund of parking permits fee                            10-4-3
                                                                                                                  (E)
Title 11:
Telecomm-                                                                                                        
unications
              Telecommunications, registration fee as telecommunication carrier or provider   $25.00             11-2-2
              Cable franchise fee - derived from the provision of cable service within the    5% of annual gross 11-5-20
               village                                                                         revenues           (A)
                                                                                               Recomputed amounts 11-5-20
              Cable franchise fee - recomputed amounts                                        plus 12% interest  (C&D)
                                                                                               per annum
              Cable/video service provider fee                                                5% of the holders  11-5A-1
                                                                                               gross revenues     (B)
                                                                                               $1,500.00 or % of
                                                                                               the applicant's
              Telecommunications, applications fee for license or franchise                   telecommunications 11-6-2
                                                                                               facilities,        (A)
                                                                                               whichever is
                                                                                               greater
                                                                                               Refund of fee,
               Telecommunications, withdrawal, abandonment, or denial of applications, refund  less $500.00 and   11-6-2
              fees                                                                            all costs/expenses (C)
                                                                                               incurred by
                                                                                               village
                                                                                               Reimbursement for
              Telecommunications other village costs due within 30 day                        direct and         11-6-3
                                                                                               indirect cost and
                                                                                               expenses
                                                                                               $250.00 or 8/10 of
                                                                                               1% of the
              Telecommunications construction permit                                          estimated          11-6-6
                                                                                               construction
                                                                                               costs, whichever
                                                                                               is greater
              Telecommunications annual license fee                                           $2,000.00          11-6-7
              Telecommunications OVS fees                                                     5% annual gross    11-6-9
                                                                                               revenue
Title 12:
Stormwater And                                                                                                   
Floodplain
Regulations
              Use of Garfield Basin for Detention or Compensatory Storage 15-72.E10 (per acre $325,000.00         
               foot)
              Site Runoff Storage Variance Fee 15-97.B.1.b (per acre foot)                    $325,000.00         
              PCBMP Fee-in Lieu 15-98.B.1 (per 100 sq. ft. of new impervious surface)         $1,000.00           
              Stormwater variance petition 15-117.E (per variance)                            $500.00             
                                                                                                                
              SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT FEES                                                                      12-3-6
              Floodplain verification/impact review                                           $50.00              
              PCBMP review and inspection                                                     $200.00             
              PCBMP, floodplain, wetland, buffer recording fee                                $67.00              
              Engineering inspection fee; per inspection                                      $100.00             
              Engineering spot survey review                                                  $100.00             
              Engineering as-built plan review                                                $100.00             
              Single family plan review (individual parcel)                                                      
                 Grading with disturbed area:                                                                 
                 Less than 500 sq. ft.                                                     $100.00             
                 Between 501 and 1000 sq. ft.                                              $200.00             
                 Between 1001 and 2000 sq. ft.                                             $300.00             
                 greater than 2000 sq. ft.                                                 $400.00             
              New construction (other than an individual single family parcel); including                        
               subdivisions, stormwater, and public improvements
                                                                                               2.0% engineer's
                 Plan review                                                               estimated probable  
                                                                                               cost
                                                                                               1.0% engineer's
                 Construction oversight                                                    estimated probable  
                                                                                               cost
 
(Ord. 2021-4921, 9-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2021-4936, 12-6-2021; Ord. 2021-4944, 1-
17-2022; Ord. 2022-4950, 3-21-2022; Ord. 2022-4954, 4-18-2022, eff. 5-1-2022;
Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2022-4984, 11-7-2022; Ord. 2023-4997, 2-6-2023;
Ord. 2023-5009, 4-17-2023; Ord. 2023-5011, 5-15-2023; Ord. 2023-5040, 12-18-
2023; Ord. 2024-5067, 4-15-2024; Ord. 2024-5068, 4-15- 2024; Ord. 2024-5083, 7-
15-2024; Ord. 2024-5106, 10-21-2024; Ord. 2025-5136, 4-21-2025)
1-20-2: FINES:
Title Classification Fee Code Section
Title              Classification                                                                   Fee           Code
                                                                                                                  Section
Title 1:                                                                                                         
Administration
                  General penalties                                                                Up to $750.00 1-4-1
                  Collection of fees, fines, and other sums, interest penalties                                 1-4-5
                  Meetings of board, violation                                                     $2.00 - 50.00 1-5-1
                                                                                                    Active acct.
                                                                                                    $20.00
                  Returned checks service charge                                                   Non-active    1-8A-2
                                                                                                    $50.00 -
                                                                                                    500.00
Title 3: Business                                                                                                
Regulations
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $50.00, nor
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $500.00, each
                  General business license violations                                              day a         3-1-9
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                  Initial first year non- refundable application fee (all classes except Class 7)  $1,000.00     3-2-7
                  Liquor licenses violations                                                                    3-2-20
                                                                                                                  (B)(3)
                  First violation in 12 months                                                     $250.00        
                  Second violation in 12 months                                                    $500.00        
                  Third and subsequent violations in 12 months                                     $750.00        
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $50.00, nor
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00, each
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 2, generally                                      day a         3-2-22
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $50.00, nor
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00, each
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 3, generally                                      day a         3-3-7
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $50.00, nor
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00, each
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 4, generally                                      day a         3-4-11
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $50.00, nor
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00, each
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 5, generally                                      day a         3-5-6
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 6, generally                                                   3-6-8
                     Late fee (within 15 days)                                                  $50.00         
                                                                                                    $50.00 and
                                                                                                    ordinance
                     Late fee (after 15 days)                                                   violation      
                                                                                                    penalty per
                                                                                                    3-1-9
                                                                                                    Upon
                                                                                                    conviction by
                                                                                                    a court of
                                                                                                    competent
                                                                                                    jurisdiction,
                                                                                                    not less than
                                                                                                    $100.00, nor
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 8, generally                                      more than     3-8-21
                                                                                                    $750.00, each
                                                                                                    day a
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $50.00, nor
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00, each
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 9, generally                                      day a         3-9-7
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Penalty                                                                          $100.00 nor   3-11-2
                                                                                                    more than     (H)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Penalty                                                                          $100.00 nor   3-11-3
                                                                                                    more than     (H)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $50.00, nor
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00, each
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 13, generally                                     day a         3-13-16
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                  Sale to Minors                                                                   $750.00; per  3-16-6
                                                                                                    offense       (A)
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $100.00 not
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00; Each
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 16, generally                                     day a         3-16-10
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                                                                                                    be a separate
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense.
                                                                                                    $750.00 each
                                                                                                    day a
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    exists shall
                  Violations of Title 3, Chapter 19, generally                                     be a separate 3-19-16
                                                                                                    and distinct
                                                                                                    offense.
                                                                                                    Incarceration
                                                                                                    up to 6
                                                                                                    months
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Penalties: Failure to register and late payment penalties                        $40.00 nor    3-20-8
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $250.00
                                                                                                    Any person
                                                                                                    convicted of
                                                                                                    violating any
                                                                                                    provision of
                                                                                                    any section
                                                                                                    of Chapter 22
                                                                                                    shall be
                                                                                                    fined in an
                                                                                                    amount not
                                                                                                    less than
                                                                                                    $500.00 nor
                                                                                                    more than
                  Violations prohibiting retail sale of animals                                    $750.00 for   3-22-4
                                                                                                    each animal
                                                                                                    offered for
                                                                                                    sale in
                                                                                                    violation of
                                                                                                    this chapter.
                                                                                                    Each day of
                                                                                                    violation
                                                                                                    shall
                                                                                                    constitute a
                                                                                                    separate and
                                                                                                    distinct
                                                                                                    offense
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 3, Chapter 26; each day a violation exists shall be a         $100.00 nor   3-26-11
                   separate and distinct offense                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 3, Chapter 27; each day a violation exists shall be a         $100.00 nor   3-27-7
                   separate and distinct offense                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 3, Chapter 28; each day a violation exists shall be a         $100.00 nor   3-28-11
                   separate and distinct offense                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 3, Chapter 29; each day a violation exists shall be a         $100.00 nor   3-29-6
                   separate and distinct offense                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
Title 4: Building                                                                                                
Regulations
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 1; Each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   4-1-2
                   and distinct offense.                                                            more than     (1)(k)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 2; Each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   4-2-2
                   and distinct offense.                                                            more than     (1)(k)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than 4-3-2
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 3; Each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   (30)
                   and distinct offense.                                                            more than     ( g)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 5; Each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   4-5-2
                   and distinct offense.                                                            more than     (1)(f)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 6; Each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   4-6-2
                   and distinct offense.                                                            more than     (1)(g)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 8; Each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   4-8-2
                   and distinct offense.                                                            more than     (1)(f)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 9; Each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   4-9-2
                   and distinct offense.                                                            more than     (1)(f)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 10; Each day a violation exists shall be a         $100.00 nor   4-10-2
                   separate and distinct offense.                                                   more than     (1)( g)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 11; Each day a violation exists shall be a         $100.00 nor   4-11-2
                   separate and distinct offense.                                                   more than     (1)(f )
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 12; Each day a violation exists shall be a         $100.00 nor   4-12-5
                   separate and distinct offense.                                                   more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violation of Title 4, Chapter 13; Each day a violation exists shall be a         $100.00 nor   4-13-5
                   separate and distinct offense.                                                   more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
Title 5: Zoning                                                                                                  
Regulations
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violations of Title 5.                                                           $100.00 nor   5-19-5
                                                                                                    more than     (B)
                                                                                                    $750.00
Title 6:
Subdivision                                                                                                      
Regulations
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 6                                                             $100.00 nor   6-2-6
                                                                                                    more than     (D)4
                                                                                                    $750.00
Title 7: Public                                                                                                  
Ways And Property
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 7, Chapter 1; each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   7-1-28
                   and distinct offense                                                             more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 7, Chapter 3; each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   7-3-10
                   and distinct offense                                                             more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 7, Chapter 4; each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   7-4-18
                   and distinct offense                                                             more than     (B)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 7, Chapter 5; each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   7-5-16
                   and distinct offense                                                             more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 7, Chapter 6; each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   7-6-11
                   and distinct offense                                                             more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 7, Chapter 7; each day a violation exists shall be a separate $100.00 nor   7-7-7
                   and distinct offense                                                             more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
Title 8: Health                                                                                                  
And Sanitation
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Health and sanitation, waterway pollution, penalty Each day a violation exists   $100.00 nor   8-1-1
                   shall be a separate and distinct offense.                                        more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                   Penalties for violations of
                  8-1-2 (B)(1) &                                                                                8-1-2
                   8-1-2 (B)(2) (1/2of penalties collected are to be remitted to the IL Dept. of                  (G)
                   Health)
                   Penalties for violations of                                                                    8-1-2
                  8-1-2 (B)(3) &                                                                                (B)
                   8-1-2 (B)(4) (1/2of penalties collected are to be remitted to the IL Dept. of                  (3 & 4)
                   Health)
                     First Violation                                                            $250.00        
                     Second Violation violations within one year of first.                      $500.00        
                     For third and any subsequent violations within one year of first.          $750.00        
                   Penalties for violations of                                                      $250.00 per   8-1-2
                  8-1-2 (B)(5) (½ of penalties collected are to be remitted to the IL Dept. of    violation     (B)(5)
                   Health)
                   Health and sanitation, prohibited acts regarding garbage rubbish and hazardous   Not less
                  waste penalty.                                                                   $100.00 nor   8-2-2
                   Each day a violation exists shall be a separate and distinct offense.            more than     (H)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                     First Violation                                                            $100.00        
                     For any subsequent violations within one year of first.                    $250.00        
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Health and sanitation, weed control and eradication, penalty. Each day a         $100.00 nor   8-4-10
                   violation exists shall be a separate and distinct offense.                       more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less
                  Violations of Title 8, Chapter 5.                                                $100.00 nor   8-5-8
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                   Each day, or any portion of a day, during which violation if committed,                        8-6-8
                  continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be          $750.00       (G)
                   punishable as such.
Title 9: Police                                                                                                  
Regulations
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violations of Title 9, Chapter 2, generally                                      $75.00 nor    9-2-11
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Sec.                                                                $25.00 or     9-2-8
                   9-2-8  - each day a violation exists shall be a separate and distinct offense    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Animal control, running at large violations, penalty                                          9-3-5
                     First offense                                                              $25.00         
                     First offense, dangerous dog                                               $50.00         
                     Second offense                                                             $50.00         
                     Second offense dangerous dog                                               $100.00        
                                                                                                    Not less than
                     Third and subsequent offenses                                              $50.00 or      
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                     Third and subsequent offenses dangerous dog                                $100.00 or     
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violations of Title 9, Chapter 3, generally, each day a violation exists shall   $25.00 or     9-3-14
                   be a separate and distinct offense                                               more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Dangerous dogs, each day a violation exists shall be a separate and distinct     $50.00 or     9-3-5
                   offense                                                                          more than     (C)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Destroy, damage property, graffiti, penalties                                                 9-4-5
                                                                                                                  (D)4
                      Painting graffiti on surface of private or public structure or building pluNot less than
                  restitution to owner or village for removal of graffiti and any restoration of   $200.00 nor    
                   structure or building as a result of graffiti removal                            more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                     Failure by owner to remove graffiti or failure to inform village of graffit$200.00 nor    
                   for village removal                                                              more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                   Violations of Sec.                                                               Not less than
                  9-4-1  through                                                                   $50.00 nor    9-4-20
                   9-4-18  generally                                                                more than     (A)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violations of Sec.                                                               $200.00, nor  9-4-20
                   9-4-19                                                                           more than     (B)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Vandalism, damage to property, parents responsibility                            $25.00 nor    9-4-21
                                                                                                    more than     (D)
                                                                                                    $500.00
                  Claims For Certain Offenses, Settlements:                                                     9-4-22
                                                                                                                  (E)
                  Parking alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such     $10.00         
                   parking would obstruct traffic
                  Parking within 20 feet of crosswalk at intersection                              $10.00         
                  Bicycle riding on sidewalk in business district                                  $20.00         
                  Double parking                                                                   $20.00         
                  Overtime hourly parking                                                          $20.00         
                  Parking in excess of maximum time limit in central business district             $20.00         
                  Parking in front of driveway                                                     $20.00         
                  Parking in reserved lot without paying rental fee                                $20.00         
                  Parking on crosswalk                                                             $20.00         
                  Parking on any street between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. without special permission $20.00         
                  Parking on sidewalk                                                              $20.00         
                  Parking upon any bridge or elevated structure upon highway or within highway     $20.00         
                   tunnel
                  Parking within 15 feet of fire hydrant                                           $20.00         
                  Parking within 30 feet of approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic $20.00         
                   control signal located on side of road
                  Parking within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station              $20.00         
                  Failure to obtain animal license                                                 $25.00         
                  Failure to display animal license                                                $25.00         
                  Open burning                                                                     $25.00         
                  Parking in area prohibited during or after snowfall                              $25.00         
                  Permitting animal to bark, whine, or howl excessively                            $25.00         
                  Permitting animal to create noxious or offensive odors                           $25.00         
                  Permitting animal to run at large                                                $25.00         
                  Unlawful accumulation of garbage and debris                                      $25.00         
                  Overtime parking on expired meters                                               $40.00         
                  Parking in space designated with signs prohibiting parking                       $40.00         
                  Parking not entirely within the limits of a single striped parking space         $40.00         
                  Parking on private property without consent                                      $40.00         
                  Permitting animal to run at large, second violation within 12 month period       $50.00         
                  Permitting dangerous dog to run at large, first violation within 12 month period $50.00         
                  Permitting dangerous dog to run at large, second violation within 12 month       $100.00        
                   period
                  Knowingly permitting a dangerous dog to run at large                             $250.00        
                  Parking in space designated for handicapped person                               $350.00        
                  Permitting a vicious dog within the corporate limits of the village              $500.00        
                   Claims for certain offenses, settlement fine for failure of owner or operator of               9-4-22
                  vehicle to pay any settlement as set forth in Sec.                                            (F)
                   9-4-22 (E) within 10 days
                     $10.00 increases to                                                        $20.00         
                     $20.00 increases to                                                        $40.00         
                     $25.00 increases to                                                        $50.00         
                     $40.00 increases to                                                        $80.00         
                     $50.00 increases to                                                        $100.00        
                     $100.00 increases to                                                       $150.00        
                  Settlement and compromise of violations - $10.00 (see cross reference to Sec.    $10.00         
                   9-4-22 )
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Snow deposits on street violation, penalty                                       $50.00 nor    9-4-23
                                                                                                    more than     (B)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Curfew violation, penalty                                                        Not more than 9-4-24
                                                                                                    $500.00       (E)
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Offenses related to drugs, selling drug paraphernalia violations, penalty. Each  $100.00 nor   9-4-25
                   day a violation exists shall be a separate and distinct offense                  more than     (D)5
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $25.00 or
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $100.00 per
                  School curfew. Same for parents or custodians of violators under 13              offense or    9-4-27
                                                                                                    community     (E)
                                                                                                    service or
                                                                                                    both for
                                                                                                    violators 13
                                                                                                    years and up
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Laser pointers, prohibited uses violations, penalty                              $100.00 not   9-4-31
                                                                                                    more than     (E)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                                                                                                    $100.00 or
                   Violations by sex offenders, each day a violation exists shall be a separate and more than
                  distinct offense                                                                 $750.00 plus  9-4-32
                                                                                                    additional
                                                                                                    costs
                                                                                                    incurred
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violations of Title 9, Chapter 5, generally, each day a violation exits shall be $50.00 nor    9-5-7
                   a separate and distinct offense                                                  more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Violations of Title 9, Chapter 6, generally, each day a violation exists shall                9-6-5
                   be a separate and distinct offense
                                                                                                    Not less than
                     First offense                                                              $50.00 nor     
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                     Second offense                                                             $150.00 nor    
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                     Third offense                                                              $300.00 nor    
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                     Fourth and all subsequent offenses                                         Not less than  
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Burglar and fire alarm systems, false alarm fines                                             9-8-8
                                                                                                                  (A)
                     For each false alarm in excess of three in a calendar year period.                       
                   Residential:
                        Fourth false alarm                                                   $50.00         
                        Fifth false alarm                                                    $75.00         
                        Sixth - ninth false alarm, each occurrence                           $100.00        
                        Tenth - fourteenth false alarm, each occurrence                      $150.00        
                        Fifteenth and over false alarm, each occurrence                      $200.00        
                     For each false alarm in excess of three in a calendar year period. Business              
                        Fourth false alarm                                                   $75.00         
                        Fifth false alarm                                                    $100.00        
                        Sixth - ninth false alarm, each occurrence                           $150.00        
                        Tenth - twelfth false alarm, each occurrence                         $200.00        
                        Thirteenth - fourteenth false alarm, each occurrence                 $400.00        
                        Fifteenth and over false alarm, each occurrence                      $500.00        
                  Violations of Title 9, Chapter 8, generally                                      Not more than 9-8-8
                                                                                                    $750.00       (B)
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violations of Title 9, Chapter 10, generally                                     $25.00 nor    9-10-3
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
Title 10: Traffic                                                                                                
Regulations
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  General traffic regulations, operations of restricted vehicles, penalties        $50.00 nor    10-1-2
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  General traffic regulations, failure to obey school crossing signs, penalty      $50.00 nor    10-1-3
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  General traffic regulations, meeting or overtaking stopped school bus picking up $50.00 nor    10-1-5
                   or dropping off students, penalty                                                more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  General traffic regulations, violation of street load limits                     $100.00 nor   10-1-6
                                                                                                    more than     (C)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  General traffic regulations, driving vehicle on sidewalks and other village      $50.00 nor    10-1-7
                   property other than the street                                                   more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  General traffic regulations, driving vehicle on private or public property       $50.00 nor    10-1-
                   without owner’s consent or on property other than street, penalty              more than     8 D
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  General traffic regulations, failure to yield to pedestrians present in          $50.00 nor    10-1-9
                   pedestrian crosswalk, penalty                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code                                                       10-1-10
                   A violation of any provision of this title, unless otherwise specified, or of an
                   offense classified as “petty” offenses under the aforesaid provisions of the Not less than
                  Illinois Vehicle Code shall be punishable by a fine for each offense. Offenses   $120.00 nor    
                   classified as business offenses under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle     more than
                   Code, adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter, shall be punishable as set  $1,000.00
                   forth herein
                   Offenses classified as “misdemeanors” under the provisions of the Illinois
                  Vehicle Code, adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to               
                   a fine or imprisonment for a determinate term according to the following
                   limitations:
                                                                                                    Imprisonment
                                                                                                    for any term
                                                                                                    less than one
                                                                                                    year and/or a
                                                                                                    fine of not
                                                                                                    less than
                  (i)   For a Class A misdemeanor                                               $1,000.00 and  
                                                                                                    not to exceed
                                                                                                    statutory
                                                                                                    maximums,
                                                                                                    except as
                                                                                                    provided in
                                                                                                    division (iv)
                                                                                                    below
                                                                                                    Imprisonment
                                                                                                    for not more
                                                                                                    than six
                                                                                                    months and/or
                  (ii)   For a Class B misdemeanor                                              fine of not    
                                                                                                    less than
                                                                                                    $300.00 and
                                                                                                    not to exceed
                                                                                                    statutory
                                                                                                    maximums
                                                                                                    Imprisonment
                                                                                                    for not more
                                                                                                    than 30 days
                                                                                                    and/or a fine
                  (iii)   For a Class C misdemeanor                                             of not less    
                                                                                                    than $150.00
                                                                                                    and not to
                                                                                                    exceed
                                                                                                    statutory
                                                                                                    maximums
                                                                                                    Shall impose
                                                                                                    a fine of not
                                                                                                    less than
                                                                                                    $2,000.00 if
                                                                                                    the defendant
                                                                                                    had
                                                                                                    previously
                                                                                                    been
                                                                                                    convicted of
                                                                                                    driving under
                                                                                                    the influence
                   (iv)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any offense under 10-1-5of alcohol or
                  or 10- 1-503 of this code, in addition to any sentence alternative elected by    any            
                   the court                                                                        prohibited
                                                                                                    controlled
                                                                                                    substance
                                                                                                    under any
                                                                                                    local code or
                                                                                                    under 11-503
                                                                                                    of the
                                                                                                    Illinois
                                                                                                    Vehicle Code,
                                                                                                    or a similar
                                                                                                    provision
                                                                                                    under local
                                                                                                    ordinance
                                                                                                    Shall impose
                                                                                                    an additional
                                                                                                    fine of
                                                                                                    $500.00 if
                                                                                                    the defendant
                                                                                                    had a breath
                  (v)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty of any offense under 10-1-11-alcohol        
                   501 of this code, in addition to any sentencing alternative elected by the court content of
                                                                                                    0.160 or
                                                                                                    higher in the
                                                                                                    case for
                                                                                                    which he or
                                                                                                    she is being
                                                                                                    sentenced
                   (vi)   In addition to any other alternative sentence imposed by the court, an
                   individual found guilty of a violation of 10-1-501, whose operation of a motor
                   vehicle while in violation of 10-1-11-501, proximately caused an incident        $1,000.00/
                   resulting in an appropriate emergency response, shall be required to make        public agency
                  restitution to a public agency for the costs of that emergency response. The     providing      
                   restitution may not exceed $1,000.00 per public agency for each emergency        emergency
                   response. As used in this division (vi), “emergency response” means any incidresponse
                   requiring a response from a police officer, a fire fighter carried on the rolls
                   of a regularly constituted fire department of an ambulance
                   All fines recited herein are in addition to: (a) all costs, including DUI tech
                  fees, mandated by state statute which are adopted herein by reference; and (b)                 
                   all other fees and costs established within the village code
                   The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any offense under 10-1-11-501(a)
                   (3), 10-1-11-501(a)(4), 10-1-11-501(a)(5) or 10-1-11-501(a)(6), in addition to
                  any sentence alternative elected by the court, shall impose a fee in the amount                
                   of $50.00 for costs incurred by the village for equipment and the handling of
                   drug samples
                   Deferred prosecution - any eligible ordinance ticket for which deferred          Not less than
                  prosecution is utilized (at the discretion of the village prosecutor) is subject $100.00 not    
                   to a village administrative fee                                                  to exceed
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Automated traffic law violation penalty                                          $100.00       10-1-12
                                                                                                                  (I)
                     Late payment penalty                                                       $100.00        
                  Towing impoundment                                                                            10-1-13
                                                                                                                  (I)
                  Administrative fee and all additional fees to all other towing and storage fees  $500.00       10-1-13
                   Parking restrictions, parking in street between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. without  Not less than
                  permission, fire lane, restricted parking zone, or where vehicle reduces width   $50.00 nor    10-2-1
                   of street to less than 18 feet, penalty                                          more than     (D)2
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Parking restrictions, manner of parking on street against curb and in compact    $25.00 nor    10-2-3
                   parking spaces, penalty                                                          more than     (C)
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Parking restrictions, redemption fee for impounded vehicles                      $25.00        10-2-4
                                                                                                                  (C)
                  Parking restrictions, parking without proper plates, decals, or other visible    $350.00/      10-2-6-
                   authorization in handicapped designated parking space                            offense       3 (A)
                   Violations of Title 10, Chapter 2, generally settlement and compromise of        Not less than
                  violations (See cross-reference to Sec.                                          $25.00 nor    10-2-7
                   9-4-22 )                                                                         more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Late Fees:                                                                                     
                  Within first five business days of the quarter to which the permit applies       10% of the     
                                                                                                    quarterly fee
                  Within six to fifteen business days after the first day of the quarter to which  20% of the     
                   the permit applies                                                               quarterly fee
                  Replacement of lost or damaged quarterly permit; 1 free per calendar year.       $25.00         
                   Subsequent replacements -
                     If cancelled within the first month                                        67% quarterly 10-4-3
                                                                                                    fee           (E)
                     If cancelled within the second month                                       33% quarterly  
                                                                                                    fee
                     If cancelled within third month                                            No refund      
                                                                                                                  10-4-3
                  Municipal parking lots                                                                        (H) 1 &
                                                                                                                  2
                     Failure to display permit                                                  Not less than  
                                                                                                    $25.00
                     Failure to secure display parking permit                                   Not less than  
                                                                                                    $50.00
                  Municipal parking lots, parking in more than one space, penalty                  $40.00        10-4-5
                                                                                                                  (A)
                   Municipal parking lots, parking in handicapped parking spaces without proper
                   plates, decals, or other visible authorizations in handicapped designated        $350.00/      10-4-5
                  parking space, penalty. Settlement and compromise of violations (See cross-      offense       (B)
                   reference to Sec.
                   9-4-22 )
                  Municipal parking lots, reverse parking, penalty                                 $25.00        10-4-5
                                                                                                                  (C)
                  Municipal parking lots, blocking or impeding traffic in aisle or access to       $25.00        10-4-5
                   parking space                                                                                  (D)
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violations of Title 10, Chapter 4, generally, each day a violation exists shall  $50.00, nor   10-4-9
                   be a separate and distinct offense                                               more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Traffic movement regulation, failure to observe yield or stop signs, penalty     $25.00 or     10-5-2
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $200.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Traffic movement regulation, right turn at specified prohibited intersections,   $25.00 or     10-5-3
                   penalty                                                                          more than
                                                                                                    $200.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Traffic movement regulations, making prohibited left turns out of the            $25.00 or     10-5-4
                   southernmost two driveways from Jewel Foods parking lot at Route 53 and Maple    more than     (B)
                                                                                                    $200.00
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 10, Chapter 5, generally                                      $50.00 or     10-5-6
                                                                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                   Violations of Title 10, Chapter 6, generally. Settlement and compromise of       Not less than
                  violations (See cross- reference to Sec.                                         $25.00 or     10-6-6
                   9-4-22 )                                                                         more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
Title 11:                                                                                                        
Telecommunications
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violations of Title 11, generally, each day a violation exists shall be a        $100.00 or    11-1-8
                   separate and distinct offense                                                    more than
                                                                                                    $750.00
                  Late fees - as governed by the Local Government Taxpayers Bill of Rights Act, 50              11-5A-
                   ILCS 45/1                                                                                      1 (K)
                                                                                                    Monetary
                                                                                                    penalties
                                                                                                    which shall
                                                                                                    not exceed
                                                                                                    $750.00 for
                   Cable and Video Customers Protection Law, for any material breach of standards   each day of
                   and requirements. Such penalties shall be in addition to the penalties provided  material
                  in the law and shall not represent the village’s exclusive remedy for any      breach, and   11-9-3
                   material breach. All monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral   not exceed
                   basis                                                                            $25,000.00
                                                                                                    for each
                                                                                                    occurrence of
                                                                                                    a material
                                                                                                    breach per
                                                                                                    customer
Title 12:
Stormwater And                                                                                                   
Floodplain
Regulations
                                                                                                    Not less than
                  Violation of Title 12                                                            $100.00 nor   12-3-5
                                                                                                    more than     (B)
                                                                                                    $750.00
 
(Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; amd. Ord. 2021-4936, 12-6-2021; Ord. 2021-4944, 1-
17-2022; Ord. 2023-4997, 2-6-2023)
1-20-3: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Title Classification Type Coverage Required Code Section
Title           Classification   Type            Coverage Required Code Section
Title 3:
Business                                                         
Regulations
               Solicitors                                       3-4-8 (D)
                                                               3-4-9 (B)
                                                 General aggregate
                                                 limit:
                                                 $2,000,000;
                                 Comprehensive   bodily injury and
                               general         property damage    
                                 liability       combined single
                                                 limit each
                                                 occurrence:
                                                 $1,000,000
               Special events                                   3-26-7
                                                 General aggregate
                                                 limit:
                                                 $2,000,000;
                                 Comprehensive   bodily injury and
                               general         property damage    
                                 liability       combined single
                                                 limit each
                                                 occurrence:
                                                 $1,000,000
                Lisle commuter
               rail station                                      
                concession
                license
                                                 In accordance
                                 Worker's        with worker's
                               compensation    compensation act  3-29-3(B)1
                                 coverage        and occupational
                                                 diseases act
                                                 General aggregate
                                                 limit:
                                                 $2,000,000;
                                 Comprehensive   bodily injury and
                               general         property damage   3-29-3(B)2
                                 liability       combined single
                                                 limit each
                                                 occurrence:
                                                 $1,000,000
Title 7: Public
Ways And                                                         
Property
                Excavation and
               construction                                     7-1-16
                rights-of-way
                                                 In accordance
                                 Worker's        with worker's
                               compensation    compensation act   
                                 coverage        and occupational
                                                 diseases act
                                                 $1,000.000 per
                                                 injury, per
                                                 occurrence;
                               Employers       $500.00 per        
                                 liability       disease per
                                                 employee and
                                                 $1,000,000 per
                                                 disease
                                                 General aggregate
                                                 limit:
                                                 $2,000,000;
                                 Comprehensive   bodily injury and
                               general         property damage    
                                 liability       combined single
                                                 limit each
                                                 occurrence:
                                                 $1,000,000
                                 Automobile      Each occurrence
                               liability       limit: $1,000,000  
                                 insurance
                               Umbrella        $2,000,000.00      
                                 coverage
               Small wireless                                   7-2-15
                facilities
                                                 In accordance
                                 Worker s        with Worker's
                               compensation    Compensation Act   
                                 coverage        and Occupational
                                                 Diseases Act
                                                 General aggregate
                                 Comprehensiv e  limit:
                               general         $5,000,000;        
                                 liability       bodily injury and
                                                 property damage
                                 Automobile      Each occurrence
                               liability       limit: $1,000,000  
                                 insurance
                Vestibule right-
               of-way                                           7-3-6(B)
                encroachment
                                                 General aggregate
                                                 limit:
                                                 $1,000,000;
                                 Comprehensive   bodily injury and
                               general         property damage    
                                 liability       combined single
                                                 limit each
                                                 occurrence:
                                                 $1,000,000
                Outdoor eating
               and drinking on                                  7-3-8(B)
                public right-of-
                way
                                                 General aggregate
                                                 limit:
                                                 $1,000,000;
                                 Comprehensive   bodily injury and
                               general         property damage    
                                 liability       combined single
                                                 limit each
                                                 occurrence:
                                                 $1,000,000
                Outdoor retail
               display on                                       7-3-9(B)
                public right-of-
                way
                                                 General aggregate
                                                 limit:
                                                 $1,000,000;
                                 Comprehensive   bodily injury and
                               general         property damage    
                                 liability       combined single
                                                 limit each
                                                 occurrence:
                                                 $1,000,000
               Public                                           7-6-8
                improvements
                                                 In accordance
                                 Worker's        with Worker s
                               compensation    Compensation Act   
                                 coverage        and Occupational
                                                 Diseases Act
                                                 $1,000,000 per
                                                 injury, per
                                                 occurrence;
                               Employers       $500,000 per       
                                 liability       disease per
                                                 employee and
                                                 $1,000,000 per
                                                 disease
                                                 General aggregate
                                                 limit:
                                                 $2,000,000;
                                 Comprehensive   bodily injury and
                               general         property damage    
                                 liability       combined single
                                                 limit each
                                                 occurrence:
                                                 $1,000,000
                                 Automobile      Each occurrence
                               liability       limit: $1,000,000  
                                 insurance
                               Umbrella        $2,000,000.00      
                                 coverage
                                                 General liability
                                                 for each truck -
                                                 $250,000.00/
                                                 person
                                                 $500,000.00/
                                                 occurrence
                                                 Comprehensive
                                                 general liability
                                                 - $500,000.00
                                                 combined single
                                                 limit, or
                                                 $500,000.00
                                                 bodily injury and
                                 Comprehensive   $250,000.00
                                 general         property damage
                                 liability,      Comprehensive
Title 9: Police                  garage keepers, auto liability -
Regulations     Tow operator     and workers     $50,000.00 on     9-9-4
                                 compensation    hook liability
                                 insurance       Minimum garage
                                 requirements    keepers legal
                                                 liability or
                                                 motor truck cargo
                                                 - $50,000.00
                                                 Workers
                                                 compensation and
                                                 employers
                                                 liability -
                                                 Statutory limits
                                                 plus $100,000.00
                                                 Employers
                                                 liability limit -
                                                 $100,000.00
                                                 Minimum umbrella
                                                 liability - $1M
 
(Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; amd. Ord. 2021-4944, 1-17-2022; Ord. 2024-5106, 10-
21-2024)
1-20-4: GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS:
Title Classification Type Form Amount Code Section
Title        Classification       Type         Form Amount       Code Section
Title 6:
Subdivision                                                   
Regulations
                                                    110% of
             Public improvement                     engineer's
            construction                         probable     6-4-2 (A)
             security                               estimate of
                                                    cost
                                  Post
                                  construction      20% of total
                                guarantee of     cost of      6-4-4 (D)
                                  completed         public
                                  public            improvements
                                  improvements
Title 7:
Public Ways                                                   
And Property
             Excavation and
            construction in                      $5,000.00    7-1-18
             rights-of-way
             Temporary building
            construction water,                              7-4-6 (C)1
             fire hydrant usage
               Meter size (in                              
             inches)
               3/4                            $250.00       
               1                              $300.00       
               1- 1/2                         $500.00       
               2                              $1,600.00     
               3                              $2,000.00     
             Temporary
            construction water,                              7-4-6 (D)3(b)
             fire hydrant usage
                                                    110% of
             Public improvement                     engineer's
            construction                         probable     7-6-7
             security                               estimate of
                                                    cost
             Public construction                    20% of total
            guarantee of                         cost of      7-6-10 (D)
             completed public                       public
             improvements                           improvements
 
(Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; amd. Ord. 2021-4944, 1-17-2022; Ord. 2024-5106, 10-
21-2024)
1-20-5: REGULATORY MEASURES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-4936, 12-6-2021)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Created
2-1-2: Members
2-1-3: Terms Of Members
2-1-4: Proceedings
2-1-5: Officers; Compensation
2-1-6: Planning Department
2-1-7: Hearings; Appeals; Notices
2-1-8: Stay Of Proceedings
2-1-9: Powers Of Commission
2-1-10: Preliminary Approval Of Subdivision Plats
2-1-11: Preexisting Plats Or Maps
2-1-12: References To Commission
2-1-13: Ex Officio Student Participation
2-1-1: CREATED:
A planning and zoning commission for the village is hereby created under the
authority of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-
1 et seq. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-2: MEMBERS:
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, one of
whom shall be the chairman and the said seven (7) members of said planning and
zoning commission shall be appointed by the president, subject to confirmation
by the corporate authorities. Members of the planning and zoning commission
shall reside within the village or within the territory contiguous with the
village. The chairman of the planning and zoning commission shall be designated
by the president, subject to confirmation by the corporate authorities. The
president, with the approval of the corporate authorities, may remove any
member or the chairman for misconduct in office or neglect of duty. (Ord. 2003-
3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003; amd. Ord. 2020-4884, 11-2-2020)
2-1-3: TERMS OF MEMBERS:
Members appointed by the president, confirmed by the corporate authorities,
shall serve the following terms: two (2) shall be appointed for a term of one
year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and the remaining three (3) for a
term of three (3) years. The members and chairman so appointed shall, after the
expiration of their first term, if they are reappointed, be appointed for a
period of three (3) years and until their respective successors are appointed
and have qualified. All vacancies occurring in the planning and zoning
commission shall be filled by appointment of the president, subject to
confirmation of the corporate authorities, for the remainder of the unexpired
term in the same manner as original appointments. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003,
eff. 5-1-2003; amd. Ord. 2020-4884, 11-2-2020)
2-1-4: PROCEEDINGS:
Meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be held at the call of the
chairman and at such other times as the planning and zoning commission may
determine. Such chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The presence of at
least four (4) members of the planning and zoning commission shall be necessary
to constitute a quorum.
The planning and zoning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and
shall keep a record of its own proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. Findings of
fact shall be included in the minutes of each case of a requested variation or
appeal, and the reasons for approving or denying such variation or appeal shall
be specified.
All records of proceedings, findings, determinations and actions of the
planning and zoning commission shall be filed immediately in the office of the
planning and zoning commission and shall be a public record. All meetings of
the planning and zoning commission shall be open to the public. (Ord. 2003-
3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-5: OFFICERS; COMPENSATION:
As soon as possible after the original appointment of members of said planning
and zoning commission or upon the appointment of a new member for the remainder
of an unexpired term, the president shall designate a chairman of the planning
and zoning commission subject to confirmation by the corporate authorities.
Said commission may have a secretary, a staff or both, and such other officers
as may in their judgment be necessary. All members and all officers of said
planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation with the
exception of the secretary, who may receive such compensation as may be fixed
from time to time by the corporate authorities and as may be provided for in
the annual appropriation ordinance. The members of the planning and zoning
commission, by their chairman, shall from time to time make recommendations to
the village board of trustees with respect to compensation for the secretary of
said commission. If the planning and zoning commission deems it advisable to
obtain technical or legal advice or other professional services, it may do so,
but it first must obtain from the village board of trustees prior approval and
authority to incur any expense and said expense, before incurred, must have
been provided for in the annual appropriation ordinance or budget as amended
and as passed by the village board of trustees. The corporate authorities may
appropriate or budget such sums as they may deem proper for the maintenance and
operation of said planning and zoning commission and/or planning department
which may hereafter be created, including the salaries of all paid members and
employees; development of a planning program; preparation of regulations,
projects and programs pertinent to the development, redevelopment and renewal
of the municipality and such surrounding territory over which the municipality
exercises subdivision jurisdiction; the preparation and revision of the
official map and the exercise of such powers germane to the purposes for which
it was created, as may be conferred upon the planning and zoning commission or
planning department by ordinance. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-6: PLANNING DEPARTMENT:
The corporate authorities may, by ordinance, establish a planning department.
(Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-7: HEARINGS; APPEALS; NOTICES:
Appeals to the planning and zoning commission may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the village
affected by a decision of the building commissioner and/or zoning inspector.
Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the
planning and zoning commission by general rule, by filing with the building
commissioner and with the planning and zoning commission a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof. The building commissioner shall forthwith
transmit to the planning and zoning commission all of the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-
2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-8: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the building commissioner certifies to the planning and zoning
commission after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that, by reason
of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the planning and zoning
commission, or by a court of record, on application or notice to the building
commissioner on due cause shown.
The planning and zoning commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for
the hearing of the appeal, shall give due notice thereof to the parties in
interest, and shall render a decision within a reasonable time.
Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly
authorized agent or attorney. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-9: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
Said planning and zoning commission shall, in addition to all other powers
provided by law, have the following powers:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the board of trustees of the village a
comprehensive plan of public improvements looking to the present and future
development of the village, which plan shall be known as the official plan of
Lisle. Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to streets,
alleys and public grounds, unsubdivided lands within the corporate limits of
the village and in contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than
one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits and not included in any city,
village or incorporated town. Said requirements to be effective whenever such
land shall be subdivided after the adoption of such plan.
   (B)   To prepare and recommend to the board of trustees from time to time
such changes in the plan as may be deemed necessary by the board of trustees or
by the planning and zoning commission; provided, however, that such change will
not affect the general principles of the plan as adopted.
   (C)   To prepare and recommend to the board of trustees from time to time
general plans for specific improvements in accordance with such official plan.
   (D)   To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further
making of such improvements and generally promote the realization of the
official plan.
   (E)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by law and
as may be conferred by the corporate authorities of the village.
   (F)   The power to perform the duties that are set out in the zoning
regulations of the village, being in particular title 5, chapter 19 of this
code. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-10: PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS 1 :
All plats of subdivision shall be submitted initially to the planning and
zoning commission for preliminary approval. The application for approval shall
show location and width of proposed streets and public ways; shall indicate
proposed location of sewers and storm drains; proposed dedication of public
grounds, if any; lot sizes; proposed easements for public utilities; and
proposed methods of sewage and waste disposal; but need not contain
specifications for proposed improvements.
The planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the application
for preliminary approval within ninety (90) days of the date of application or
the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. If
such plat is disapproved, then within ninety (90) days the planning and zoning
commission shall furnish to the applicant a statement, in writing, setting
forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects
in which the proposed plat failed to conform to the ordinances including
official map. If the plat is approved, the corporate authorities shall accept
or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after its next regular stated
meeting following the action of the planning and zoning commission. Preliminary
approval shall not qualify a plat for recording.
Application for approval of the plat shall be made not later than one year
after preliminary approval has been granted. The application must be supported
by such drawings, specifications and bond as may be necessary to demonstrate
compliance with all requirements of applicable statutes and such regulations as
the corporate authorities may provide by ordinance under law.
The applicant may elect to have final approval of the geographic part or parts
of the plat that received preliminary approval and may delay application for
approval of other parts until a later date or dates beyond one year with the
approval of the corporate authorities; provided that all facilities required to
serve the part or parts for which the final approval is sought have been
provided. In such case only, such part or parts of the plat as have received
final approval shall be recorded.
When a person submitting a plat of subdivision or resubdivision for final
approval has supplied all drawings, maps and other documents required by the
municipal ordinances to be furnished in support thereof, and if all such
material meets all municipal requirements, the corporate authorities shall
approve the proposed plat within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the
last required document or other paper or within sixty (60) days from the date
of filing application for final approval of the plat, whichever date is later.
The applicant and the corporate authorities may mutually agree to extend the
sixty (60) day period.
Any person seeking approval of a subdivision or resubdivision map or plat shall
post a good and sufficient bond with the village clerk and a penal sum
sufficient to cover the estimate made by the village engineer, or other
authorized person, of expenditures including, but not limited to, reasonable
inspection fees to be borne by the applicant, necessary to conform to the
requirements established and conditions upon completion of said requirements in
a reasonable time. The form of bond shall be a form from time to time
prescribed by the corporate authorities as will be the required surety to be
approved by the corporate authorities; provided that the village may permit the
deposit of cash or other security acceptable to the corporate authorities, to
complete the improvements required in lieu of bond, and further provided, that
no bond or securities shall be required to be filed until the corporate
authorities have approved the plat in all other respects and have notified the
applicant of such approval.
If the preliminary or final plat is approved, the village clerk shall attach a
certified copy of the order or resolution of approval to a copy of the plat. If
the proposed plat is disapproved, the order or resolution shall state the
reasons for disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspects in which the
proposed plat fails to conform to the official map. A copy of the order or
resolution shall be filed in the offices of the village clerk. (Ord. 2003-3451,
4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6 of this code containing the subdivision regulations of the
  village.
2-1-11: PREEXISTING PLATS OR MAPS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any official
plat or map adopted and in force prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord.
2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-12: REFERENCES TO COMMISSION:
Any reference within this code to either the plan commission or the zoning
board of appeals shall hereafter be seen as a reference to this combined
planning and zoning commission and any power or responsibility delegated to
either individual body shall henceforth be the power or responsibility of this
combined commission. (Ord. 2005-3906, 3-21-2005)
2-1-13: EX OFFICIO STUDENT PARTICIPATION:
   (A)   In order to encourage civic responsibility and to provide hands on
learning experiences, the high school student representative position(s) is
established for the planning and zoning commission.
   (B)   Student representatives shall be Lisle residents and open to all high
school grade levels with preference being given to qualified seniors.
   (C)   Student representatives shall be expected to attend one meeting per
month as regularly scheduled.
   (D)   Student representatives shall serve a one year term consistent with
the term of the school year.
   (E)   Student representatives who engage in improper behavior or are absent
from two (2) or more consecutive meetings without notifying the village planner
may be removed from the commission by the chairman of the planning and zoning
commission at the recommendation of the village planner.
   (F)   Student representatives shall not vote, nor are they to be considered
a member of the commission as it relates to vote counts or quorum requirements.
(Ord. 2017-4705, 2-6-2017)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1 of this title and title 5, chapter 19 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Established
2-3-2: General Duties
2-3-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established the board of local improvements for the village,
which board shall consist of the village president and all the members of the
village board of trustees. (Ord. 137, 10-2-1962)
2-3-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
The said board of local improvements shall have the powers and perform the
duties assigned to it by state law or by ordinance of the village 1 . (Ord.
137, 10-2-1962)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/5-3-11.
CHAPTER 4
SAFETY REVIEW BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 83-1162, 11-15-1983)
CHAPTER 5
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-4135, 8-20-2007)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-6-1: Created
2-6-2: Officers Of Board, Duties
2-6-3: Duties And Responsibilities Of Board
2-6-4: Oath And Bond Of Commissioners
2-6-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a board of fire and police commissioners consisting of
three (3) members, whose terms of office shall be three (3) years and until
their respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
The members of said board shall possess qualifications required by state law,
and shall take the oath or affirmation of office set forth in section
2-6-4 of this chapter, and said members shall be subject to removal from office
as provided by state law. (Ord. 188, 7-6-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
2-6-2: OFFICERS OF BOARD, DUTIES:
Such board may designate one of its own members to act as secretary. The
secretary shall keep the minutes of the board's proceedings, the original of
which is to remain on file and secure in the village hall so as to avoid being
taken away from the village's possession or from being lost, and the secretary
shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the board, shall
keep a record of all examinations held, and shall perform such other duties as
the board shall prescribe. (Ord. 188, 7-6-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
2-6-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF BOARD:
Such board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and
members of the police department of the village, except the chief of police,
which appointment shall be made by the mayor with the consent of the board of
trustees. All appointments made by the board of fire and police commissioners
shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment shall be made,
other than that of the lowest rank.
Such board of fire and police commissioners shall make such rules and make such
appointments and removals except those herein reserved to the village president
and board of trustees, and shall have such other and further powers as are
provided by statute. (Ord. 188, 7-6-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
2-6-4: OATH AND BOND OF COMMISSIONERS:
The member commissioners of the police board of the village shall be considered
officers of the village and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) prior to their entry into and
qualification for the office of police commissioner of the village. The village
clerk shall prepare an oath to be signed on appointment, but prior to taking
office of each police commissioner of the village, and the village shall pay,
from monies budgeted or appropriated, the premium on any fidelity bond
necessary to be taken out under state law and this section in connection with
the appointment of police commissioners of the village. (Ord. 697, 6-21-1977)
CHAPTER 7
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
2-7-1: Board Of Trustees; Designation
2-7-2: Selection Of Members
2-7-3: Term Of Office
2-7-4: Board Meetings
2-7-5: Powers And Duties Of Board
2-7-1: BOARD OF TRUSTEES; DESIGNATION:
There is hereby created a board to be known as the BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
POLICE PENSION FUND, such board to be composed of five (5) members 1 . The
members appointed by the mayor shall be residents of the village, but those
elected from the regular police force, by active members and the fifth member
to be elected by and from among the beneficiaries, as hereinafter provided,
need not be residents of the village. (Ord. 194, 10-7-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-7-8 of this code for bond requirements of board.
2-7-2: SELECTION OF MEMBERS:
Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor of the village,
the third and fourth members of said board shall be elected from the regular
police force by the active members thereof, and the fifth member shall be
elected by and from among the beneficiaries, if any, of the fund.
Following their appointment, the members so appointed shall provide for an
election of two (2) board members to be elected from the regular police force
by the active members thereof and for the election of a board member from among
the beneficiaries, if any, of the fund. The election shall be held under the
Australian ballot system, at such place or places within the village and under
such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the
board. The first election following the creation of the board shall take place
as soon after the appointed members take office as is possible and those
members elected shall serve until the second Tuesday of the second May after
such election. Thereafter, such members shall be elected for a term of two (2)
years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after such election.
Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any member of the board
elected under this section, his successor shall be elected for the unexpired
term at a special election, to be called by the board and conducted in the same
manner as the regular biennial election.
All members of the regular police force shall be entitled to vote only for the
police force members of the board. All beneficiaries of legal age shall be
entitled to vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No
person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at such election. (Ord.
194, 10-7-1965)
2-7-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
One of the board members appointed by the mayor shall serve until the second
Tuesday in May following his appointment. The other board member appointed by
the mayor shall serve until the second Tuesday of the second May following his
appointment. The successors to any of the appointed members of the board shall
serve for two (2) years each or until their successors are appointed and
qualified. (Ord. 194, 10-7-1965)
2-7-4: BOARD MEETINGS:
The board shall hold regular quarterly meetings on the second Tuesday of July,
October, January and April annually, and special meetings as called by the
president of the board.
At the first meeting following the election of the first board members, and
thereafter at the regular July meeting, the board shall select from its members
a president, vice president, secretary and assistant secretary. The initial
officers so selected shall serve until the regular July meeting and thereafter
the term of office shall be for a period of one year and until his respective
successor is elected and qualified.
The vice president of the board shall perform the duties of president during
any vacancy in that office, or during such time as the president is absent from
the village or for any other reason is disqualified or by reason of illness or
other causes is unable to perform his duties.
The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever necessary to
discharge the functions of such office. (Ord. 194, 10-7-1965)
2-7-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The board shall have the powers and duties stated in 40 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-132 to 5/3-140, and as hereafter altered or amended, in addition
to the other powers and duties granted it in said chapter. (Ord. 194, 10-7-
1965)
CHAPTER 8
FLOOD INFORMATION COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-8-1: Establishment And Purpose
2-8-2: Membership And Appointment
2-8-3: Powers And Duties
2-8-4: Removal Of Members
2-8-5: Records And Public Inspection
2-8-6: Annual Report Required
2-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A flood information committee for the village is created for the purpose of
developing a program for public information as part of the village's community
rating system (CRS) program. A program for public information, as defined by
CRS, is an ongoing local effort to identify, prepare, implement, and monitor a
range of public information activities that meet specific local needs as they
relate to flood protection, flood insurance, floodplain mapping, and other
flood related issues. The CRS program is a voluntary incentive program that
recognizes communities for implementing floodplain management practices that
exceed the federal minimum requirements of the national flood insurance program
to provide protection from flooding. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-2: MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   The committee will consist of at least five (5), but no more than nine
(9), members. The mayor, with consent of the village board of trustees, will
appoint the members as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for a term
of three (3) years and up to four (4) members for a term of two (2) years.
Thereafter, the term of each member of the commission shall be two (2) years,
unless such appointment is to fill the unexpired term created by a vacancy,
occasioned by removal, resignation or death. All vacancies occurring in the
flood information committee shall be filled by appointment of the mayor,
subject to confirmation of the village board of trustees, for the remainder of
the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until their successors are
appointed.
   (B)   The village stormwater manager and village communications director are
hereby appointed to the committee, as nonvoting members. Each new or acting
stormwater manager or communications director will automatically assume the
place of his or her predecessor on the committee.
   (C)   Membership to the committee will be appointed in the following order
of priority:
      1.   Qualified floodplain residents who are registered electors of the
village who have lived in the FEMA special flood hazard area (SFHA) for at
least one year prior to the date of appointment;
      2.   Qualified floodplain landowners who are at least eighteen (18) years
of age and have owned property in the SFHA for at least one year prior to the
date of appointment;
      3.   Village of Lisle residents; and
      4.   Community stakeholders who are representatives of a school district,
a park district, or a library district serving village residents, not for
profit community organizations serving village residents, and village
businesses. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   The duties of the committee will be:
      1.   To prepare and recommend, for consideration and adoption by the
board of trustees, a program for public information that meets the requirements
of the CRS program.
      2.   To annually monitor and evaluate the program for public information
for efficacy.
      3.   To recommend modifications to the program for public information to
the village board of trustees from time to time.
   (B)   The stormwater manager will serve as coordinator for the committee and
prepare materials for distribution and conduct such other business of the
committee as may be assigned by the committee from time to time. The
communications director will serve as secretary and keep meeting minutes and
conduct such other business of the committee as may be assigned by the
committee from time to time. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-4: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The mayor may remove any member of the committee whenever, in the mayor's sole
and absolute discretion, the best interests of the village are served thereby.
Committee members who are absent from two (2) or more consecutive meetings
without notifying the stormwater manager may be removed from the committee by
the mayor at the recommendation of the stormwater manager. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-
7-2016)
2-8-5: RECORDS AND PUBLIC INSPECTION:
The committee will operate in accordance with the requirements of the open
meetings act and keep a written record of its proceedings that will be open to
public inspection during regular business hours of the village clerk's office
and subject to the freedom of information act. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-6: ANNUAL REPORT REQUIRED:
The committee will submit an annual written report to the mayor and the board
of trustees no later than September 15 of each year. The report will evaluate
the implementation of the program for public information and provide
recommendations for modifications to the program for public information for the
following year. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 9
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
2-9-1: Establishment
2-9-2: Coordinator
2-9-3: Continuity Of Government
2-9-4: Functions
2-9-5: Service As Mobile Support Team
2-9-6: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-9-7: Local Disaster Declaration
2-9-8: Emergency Action
2-9-9: Reimbursement By State
2-9-10: Purchases And Expenditures
2-9-11: Oath
2-9-12: Office
2-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Lisle emergency management agency (Lisle EMA) to
prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from the
explosion of atomic or other means from without or by means of sabotage or by
other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake,
telecommunications failure, or other natural or technological causes, in
accordance with the Illinois emergency management act 1  ("the act").
The EMA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be
selected by the coordinator. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
2-9-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the EMA shall be appointed by the village president without
the need for consent by the village board, as may be from time to time
necessary. The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training, and operation of the EMA, subject to
the direction and control of the mayor and board of trustees as provided by the
act. (Ord. 2001-3291, 3-5-2001)
2-9-3: CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT:
The principal executive officer ("PEO") of the village is the village
president. The "PEO", or the emergency interim successor, is the only
individual who can officially declare a disaster in the village. The "PEO" or
the emergency interim successor is the ultimate authority in the village during
any declared disaster, but relies directly on information and advice from the
coordinator and the village manager.
In the event that the "PEO" is unavailable, the powers of office shall be
exercised, and duties shall be discharged by the designated emergency interim
successors in the order specified. The emergency interim successors shall
exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which designated
until such time as a vacancy which may exist shall be filled in accordance with
statutes to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of office.
Emergency interim successors in the following order of succession are hereby
designated for the "PEO" as follows:
   Village board:
   (A)   Senior trustee.
   (B)   Next most senior trustee.
   (C)   Most senior trustee available.
In cases in which two (2) or more trustees have served the same length of time,
seniority of those trustees will be determined as follows: The most senior
trustee will be the trustee who received the greatest number of votes in the
election in which the trustees who are tied for seniority were first elected to
the village board. If two (2) or more trustees who are tied for seniority have
served intermittent terms on the board, the vote count used to determine
seniority shall be from the election from which the trustee was elected to this
current and consecutive length of service. Trustees will be ranked for
seniority purposes by the total numbers of votes received by each individual
trustee from highest number to lowest number. Seniority will continue to be
assigned by vote totals from the above designated election to the village
board.
All emergency interim successors shall exercise the powers and discharge the
duties of an office until a successor is appointed or elected and qualified as
may be provided by the constitution, statutes, charters, and ordinances or
until the lawful incumbent is able to resume the exercise of the power and
discharge the duties of office.
All vital records shall be maintained and protected by the coordinator for use
in reestablishing governmental operations after the emergency is declared over.
(Ord. 2002-3365, 1-7-2002)
2-9-4: FUNCTIONS:
The EMA shall coordinate emergency management functions within the territorial
limits of the village as are prescribed in and by the state emergency
operations plan, and programs, orders, rules, and regulations as may be
promulgated by the Illinois emergency management agency and, in addition, shall
conduct such functions outside of those territorial limits as may be required
under mutual aid agreements and compacts as provided in the act. (Ord. 97-2866,
4-7-1997)
2-9-5: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the EMA may be designated as member of a mobile support
team created by the director of the state EMA as provided by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated as provided by the
act.
Personnel of a mobile support team, while on duty pursuant to such a call or
while engaged in regularly scheduled training exercises, whether within or
without the state, shall either:
   (A)   If they are paid employees of the village, have the powers, duties,
rights, privileges, and immunities, and receive the compensation incidental to
their employment;
   (B)   If they are not employees of the village, be entitled to at least one
dollar ($1.00) per year compensation from the state. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-6: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator may, in collaboration with other public agencies within his
immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements
with other political subdivisions within this state for reciprocal disaster
response and recovery assistance in case a disaster is too great to be dealt
with unassisted. The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and
until approved by each of the political subdivisions. The arrangements shall be
consistent with the state emergency operations plan and state emergency
management program, and in the event of a disaster, it shall be the duty of
each emergency management agency to render assistance in accordance with the
provisions of the mutual aid arrangements. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-7: LOCAL DISASTER DECLARATION:
A local disaster may be declared only by the "PEO" of the village, or his
emergency interim successor. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period
in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the governing
board of the village. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or
terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and
shall be filed promptly with the village clerk.
The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the emergency
operations plan of that village and to authorize the furnishing of aid and
assistance thereunder. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-8: EMERGENCY ACTION:
A proclamation of a disaster by the governor shall activate the state emergency
operations plan and the village's emergency operations plan, and it shall be
authority for the deployment and use of any forces that the plan applies and
for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, and materials and
facilities assembled, stockpiled, or arranged to be made available under the
act or any other provision of law relating to disasters. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-
1997)
2-9-9: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the EMA as prescribed by the state director of EMA; compensation for
service and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the village in response to a call by the governor or state director of the EMA,
as provided by law; and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to
EMA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-10: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
In carrying out the provisions of the act, the village may enter into contracts
and incur obligations necessary to place it in a position effectively to combat
the disaster; to protect the health and safety of persons; to protect property;
and to provide emergency assistance to victims of those disasters. If a
disaster occurs, the village may exercise powers vested under the act in the
light of exigencies of the disaster and, excepting mandatory constitutional
requirements, without regard to the procedures and formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work; entering into
contracts, incurring of obligations; the employment of temporary works; the
rental of equipment; the purchase of supplies and materials; and the
appropriation, expenditure, and disposition of public funds and property. (Ord.
97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-11: OATH:
Each person whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in
any capacity in the Illinois emergency management agency or the village
emergency management agency, shall, before entering upon his duties, take an
oath, in writing, before the coordinator or before other persons authorized to
administer oaths in this state, which oath shall be filed with the coordinator
and which oath shall be substantially as follows:
   I,                                , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
will support, defend, and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the
territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. I do further
affirm that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Lisle EMA organization, I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence.
(Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-12: OFFICE:
The village president and board of trustees are authorized to designate space
in a village building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the village
president and the board of trustees for the village EMA as its office. (Ord.
97-2866, 4-7-1997)
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC ART AND SPECIAL EVENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-10-1: Establishment And Purpose
2-10-2: Membership And Appointment
2-10-3: Duties
2-10-4: Public Proceedings
2-10-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A Public Art and Special Events Advisory Committee is hereby created to
promote, encourage, and recommend public art displays and special events that
create a positive avenue to welcome individuals to a community, attract
visitors, facilitate social interaction, develop a sense of community pride,
and enhance the quality of life of residents.
The Public Arts and Special Events Advisory Committee advises and makes
recommendations to the Village Board on matters relating to Public Art and
Special Events, including review and evaluation on matters pertaining to the
identification, planning, development, acceptance, funding, implementation of
projects and events. (Ord. 2025-5155, 7-21-2025)
2-10-2: MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   The Public Arts and Special Events Advisory Committee will consist of
at least five (5) members, but no more than nine (9) members. The Mayor, with
consent of the Village Board, will appoint the members to terms of office that
do not exceed the term of the Mayor.
      The Chair of the Public Arts and Special Events Advisory Committee will
be designated by the Mayor at the time of the appointment of that member.
   (B)   The Village Manager or their designee shall serve on the Public Arts
and Special Events Advisory Committee as a non-voting member.
   (C)   A representative appointed by the Lisle Park District may serve on the
Public Arts and Special Events Advisory Committee as a non-voting member.
   (D)   Membership of the committee may be appointed from the following
      1.   Village of Lisle residents; and
      2.   Community business owners/manager. (Ord. 2025-5155, 7-21-2025)
2-10-3: DUTIES:
   (A)   The duties of the Public Arts and Special Events Advisory Committee
will be as follows:
      1.   Develop a strategic framework for arts and events that aligns with
the Village's overarching Strategic Plan, including vision, mission, goals, and
objectives;
      2.   Identify and recommend projects and events that the Village can
undertake to meet the Public Arts and Special Events Advisory Committee's
strategic framework and Village Strategic Plan;
      3.   Develop criteria, support review, and make recommendations on
funding of public art and special events through grants the Village makes
available in a given year;
      4.   Support the implementation of special events and public arts
projects with staff guidance and Village Board direction;
      5.   Establish communications and connections with community groups and
organizations that have focus and/or expertise in public art projects and
special events; and
      6.   Perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by
the Mayor and Village Board. (Ord. 2025-5155, 7-21-2025)
2-10-4: PUBLIC PROCEEDINGS:
   (A)   The Public Arts and Special Events Advisory Committee will operate in
accordance with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act and keep a written
record of its proceedings that will be open to public inspection during regular
business hours of the Village Clerk's Office and subject to the Freedom of
Information Act.
   (B)   All contractual obligations, expenditures, solicitations and
collections of funds shall be entered into only by appropriate Village staff,
with consent of the Village Board as needed. Advisory Committee members may not
make any commitments on the Village's behalf. (Ord. 2025-5155, 7-21-2025)
CHAPTER 11
LISLE IN TOUCH COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-11-1: Created
2-11-2: Appointment Of Members
2-11-3: Duties Of Commission
2-11-1: CREATED:
There shall be and is hereby created an advisory commission known as the Lisle
in touch commission for the purpose of developing and implementing programs
intended to educate and raise the awareness of Lisle area residents concerning
ways to raise a generation of drug free youth to break the cycle of substance
abuse in the community. (Ord. 91-2146, 5-6-1991)
2-11-2: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS:
   (A)   The commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, each of which
shall be appointed by the board of trustees. Of the eleven (11) members, five
(5) of the members, who shall be voting members of the commission, shall be as
follows: one member shall be an elected official of the village; one member
shall be employed by or be an elected official of the Lisle School District
202; one member shall be a member of the Lisle police department; one member
shall be employed by or be an elected official of the Lisle park district; and
one member shall be a resident who lives within the village planning
jurisdiction. Of the remaining six (6) members, who shall be nonvoting ex
officio members of the commission, there shall be one member who shall be under
the age of eighteen (18) years and attend a public or private religious school,
institution or system located within the village planning jurisdiction, the
remaining five (5) members shall be representatives of local community service
organizations (Lions Club, Rotary Club, Jaycees, Kiwanis Club, etc.); the
health service industry; youth services or community outreach organization; or
residents who live within the village planning jurisdiction.
   (B)   1.   Of the five (5) voting members, the term of appointment for the
member who is an elected official of the village, the member who is employed by
or an elected official of the Lisle School District 202, and the member who is
a resident who lives within the village planning jurisdiction shall be from
November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2002. The term of appointment for the
member who is a member of the Lisle police department and the member who is
employed by or an elected official of the Lisle park district shall be from
November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2003. Thereafter, the term of each voting
member of the commission shall be two (2) years, unless such appointment is to
fill the unexpired term created by a vacancy. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
all appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed.
      2.   Of the six (6) nonvoting ex officio members, the term of appointment
for the member who is under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be from
November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2002. Of the remaining five (5) nonvoting
ex officio members, the term of appointment for two (2) members shall be from
November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2002, and three (3) members shall be
appointed for a term from November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2003. Thereafter,
the term of the member under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be one year
and the term of each other nonvoting ex officio member of the commission shall
be two (2) years, unless such appointment is to fill the unexpired term created
by a vacancy. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office
until their successors are appointed.
   (C)   The voting members of the commission appointed as set forth herein
shall elect from among themselves a chairman and a vice chairman to preside
over the commission meetings and to direct the business of the commission.
(Ord. 2001-3354, 10-15-2001)
   (D)   A recording secretary shall be furnished by the village to record the
minutes of each meeting and to furnish clerical and record keeping support to
the commission. (Ord. 91-2220, 11-18-1991)
   (E)   The member who is an elected official of the village shall be the
liaison between the village board and the commission. The member who is a
member of the Lisle police department shall be the liaison between the village
staff and the commission. (Ord. 99-3130, 7-6-1999)
   (F)   A quorum necessary in order to conduct business of the commission
shall be defined as any three (3) voting members of the commission. (Ord. 2001-
3354, 10-15-2001)
2-11-3: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
   (A)   The commission shall be an advisory commission only and shall meet as
necessary to manage the business of the commission, and to discuss and make
recommendations to the board of trustees to effectuate the purposes and goals
of the commission. To the extent approved by the board of trustees, the
commission shall implement programs discussed and recommended.
   (B)   All contractual obligations, expenditures, solicitations and
collection of funds shall be entered into or made only with the express consent
of the board of trustees. (Ord. 91-2146, 5-6-1991)
CHAPTER 12
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-12-1:    Establishment And Purpose
2-12-2:    Membership And Appointment
2-12-3:    Powers And Duties
2-12-4:    Removal Of Members
2-12-5:   Records And Public Inspection
2-12-1:   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
An Economic Development Commission is hereby established for the purpose of
encouraging and facilitating economic growth within the Village and function in
an advisory capacity to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2025-5150, 6-2-
2025)
2-12-2:   MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   The Economic Development Commission will consist of seven (7) voting
members. Members will be residents of the Village or representatives of
businesses or organizations conducting business in the Village. All members
will be appointed by mayor, with advice and consent of the board of trustees.
   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section related to
initial terms, each appointment will be for a term of three (3) years, unless
such appointment is to fill an unexpired term resulting from a vacancy created
by removal or resignation. All vacancies occurring in the the Economic
Development Commission shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, subject to
confirmation of the board of trustees, for the remainder of the unexpired term
in the same manner as the original appointment. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
all member appointees will hold office until their successors are appointed and
confirmed.
   (C)   At the time the Economic Development Commission is first constituted,
the initial terms will be as follows: three (3) members will be appointed for a
term of three (3) years, and two (2) members for a term of two (2) years, and
two (2) members for a term of one (1) year.
   (D)   The mayor, with advice and consent of the board of trustees, will
appoint one (1) member as chairperson of the Economic Development Commission.
   (E)   The mayor, in consultation with the chairperson of the Economic
Development Commission, may appoint no more than three (3) advisory members of
the Economic Development Commission as non-voting members. (Ord. 2025-5150, 6-
2-2025)
2-12-3:   POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Economic Development Commission will act in an advisory and recommending
capacity to the mayor and board of trustees, and the duties of the Economic
Development Commission will be as follows:
   (A)   Provide input on matters to facilitate sound economic growth, business
development, and enhance quality of life within the Village.
   (B)   Examine opportunities for fostering an attractive economic climate
within the Village with respect to both existing and potential new businesses.
   (C)   Recommend additional steps and measure to promote economic growth by
retaining businesses and attracting new commerce and industry to the Village.
   (D)   Collaborate with Village elected officials and staff to realize
appropriate goals and objectives relating to sound business policies, an
increased tax base and increased employment opportunities. (Ord. 2025-5150, 6-
2-2025)
2-12-4:   REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The mayor may remove any member of the Economic Development Commission
whenever, in the mayor's sole and absolute discretion, the best interest of the
village is served thereby. (Ord. 2025-5150, 6-2-2025)
 2-12-5:   RECORDS AND PUBLIC INSPECTION:
The Economic Development Commission will operate in accordance with the
requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Acts and keep written record of its
proceedings that will be open to public inspection and subject to the Illinois
Freedom of Information Act. (Ord. 2025-5150, 6-2-2025)
CHAPTER 13
LISLE TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-13-1: Created
2-13-2: Appointment Of Members
2-13-3: Duties Of Commission
2-13-1: CREATED:
There shall be and is hereby created an advisory commission known as the Lisle
technology commission for the purpose of advising the village board of trustees
regarding the use of available technology by village government to provide high
quality and cost efficient benefits to the residents and businesses of the
village of Lisle. (Ord. 2001-3324, 7-2-2001)
2-13-2: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS:
   (A)   The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each of which shall
be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
Members shall be appointed as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for
a term of one year; and four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of two
(2) years. Thereafter, the term of a member of the commission shall be two (2)
years, unless such appointment is to fill the unexpired term created by a
vacancy. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until
their successors are appointed.
   (B)   The members appointed as set forth herein shall elect from among
themselves a chairman and a vice chairman to preside over the commission
meetings and to direct the business of the commission. (Ord. 2001-3324, 7-2-
2001)
2-13-3: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
   (A)   The commission shall be an advisory commission only and shall meet as
necessary to manage the business of the commission, and to discuss and make
recommendations to the board of trustees to effectuate the purposes and goals
of the commission. To the extent approved by the board of trustees, the
commission shall implement programs discussed and recommended.
   (B)   All contractual obligations, expenditures, solicitations and
collection of funds shall be entered into or made only with the express consent
of the board of trustees. (Ord. 2001-3324, 7-2-2001)
CHAPTER 14
LISLE TRANSPORTATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-14-1: Created
2-14-2: Appointment Of Members
2-14-3: Duties Of Commission
2-14-1: CREATED:
There shall be and is hereby created an advisory commission known as the Lisle
transportation advisory commission for the purpose of advising the village
board of trustees regarding transportation related issues, including, but not
limited to, traffic, sidewalks, and bike paths. (Ord. 2001-3325, 7-2-2001)
2-14-2: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS:
   (A)   The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each of which shall
be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
Members shall be appointed as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for
a term of one year; and four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of two
(2) years. Thereafter, the term of a member of the commission shall be two (2)
years, unless such appointment is to fill the unexpired term created by a
vacancy. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until
their successors are appointed.
   (B)   The members appointed as set forth herein shall elect from among
themselves a chairman and a vice chairman to preside over the commission
meetings and to direct the business of the commission. (Ord. 2001-3325, 7-2-
2001)
2-14-3: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
   (A)   The commission shall be an advisory commission only and shall meet as
necessary to manage the business of the commission, and to discuss and make
recommendations to the board of trustees to effectuate the purposes and goals
of the commission. To the extent approved by the board of trustees, the
commission shall implement programs discussed and recommended.
   (B)   All contractual obligations, expenditures, solicitations and
collection of funds shall be entered into or made only with the express consent
of the board of trustees. (Ord. 2001-3325, 7-2-2001)
CHAPTER 15
WEST SUBURBAN MASS TRANSIT DISTRICT
SECTION:
2-15-1: Local Mass Transit District
2-15-1: LOCAL MASS TRANSIT DISTRICT:
The village has participated in the creation of the west suburban mass transit
district, and shall appoint the necessary members thereof to serve on behalf of
the village. (Ord. 2007-4156, 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 16
BICYCLIST AND PEDESTRIAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-16-1: Establishment And Purpose
2-16-2: Membership And Appointment
2-16-3: Powers And Duties
2-16-4: Removal Of Members
2-16-5: Records And Public Inspection
2-16-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee is hereby created for the
purposes of promoting and encouraging bicycling and walking through Lisle, for
both recreation and transportation, including the creation of safer routes,
capital improvements, amenities, events and programs. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-
2018)
2-16-2: MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   The Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee will consist of at
least five (5) members, but no more than nine (9) members. The Mayor, with
consent of the Village Board of Trustees, will appoint the members as follows:
three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years and two (2)
members for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, the term of each member of the
commission shall be two (2) years, unless such appointment is to fill the
unexpired term created by a vacancy, occasioned by removal, resignation or
death. All vacancies occurring in the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory
Committee shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor, subject to confirmation
of the Village Board of Trustees, for the remainder of the unexpired term in
the same manner as original appointments. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all
appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed.
   (B)   The Village Planner and Public Works Director or their designees shall
serve on the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee as non-voting members.
Each new or acting Village Planner or Public Works Director will automatically
assume the place of his or her predecessor on the committee.
   (C)   A representative appointed by the Lisle Park District shall serve on
the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee as a non-voting member.
   (D)   Membership to the committee may be appointed from the following:
      1.   Village of Lisle residents; and
      2.   Community business owners/managers. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-2018)
2-16-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   The duties of the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee will be
as follows:
      1.   Plan for bicyclists and pedestrians as part of a Village wide and
regional multi-use transportation system;
      2.   Evaluate and prioritize ways to improve the level of bicycle and
pedestrian services, trails, paths, on-street bikeways, and other economically
feasible projects;
      3.   Identify high-priority projects that improve safety for motorists,
bicyclists, and pedestrians, while reducing vehicle and bike/pedestrian
conflicts;
      4.   Establish communications with bicycle and pedestrian advocacy groups
such as Ride Illinois, Active Transportation Alliance, and other related
community groups;
      5.   Make recommendations to the Village Board for the planning of
bikeway and pedestrian routes; and
      6.   Perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by
the Mayor and Village Board. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-2018)
2-16-4: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The Mayor may remove any member of the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory
Committee whenever, in the Mayor's sole and absolute discretion, the best
interests of the Village is served thereby. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-2018)
2-16-5: RECORDS AND PUBLIC INSPECTION:
The Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee will operate in accordance with
the requirements of the Open Meetings Act and keep a written record of its
proceedings that will be open to public inspection during regular business
hours of the Village Clerk's Office and subject to the Freedom of Information
Act. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-2018)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Licenses Required
3-1-2: Application For Licenses; Issuance
3-1-3: Fees Prorated
3-1-4: Conditions Of Licenses
3-1-5: Investigation Of Applicants And/Or Premises
3-1-6: Licenses To Be Posted
3-1-7: License Fees
3-1-8: Exemptions For Local Charitable Or Municipal Organizations
3-1-9: Penalties
3-1-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in any of the businesses or occupations enumerated in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” without first obtaining from the business office manager, in
accordance with the applicable procedures, a license to engage in said business
or occupation. (Ord. 2007-4107, 4-16-2007; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSES; ISSUANCE:
Written application for such license shall be made to the business office
manager stating the name of the applicant, the place of business, number of
persons to be employed and the kind of business to be carried on and all such
other information as may be requested by the application form as amended from
time to time. All licenses shall issue by authority of the president and board
of trustees of the village or their designee. Provided, however, that no
business license shall issue to any person engaged in or intending to engage in
the operation of a food service establishment and/or retail food store within
the village until and unless evidence of a valid permit issued by the DuPage
County health department pursuant to the provisions of this code, as may be
from time to time hereafter amended, regulating and supervising food service
and retail food store sanitation, is presented with said application to the
business office manager. Further, it shall be the responsibility of any
licensee engaged in or intending to engage in the operation of a food service
establishment and/or retail food store within the village to maintain a valid
permit issued by the DuPage County health department, during the entire term of
the village license and issuance of a village license shall not relieve the
licensee of such obligation. The failure to maintain a valid permit issued by
the DuPage County health department, as required, shall be grounds for
revocation of a village license. (Ord. 2002-3425, 11-4-2002)
3-1-3: FEES PRORATED:
Except as otherwise specified herein or otherwise in this code, when
application is made for an annual license after July 1 of any calendar year,
applicant shall give satisfactory evidence that he has not engaged in the
business, profession or occupation so licensed prior to July 1 of said year
and, in that event, such fee shall be fifty percent (50%) of the annual fee
provided therefor. Fees for licenses issued for peddling foodstuffs 1  shall
not be prorated. (Ord. 2002-3425, 11-4-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 5 of this title.
3-1-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES:
   (A)   The mayor, with the approval of the board of trustees, shall have the
power to revoke any license granted hereunder for violation by the licensee or
his agents of any village ordinance or state or federal statute, regulation or
order relating to the conduct of such business or occupation. Said licenses
shall not be transferable. Upon notice to the licensee of said revocation, said
licensee shall have the right to a hearing conducted by the mayor and board of
trustees, upon request, therefor, prior to such revocation.
   (B)   Annual license fees for all licenses except those issued for Lisle
commuter parking lot mobile concessionaire/merchandiser shall be paid to the
village no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on December 15 of the
preceding year for which the license is issued. A fee paid after that date
shall include a late fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. After January 16 of the applicable license year, the village shall
issue a citation of an ordinance violation and an additional late fee shall be
charged as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 97-2906, 8-4-1997;
amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-1-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS AND/OR PREMISES:
The police or any other official designated by ordinance to make inspection
under any licensing or regulatory ordinance or to enforce the same shall have
the right of entry to any licensed place of business for the purpose of
enforcement or inspection, and may arrest or cause to be arrested any person
who violates the provisions of this or any license ordinance of the village.
Wherever any licensing or regulatory ordinance provides for inspection by the
police chief, such inspection may be performed by said police chief or by his
designated representative. (Ord. 280, 7-20-1968)
3-1-6: LICENSES TO BE POSTED:
Every licensee shall conspicuously post his certificate in the place of
business in such place as to be in plain view, and no person shall destroy,
alter or mutilate such certificate or other evidence of license. If the
licensee has no regular established place of business, he shall then carry such
license upon his person whenever engaged in his licensed occupation. (Ord. 280,
7-20-1968)
3-1-7: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fees for specific businesses and occupations shall be as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2005-3937, 6-20-2005; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-1-8: EXEMPTIONS FOR LOCAL CHARITABLE OR MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATIONS:
Those organizations described in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall
be exempt from the requirements set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (A)   Charitable: A "charitable organization" shall mean and include an
organization or institution, whose primary office is within the village, which
is organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The
service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit
on the public.
   (B)   Municipal: A "municipal organization" shall mean a body politic,
organized in whole or in part within the village, pursuant to Illinois Compiled
Statutes. (Ord. 82-1047, 6-1-1982; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-1-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-3: License; Purpose
3-2-4: Application For License; Requisites
3-2-5: Examination Of Applicant
3-2-6: Classification Of Licenses
3-2-7: License Fees
3-2-8: Number Of Licenses Issued
3-2-9: Conditions Of License
3-2-10: Persons Ineligible To License
3-2-11: Closing Hours
3-2-12: Displaying License
3-2-13: Location And Other Restrictions
3-2-14: Additional Conditions, On Premise Consumption
3-2-15: Sanitary Conditions
3-2-16: Employees
3-2-17: Restrictions And Prohibitions On Licensee
3-2-18: Possession Of Alcoholic Liquor In Vehicles
3-2-19: Prohibited Conduct On Licensed Premises
3-2-20: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-2-21: Powdered Alcohol
3-2-22: Penalty
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein defined are
used in this chapter in the same meaning given them in the following
definitions:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOL, POWDERED: Any powder or crystalline substance containing "alcohol", as
defined in this section, produced for human consumption.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes "alcohol", "spirits", "wine" and "beer" and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one
percent (0.5%) or less of alcohol by volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, port and the like.
CHAMPAGNE: Any "wine", as defined herein, further characterized by
effervescence caused by fermentation and consequent generation of carbon
dioxide.
LICENSED PREMISES: Every building, establishment, structure, place of business
or location, whether or not enclosed from the elements, owned or leased by the
licensee, having been designated on the license application as the location for
the operation of the licensed business, for which a current license is in
effect.
MANAGER, ASSISTANT MANAGER, PART TIME OR TEMPORARY MANAGER: Any person whose
full time, part time or temporary activities include any of the following: a)
overseeing the operation of a liquor establishment; b) ordering, receiving or
managing liquor inventory; c) hiring, training or supervising bartenders,
servers or sellers of liquor products; d) paying employees or suppliers; e)
responding to customer complaints related to liquor establishment operations;
f) communicating on behalf of the liquor license holder with the Local Liquor
Commissioner, Village staff or representatives of other associated agencies. If
more than one person performs all or any of the above functions, each such
person shall be deemed a manager, assistant manager or temporary manager.
PACKAGE STORE: A commercial retail establishment that conducts the sale of
alcoholic products in their original unopened packages.
RETAILER: A business that sells and offers for sale at retail, only at the
premises specified in such license, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption,
but not for resale in any form.
SALE OR SELL: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including, but not limited to, a transaction involving the
internet, telephone, mail, facsimile, or any other electronic means, by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. The taking
of an order for immediate or future remote delivery shall also be deemed a
sale.
SPECIALITY RETAILER: A business which conducts alcohol sales at a location not
owned or leased by such business, or in a manner in which liquor is specially
packaged (i.e. as part of a gift basket).
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TASTING: A supervised presentation of alcoholic products to the public at an
off premises licensed retailer for the purpose of disseminating product
information and education, with consumption of alcoholic products being an
incidental part of the presentation. Tastings must be free of charge.
TAVERN: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the
public as a place where alcoholic liquor is offered for sale to the public for
consumption on the premises or for consumption off the premises when sold to
the public in its original package. The service of food or meals is incidental
to the service of alcoholic liquor.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, vegetables, or honey, containing sugar, including mead and
such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as defined
herein.
(Ord. 617, 1-22-1976; amd. Ord. 84-1251, 12-3-1984; Ord. 87-1594, 9-8-1987,
eff. 1-1-1988; Ord. 96-2761, 4-1-1996; Ord. 97-2885, 6-2-1997; Ord. 98-3006, 6-
15-1998; Ord. 2008-4228, 10-6-2008; Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010; Ord. 2011-4406,
10-3-2011; Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013; Ord. 2016-4651, 5-2-2016; Ord. 2019-4807,
2-4-2019; Ord. 2021-4893, 2-15-2021; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022)
3-2-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   (A)   Mayor to Act as Commissioner: The Village Mayor shall be the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of
this chapter and of the appropriate provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control
Act 1 , and may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of
the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided for such Local
Liquor Control Commissioner. Said Commissioner shall receive a salary as set
forth under subsection
1-5-3(A) of this Code.
   (B)   Powers And Duties: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall also
have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses issued
under the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke
for cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises within the Village.
      2.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or of the Illinois Liquor Control Act or any rules
or regulations adopted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or by the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated, and at such
time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
      3.   To receive complaint from any citizen that any of the provisions of
the Illinois Liquor Control Act or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto or any provisions of this chapter have been or are being violated, and
to act upon such complaints in the manner provided by said statute and this
chapter.
      4.   To order, upon the issuance of a written order, the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period, if the local liquor control
commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community.
Except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another
business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be
applicable to such other business or businesses.
      5.   To cause the remittance of liquor local license fees, fines, and
penalties.
   (C)   Agents of the Commissioner: When in this chapter the local liquor
control commissioner shall be referred to, it shall include any committee or
agent appointed by such local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 617, 1-22-
1976; amd. Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022)
 
Notes
1     235 ILCS.
3-2-3: LICENSE; PURPOSE:
   (A)   Purpose: It is the policy of the village to limit the sale of
alcoholic liquor at retail primarily to the sale in its original package or by
retailers, manufacturers, or organizations as defined herein.
   (B)   License Required: It shall be unlawful for a person directly or
indirectly responsible for any premises to which the public is admitted to give
or offer to give any alcoholic liquor to any person for consumption unless said
person is licensed to sell alcoholic liquors on said premises, or is licensed
as a market research organization for the purpose of product taste testing of
new alcoholic liquors.
It shall be unlawful for a person directly or indirectly responsible for any
premises to which the public is admitted to at any time allow a person upon
said premises to consume any alcoholic liquor unless the premises is licensed
for sale of alcoholic liquors on said premises, licensed for Bring Your Own
consumption, or unless the business at the premises is licensed as a market
research organization for the purpose of product taste testing of new alcoholic
liquors. (Ord. 99-3147, 9-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2008-4178, 2-4-2008; Ord. 2022-
4978, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2022-4984, 11-7-2022; Ord. 2023-5040, 12-18-2023)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; REQUISITES:
An applicant for a license from the local liquor control commissioner shall
submit an application in writing under oath stating:
   (A)   The name, age and address of the applicant, and the name, age and
address of every sole owner, general partner, corporate officer, director,
manager, and anyone owning five percent (5%) or more of the aggregate limited
partner interest or shares of the applicant business entity or parent of the
business entity.
   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
   (C)   The character of business of the applicant. In case of a corporation,
the objects for which it was formed.
   (D)   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
   (E)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   (F)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
   (G)   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of such application.
   (H)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in the Illinois liquor control act.
   (I)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by
the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
   (J)   That applicant will not violate any of the ordinances of the village
or of the laws of the state or of the United States in the conduct of his place
of business.
   (K)   That applicant has not received or borrowed money or anything else of
value, and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value
(other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business for a
period of not to exceed 30 days, as expressly permitted under section A of 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-1 of the Illinois liquor control act), directly
or indirectly from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor
representative of any such manufacturer, nor be a part in any way, directly or
indirectly, to any violation by a manufacturer, distributor or importing
distributor of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-1 of the Illinois liquor
control act.
   (L)   That such applicant and the premises are covered by a policy of
dramshop, or host liability, insurance, as applicable, issued by a responsible
insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the state of
Illinois insuring such applicant against liability which such applicant may
incur under the provisions of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21, and
specifically designating the village of Lisle as certificate holder. The
evidence of the insurance policy shall indicate that the term of the insurance
is of sufficient length to encompass the entire period of the license sought.
All applicants shall be required to attach a certificate of insurance coverage
to said application.
   (M)   The classification of the license for which application is made.
   (N)   1.   The date of incorporation, if an Illinois corporation, or the
date of becoming qualified under the Illinois business corporations act, to
transact business in Illinois if a foreign corporation.
      2.   All managers of the premises to be operated under such license must
file documents entitled "statement of manager", providing information necessary
for the local liquor commissioner's determination. Any and all persons who
become managers during the application process or during the term of the
license must also file a "statement of manager". Failure to do so will be
grounds for revocation or suspension of the license.
   (O)   The commissioner may, within his or her discretion, require any
applicant for a new village liquor license, or any applicant for a renewal of a
village liquor license, to be fingerprinted. Should the applicant be a
partnership corporation, the commissioner may, within his or her discretion,
require the following to be fingerprinted:
      1.   The officers, manager or director of the corporation, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate of more than five percent
(5%) of the capital stock of said corporation.
Any general partners or any limited partners of a partnership owning more than
five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited partner interest in such
partnership.
      2.   All such fingerprinting shall be done by the village Police
Department. Said fingerprints shall be submitted to the appropriate state and/
or federal agencies for processing as available. The cost of fingerprinting
shall be recoverable from applicant.
In addition to the foregoing information, such application shall contain such
other and further information as the Illinois liquor control commission and
local liquor control commissioner may by rule or regulation not inconsistent
with law prescribe.
If said application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm, association, club
or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by at least two (2)
members of such partnership or the president and secretary of such corporation.
All applications shall be upon forms provided by the village. (Ord. 617, 1-22-
1976; amd. Ord. 87-1594, 9-8-1987, eff. 1-1-1988; Ord. 96-2802, 8-5-1996; Ord.
2010-4342, 10-4-2010; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2022-4984, 11-7-2022)
3-2-5: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause
to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal
thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation has been served in the
manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined the books
and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof
of his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to
issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the
purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control
commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his
behalf. (Ord. 617, 1-22-1976)
3-2-6: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
All liquor licenses shall be of the following classes:
              Class 1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors to be
              consumed on the premises designated therein, and the retail sale of alcoholic
CLASS 1 -     liquors only in original packages, unopened, for consumption off the premises,
Tavern        whereby the licensed establishment operating on the premises meets the definition
              of a "tavern" as stated in section
              3-2-1 of this chapter.
CLASS 2 -
Retailer; All Class 2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors on the
Alcohol On    premises designated therein for consumption on said premises, and the retail sale
Premise       of all alcoholic liquors in their original packages, unopened, for consumption
Consumption & off the premises.
Off-Premise
Packaged
CLASS 3 -
Retailer;     Class 3 - Retailer; Wine & Beer On Premise Consumption & Off Premise Packaged
Wine & Beer   Class 3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine & beer on the premises
On Premise;   designated therein for consumption on said premises, and the retail sale of wine
Off-Premise   & beer in their original packages, unopened, for consumption off the premises.
Packaged
CLASS 4 -     Class 4 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors in
Retailer; All their original, unopened packages, on the premises designated therein, but not
Alcohol, Off- for consumption on said premises. Tastings may be held in accordance with
Premise       subsection
Packaged      3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
CLASS 5 -     Class 5 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine and beer in original
Retailer;     packages, unopened, for consumption off the premises. Tastings may be held in
Wine & Beer   accordance with subsection
Off Premise   3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
Packaged
CLASS 6 -     Class 6 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcohol liquors for
Specialty     consumption in connection with an off-site catering business operating within the
Retailer; All village or in connection with the sale of a basket, defined as a decorative gift
Alcohol, Off  container the purpose of which is to hold an arrangement of gift items. The sale
Premise       of alcohol in a basket is merely an adjunct to the sale of flowers, plants,
Consumption   candies, chocolates or similar gift items and is not for consumption on the
              premise where sold.
              Class 7 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
              consumption on the premises and the sale of beer manufactured on the premises in
              its original package for consumption off the premises. The licensee shall:
              (A)   Maintain accurate records as to the total gallons of beer manufactured on
CLASS 7 -     the premises and sold for consumption off premises, and provide such records to
Manufacturer; the local liquor control commissioner or village staff upon request;
All Alcohol,  (B)   Segregate the portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the
On Premise    manufacturing of beer from the remainder of the premises, restricting public
Consumption & access to the manufacturing area except during supervised tours;
Off Premise   (C)   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations,
Packaged      including, but not limited to, payment of applicable taxes, procurement of any
              required federal brewer's notice, Illinois manufacturer's liquor license,
              Illinois craft brewer's license, and all other required licenses and permits
              concerning manufacture, packaging, storing, sale, and distribution of alcoholic
              beverages.
CLASS 8 -     Class 8 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the
Civic         premises designated therein, for consumption on the premises only, by
Organization; incorporated clubs not for pecuniary profit, public park districts, by a college
All Alcohol   or university when groups are assembled for a common purpose other than the sale
On Premise    or consumption of alcohol, or by institutions at affiliated residential
Consumption   facilities.
CLASS 9 -     Class 9 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquor for
Special       consumption on the premises of special events including, but not limited to,
Event; All    festivals, carnivals, or fundraising events. A Class 9 license shall not exceed
Alcohol On    six consecutive days, nor for more than twelve days in any twelve month period. A
Premise       class 9 license shall only be issued to educational, fraternal, political, civic,
Consumption   religious or not for profit organizations or current Illinois liquor license
              retailers who do not hold a village of Lisle liquor license.
              Class 10 licenses shall authorize the licensee to permit individuals that are at
              least 21 years of age to bring their own wine or beer to a premise for
              consumption within that establishment subject to the following additional
CLASS 10 -    regulations and controls:
Bring Your    (A)   A licensee shall not sell, serve or otherwise provide alcoholic liquors to
Own; All      any member or members' guest at any time.
Alcohol       (B)   A licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no persons under 21 years
Consumption   of age are in possession of wine or beer or consume BYO wine or beer at any time
On Premises   at the premises.
              (C)   The availability and sale of prepackaged snacks will be available at all
              times that wine and beer are authorized to be consumed at the premises.
              (D)   No employee shall serve, pour or otherwise handle a members or members'
              guests BYO wine or beer.
 
(Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013; amd. Ord. 2013-4505, 10-21-2013; Ord. 2015-4582, 6-
1-2015; Ord. 2015-4607, 9-14-2015; Ord. 2019-4807, 2-4-2019; Ord. 2021-4893, 2-
15-2020; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2022-4984, 11-7-2022; Ord. 2025- 5129,
2-17-2025)
3-2-7: LICENSE FEES:
The amount of the initial first time application fee and annual license fee for
each class of license shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
All such fees shall be paid to the village at the time application is made. In
the event the license applied for is denied due to the lack of an available
license, both the initial first time application fee and the annual fee shall
be returned to the applicant. If the license is denied or not issued for any
reason other than lack of an available license, the initial first time
application fee shall be retained by the village and the annual fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
If the license is granted, then both fees shall be deposited.
When application is made for an initial license after July 1 of any calendar
year, and such applicant has not engaged in the business of alcoholic liquor
sales prior to July 1 of said year, the annual license fee shall be fifty
percent (50%) of the amount provided therefor in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. The initial first year application fee shall not be prorated.
There shall be no refund of any portion of the annual license fee imposed under
this chapter for any period of time during which the licensee ceases to engage
in selling alcoholic liquor for any reason.
The application fee for a new manager of an existing liquor license retailer
shall be as established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2009-4260, 7-20-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; Ord.
2022-4978, 9-19-2022)
3-2-8: NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED:
   (A)   Determination of Licenses Issued: The mayor and village board of
trustees shall by motion and majority vote determine the number of licenses to
be issued in each class.
   (B)   Renewal and Expiration: In the event a license is not renewed at the
expiration thereof or is surrendered by the licensee at any time, then a
license in the same class and for the same location as that license shall be
available for a period of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of surrender
or expiration of the license. At the expiration of the thirty calendar days,
the license will no longer be available for issuance without approval of the
mayor and village board of trustees. All terms, conditions and fees as set
forth in this code shall apply to a license issued pursuant to this section.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the village mayor and board of trustees
from decreasing the number of licenses issued in the village or shall be
construed as creating a vested right in the issuance of a license.
   (C)   Change In Class: Requests from a current liquor license holder to
change from a class that allows for the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors to
a class that allows for the retail sale of wine, and beer only may be granted
by the local liquor control commissioner without village board approval as long
as all other terms of the new class are the same or more restrictive than the
previous class. (Ord. 2008-4172, 1-7-2008; amd. Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022)
3-2-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Nature of License; Nontransferable, Refund: A license shall be purely
a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless
sooner revoked as in this chapter and in the Illinois liquor control act
provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee,
provided that the executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee, and the trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the
sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise
the privileges of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that
portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be
prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions
of this subsection.
   (B)   Changes in Ownership or Personnel: Any and all changes in officers,
directors, managers, or changes involving five percent (5%) or more ownership
interests in limited liability companies, partnerships or corporate liquor
license holders shall be reported in writing to the village of Lisle Clerk's
Office within ten (10) days of said change. All new officers, owners, directors
or managers shall meet all of the standards of this chapter, shall pay an
application fee and shall be subject to review by the local liquor control
commissioner. Any change resulting in an ownership interest by an individual
not eligible to hold a liquor license, shall terminate such license. Any
ownership change resulting in new ownership interests totaling more than fifty
percent (50%) results in the termination of the liquor license. All sales of
liquor must cease until a new license has been issued based on the submittal of
a new application and related fees as indicated in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (C)   Term of License: Each such license (except class 9 licenses) shall
terminate on December 31 of the year for which it is issued, unless terminated
at an earlier date for failure to maintain adequate dramshop insurance or by
reason of any other action by the local liquor control commissioner. The annual
fee to be paid shall be paid on or before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
last business day of the second full week of December of the year preceding the
year for which such license is issued. There shall be a penalty of fifteen
percent (15%) of the annual fee assessed for late payment of the annual fee.
   (D)   Renewal: A licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof
only if he is qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such
renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose; and, provided further,
that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a
vested right which shall in any case prevent the village president and board of
trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the
village.
   (E)   Licensing Conditions: The following shall be express conditions of the
granting of any license hereunder:
      1.   Every licensee seeking to renew a license after January 1, 1993, and
every applicant for a new license after January 1, 1993, shall submit to the
local liquor control commissioner the proof of insurance as more fully set
forth in subsection
3-2-4(L) of this chapter, said proof to be furnished at the time of application
for renewal or for a new license. The insurance shall be an annual policy
covering the full license period, stating on its face or within the certificate
of insurance to be attached thereto, that the insurance is in force for said
period and that no cancellation, rescission or revocation of said insurance
shall take place unless and until said insurer provides to the village local
liquor control commissioner ten (10) business days' notice of such impending
cancellation, rescission or revocation. In addition, a duplicate of said notice
shall be provided by said insurer to the village.
      2.   Every licensee whose dramshop or host liability insurance has either
lapsed or been revoked, terminated, canceled or suspended, and every licensee
who has received oral or written notice of such lapse, revocation, termination,
cancellation or suspension shall immediately notify the local liquor control
commissioner of such occurrence. Failure to provide such notification will be
grounds for the exercise by the local liquor control commissioner of his
emergency powers as more fully set forth in subsection
3-2-2(B)4 of this chapter, or as set forth under any other provision in this
chapter.
      3.   Upon notification that a licensee's dramshop or host liability
insurance has lapsed or has been revoked, terminated, canceled or suspended,
the local liquor control commissioner may invoke emergency powers as set forth
in subsection
3-2-2(B)4 of this chapter, or in his discretion, may invoke his powers as set
forth in section
3-2-20 of this chapter, and shall take appropriate steps to terminate the
license held by the uninsured licensee. Any license so terminated may be
reinstated, and any license threatened with termination may be brought into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, without further cost to the
licensee, by submitting to the local liquor control commissioner proof of
renewal of previously held insurance or reinsurance under the terms of a new
policy. All such renewal or reinsurance shall comport with the requirements of
subsection
3-2-4(L) of this chapter.
   (F)   Fingerprinting: Each applicant shall, within thirty (30) days of a
request made by the village, submit said fingerprints to the village. Failure
to comply with this subsection shall be cause for revocation or suspension of a
liquor license.
   (G)   Reporting of Violations: Every licensee and every officer, agent or
employee thereof shall have an affirmative duty to immediately notify the
village police department upon the occurrence of either a violation of law
which is taking, or has taken, place upon the licensed premises or a threatened
or actual physical altercation between any two (2) or more persons upon the
licensed premises. The failure of a licensee, officer, agent or employee to so
notify shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of the licensee's
liquor license. For the purpose of this subsection "licensed premises" shall
include, but is not limited to, any building, structure, parking lot or vacant
area directly or indirectly related to the retail sale of alcoholic liquor.
   (H)   Access to Licensed Premises: The licensee or officer, agent or
employee thereof, shall immediately allow access to any law enforcement officer
wishing to enter the premises. The failure to comply with any provision of this
subsection shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of the
licensee's liquor license.
   (I)   Owner or Manager on Duty: An owner, manager, assistant manager, or
temporary manager must be on duty on the licensed premises during all hours of
operation.(Ord. 541, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord. 86-1378, 1-20-1986; Ord. 87-1594, 9-
8-1987, eff. 1-1-1988; Ord. 88-1721, 9-6-1988; Ord. 92-2338, 12-7-1992; Ord.
93-2371, 3-15-1993; Ord. 95-2713, 12-4-1995; Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010; Ord.
2021-4921, 9-20-2021; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2022-4984, 11-7-2022)
3-2-10: PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO LICENSE:
No license shall be issued by the local liquor control commissioner to:
   (A)   A person, other than a corporation, who is not a resident of the
village.
   (B)   A person who is not of good character or reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, if the state commission determines, after investigation, that such person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter or the Illinois
liquor control act has been revoked for cause.
   (H)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   (I)   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political
subdivision.
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision.
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   (L)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor.
   (M)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued.
   (N)   Any law enforcing public official, any mayor of the village, any
member of the village board of trustees, or any president or member of the
county board; and no such official shall be interested in any way, either
directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor. (Ord. 541, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord. 96-2802, 8-5-1996; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-
19-2022)
3-2-11: CLOSING HOURS:
No person shall sell, offer for sale or permit to be sold, or to allow anyone
on his premises to consume or to have in his possession for consumption any
alcoholic liquor between the hours specified as follows:
 
LIQUOR CLASSIFICATIONS 1 - 9 CLOSING HOURS
Monday - Friday              1:00 a.m. - 7:00 a.m.
Saturday & Sunday            2:00 a.m. - 7:00 a.m.
Legal (State) Holidays       2:00 a.m. - 7:00 a.m.
New Year's Day               3:00 a.m. - 7:00 a.m.
 
(Ord. 2004-3808, 2-2-2004; amd. Ord. 2009-4243, 2-2-2009; Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-
2010; Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013; Ord. 2021-4893, 2-15-2021; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-
19-2022)
3-2-12: DISPLAYING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in
plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 541, 11-19-
1974)
3-2-13: LOCATION AND OTHER RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   Retail Sales Near Churches, Schools, Etc.: No license shall be issued
for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100')
of any church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital,
home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or
any military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply
to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to
restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not
the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall
have been established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this
chapter, or to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where
such church or school has been established within such one hundred feet (100')
since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the
distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of
any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to
property boundaries. In all other instances, the distance of one hundred feet
(100') shall be measured from property line to property line.
Nothing in this subsection shall apply to a Class 8 license, nor prohibit the
issuance of a license to a college, university, church or private school to
sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when
groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common
object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Stores Selling School Supplies: No license shall be issued to any
person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other
place of business wherein the majority of customers are minors of school age or
where the principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school
supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
   (C)   Access From Licensed Premises to Dwelling Quarters: In the case of
hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises
which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the
same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purpose and which is
permitted to be used or kept accessible for any use by the public. This
provision shall not prevent any connection between such premises and such other
portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his
family and personal guests.
   (D)   Change of Location: A retail dealer's license shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor only within the premises or portion described in the
application for such license. A location may be changed or altered only after a
written application has been made to the local liquor control commissioner and
the same has been approved.
   (E)   Village Buildings: Alcoholic liquors may be sold in or delivered to
buildings belonging to or under the control of the village with prior approval
of the local liquor commissioner and upon presentation of evidence of any and
all insurance coverages required by the village. Such coverages must name the
village of Lisle, its officers, employees, agents and assigns as additional
insured and evidence of such additional insured coverage acceptable to the
local liquor commissioner must be provided before any license approval will be
issued.
   (F)   No liquor license shall be issued for any premises from which motor
fuel is sold or dispensed unless (1) the indoor premises is at least three
thousand (3,000) square feet, (2) the premises does not have drive through
facilities, and (3) food is prepared and offered for sale to be consumed either
on or off premises and the premises is permitted by the DuPage County Health
Department. A premises from which motor fuel is sold or dispensed is not
eligible to receive a liquor license allowing on premise consumption. (Ord.
541, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord. 2004-3808, 2-2-2004; Ord. 2005-3956, 10-17-2005;
Ord. 2015-4607, 9-14-2015; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2025-5129, 2-17-
2025)
3-2-14: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS, ON PREMISE CONSUMPTION:
All rooms wherein liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be
continuously lighted during business hours by natural lights or artificial
white lights so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly
visible. In case the view into any such licensed premises required by the
foregoing provisions shall be willfully obscured or suffered to be obscured or
in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in
the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section,
the local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to require or cause
to be required the filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing
the clearance as above required. (Ord. 541, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord. 2022-4978, 9-
19-2022)
3-2-15: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All premises used for retail sale of alcoholic liquors, shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the
ordinance provisions regulating the conditions of premises used for the storage
of food for human consumption. (Ord. 86-1383, 2-3-1986)
3-2-16: EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   Diseases: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a
carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease
to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling,
preparation or distribution of such liquor.
   (B)   Qualifications: It shall be unlawful to employ any person not
possessing the same qualifications as are necessary for the applicant to
possess in order to secure a license under this chapter, except the requirement
as to citizenship in the United States.
   (C)   Dispensing of Liquor by Individuals Under Twenty One Years Of Age/
Employment of Minors: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall
tend bar, tend a package counter or window, sell or deliver alcoholic liquor
for consumption off the premises, or sell, handle, draw, pour, mix, dispense,
drain or serve any alcoholic liquor and no licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of a licensee shall engage, employ or
permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years so to do; provided
that, persons eighteen (18) years of age and over who have completed the
beverage alcohol sellers and services education and training (BASSET) program
approved by the educational foundation of the National Restaurant Association
or have completed such training at a facility approved under 20 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 301/15-10 may serve alcoholic beverages to patrons who are
dining at any premise licensed to conduct such sales. The provisions of this
subsection shall not be construed to prohibit an employee under the age of
twenty one (21) years from handling unopened containers of alcoholic liquor if
such handling is in the capacity of a stocker on a licensed premises and for a
licensed employer. (Ord. 86-1383, 2-3-1986; amd. Ord. 2000-3248, 11-6-2000;
Ord. 2008-4228, 10-6-2008; Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013)
3-2-17: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON LICENSEE:
   (A)   Sales to Minors, Habitual Drunkards, Mental Incompetents:
      1.   No licensee or agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give
or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be a
habitual drunkard, spendthrift or insane, feeble minded or distracted person.
      2.   The serving of minors and revocation of licenses pursuant to
statutory authority for serving to any person buying for another or accepting
identification which the licensee knows or has reason to know may be either
altered or may not be the identification material of the particular purchaser
submitted for purposes of allowing some other underaged person to obtain
alcoholic liquor shall be the basis for revocation of licenses. Licenses may
also be revoked for any reason permitted under state law.
      3.   In every location within the village where alcoholic liquor is sold,
there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place printed cards which
shall contain the following information:
WARNING TO MINORS
   Pursuant to the provisions of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16 and 5/6-
20, and the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 3 of the Village Code of the
Village of Lisle, you are subject to a fine as established by Title 1, Chapter
20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”, or
imprisonment, or both, if you are under the age of twenty-one (21) and purchase
alcoholic beverages, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic beverages. If valid identification is requested and is not
presented prior to sale or service, the merchant may refuse the sale or
service.
PREGNANT WOMEN
   Government Warning: According to the surgeon general, women should not drink
alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of birth defects.
      4.   If a licensee or a licensee's agent or employee believes, has reason
to believe or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage,
such licensee, agent or employee shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of some form of positive identification containing proof of
age issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
   (B)   Gifts: No commissioner, official or employee of the village shall
solicit or accept any gift, gratuity, emolument or employment from any person
or agent of any person holding a village liquor license, and the holder of any
liquor license is hereby forbidden to give or offer to give to any
commissioner, official or employee of the village any gift, gratuity,
emolument, or employment. Any person violating the provisions of this
subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” and the license of any such person who, himself or through an agent,
violates this subsection shall be revoked forthwith.
   (C)   Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
village.
   (D)   Happy Hours Prohibited:
      1.   All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged
for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multiuse
establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises
more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at
retail, the hotel or multiuse establishment shall maintain at each such
establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that
establishment.
      2.   No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
         (a)   Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to
one person for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering
wine by the bottle or carafe;
         (b)   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number
of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public;
         (c)   Sell, offer to sell, or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to
any person at a price other than that charged all other persons on that same
day of business (day of business being from open to close, which may cover
hours on 2 calendar dates), except as authorized in subsection (D)3(g) of this
section;
         (d)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or
the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
         (e)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or
contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of
alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises;
or
         (f)   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections (D)2(a) through
(D)2(e) of this section.
      3.   Nothing in subsection (D)2 of this section shall be construed to
prohibit a licensee from:
         (a)   Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
         (b)   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
         (c)   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
         (d)   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract
between a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of
any function, meeting, convention or trade show;
         (e)   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
         (f)   Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited
to, buckets), carafes or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold
in such manner and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time; or
         (g)   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in
whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment
not regularly scheduled.
   (E)   Tastings: Tastings are limited to three (3) samples per customer per
day in the following amounts: distilled spirits, one-fourth (1/4) ounce; wine,
one ounce; beer, two (2) ounces.
An on premises retail licensee may offer for sale or serve more than one drink
per person for product sampling purposes without violating subsection
3-2-17(D)2(a) of this section, provided the total quantity of the sampling
package, regardless of the number of containers in which the alcoholic liquor
is being served, does not exceed one ounce of distilled spirits, four (4)
ounces of wine, or sixteen (16) ounces of beer. (Ord. 541, 11-19-1974; amd.
Ord. 86-1378, 1-20-1986; Ord. 89-1995, 10-2-1989; Ord. 92-2238, 1-20-1992; Ord.
93-2351, 1-18-1993; Ord. 2005-3897, 2-21-2005; Ord. 2006-4075, 12-4-2006; Ord.
2013-4471, 1-21-2013; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022)
3-2-18: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN VEHICLES:
   (A)   Except as provided for in subsection (B) of this section, no person
shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon any
motor vehicle except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a Class 2 or 3
licensee may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed
bottle of wine for off premises consumption provided that the patron has
purchased and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine on the business
premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the
premises pursuant to this section shall be securely sealed by the licensee or
an agent of the licensee prior to removal from the premises, and sealed in a
transparent one time use tamperproof bag. The licensee or agent of the licensee
shall attach to the bag a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal. Wine
that is resealed in accordance with the provisions of this subsection and not
tampered with shall not be deemed an unsealed container for the purposes of
subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 2006-4074, 12-4-2006, eff. 1-1-2007; amd.
Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022)
3-2-19: PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to permit in the
licensed premises, the exposure of any male or female performer in the presence
of the audience, or the giving of the illusion of nudeness in the presence of
the audience, or exposure of the lower abdomen, genital organs, buttocks or
breasts, and it shall further be unlawful for any licensee to advertise and/or
conduct on the premises any "topless" or "bottomless" entertainment or
activity. (Ord. 541, 11-19-1974)
The following kinds of conduct on premises in the village licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor, are prohibited:
   (A)   The performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts;
   (B)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals;
   (C)   The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks, pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
   (D)   The permitting, by a licensee, of any person to remain in or upon the
premises who exposes to public view his or her entire breasts or buttocks;
   (E)   The permitting, by a licensee, of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her
genitals, vulva or anus;
   (F)   The displaying of moving pictures or photographic slide presentations
depicting acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act. (Ord. 611, 12-2-
1975)
3-2-20: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Duties; Chief of Police: It shall be the duty of the chief of police
to report to the local liquor control commissioner the following occurrences:
      1.   Receipt by the chief of police of a report by a law enforcement
officer or village official of a violation by a licensee of any law or
ordinance pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor; or
      2.   A conviction of a licensee by a court of law of violation of any
ordinance or law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   Notice; Hearing; Penalty; Forfeiture of Fees:
      1.   Notice of Violation: Upon receipt by the local liquor control
commissioner of any report or notice, including a report referenced in
subsection (A) of this section, of any violation by a license holder, or his
agent, of any village ordinance, resolution, code, or state or federal statute,
regulation, or other order relating to the conduct of such business or
occupation, the local liquor control commissioner shall deliver, or cause to be
delivered, a notice to the license holder to appear at a public hearing to
consider appropriate penalties in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any such notice issued pursuant to this subsection (B)1 shall: a)
specify the provisions of this chapter that the license holder is alleged to
have violated, as well as any other state or federal violations, or the
conviction of any such license holder, and b) provide the date, time, and place
of the public hearing, which date shall be not less than three (3) days after
delivery of any such notice.
      2.   Public Hearing: Any public hearing conducted under this subsection
(B) shall be convened and presided over by the local liquor control
commissioner, and conducted in accordance with applicable state law for
purposes of fulfilling any of the powers, functions, and duties of the village
or the local liquor control commissioner in this chapter.
      3.   Penalties for Violations: The local liquor control commissioner
shall deliver to a liquor license holder, within five (5) days after the close
of any public hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (B)2 of this section,
via certified mail, return receipt requested, an order that shall state: a) the
penalties, if any, that shall be levied on the license holder, and b) the
finding and reasons for any such penalties. Penalties for violations of this
chapter may include suspension of a liquor license for a period of not more
than thirty (30) days, or revocation of any such license. In addition to, or in
lieu of, any such suspension or revocation, the local liquor control
commissioner may levy a fine on the license holder, which fine shall not
exceed:
         (a)   An amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period;
         (b)   An amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period; and
         (c)   An amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for a third and all subsequent violations within a twelve (12) month
period.
Each day a violation exists shall be construed as a separate and distinct
offense; provided, however, that not more than an amount as established by the
annual fee ordinance in fines may be imposed on any license holder during the
term of its license. The local liquor control commissioner may, in his sole and
absolute discretion, require that the license holder pay for part or all of the
costs of any public hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (B)2 of this
section, including, without limitation, attorney fees, stenographer fees,
document production, and all costs associated with the preparation and delivery
of any notices issued under subsection (B)1 of this section. Any fine or cost
imposed upon a license holder pursuant to this subsection (B)3 shall be paid in
full within thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing. In the
event that the license holder fails, for any reason whatsoever, to pay any such
fines or costs within such thirty (30) day period, the liquor control
commissioner may initiate, or cause to be initiated, appropriate proceedings
under either this code, or in any action in law or equity, to compel payment of
any such delinquent fines or costs, and, in addition to any other remedies
available to the liquor control commissioner to compel payment, the liquor
control commissioner may suspend or revoke the license of, or levy additional
fines upon, the license holder without further public hearing.
      4.   Forfeiture of License Fee: Any license holder whose license is
revoked pursuant to subsection (B)3 of this section shall forfeit any license
fees paid to the village.
   (C)   Closure of Premises; Liquor Control Commissioner: In addition to the
powers set forth in subsection (B) of this section, the local liquor control
commissioner may, at his discretion, order, upon the issuance of a written
order, the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving
the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, if the local liquor
control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community. If such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another
business or businesses on the licensee's premises, such order shall not be
applicable to such other business or businesses.
   (D)   Notice of Appeal: The president and board of trustees of the village
has heretofore adopted resolution 87-489, providing that in the event of any
appeal from an order or action of the local liquor control commissioner, the
appeal to the Illinois state liquor control commission shall be limited to a
review of the official record of the proceedings before said local liquor
control commissioner. In such event the said local liquor control commissioner
shall file with the Illinois state liquor control commission the certified
official record of the proceedings within five (5) days after notice of the
filing of such an appeal. The said state commission shall review the propriety
of the order or action of the said local liquor control commissioner on the
said certified official record.
   (E)   Suspension Ordered; Display of Sign: At all times during the term of a
suspension ordered by the local liquor control commissioner, the licensee shall
display a sign no less than four (4) square feet containing the following
information:
No alcoholic liquor will be sold at this location (from (date to date)), due to
the suspension of liquor license.
By order of the Village of Lisle Local Liquor Commissioner.
Said sign shall be located in plain view of any person immediately upon
entering the licensed premises and shall be clearly legible by such a person.
(Ord. 86-1378, 1-20-1986; Ord. 87-1594, 9-8-1987, eff. 1-1-1988; Ord. 88-1745,
11-7-1988; Ord. 2004-3836, 5-17-2004; Ord. 2005-3907, 3-21-2005; amd. Ord.
2021-4921, 9-20-2021; Ord. 2022-4978, 9-19-2022)
3-2-21: POWDERED ALCOHOL:
No person shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver, receive, or purchase for
resale any product consisting of or containing powdered alcohol. (Ord. 2016-
4651, 5-2-2016)
3-2-22: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, other than those for which
specific penalties are herein provided, shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2016-4651,
5-2-2016; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 3
ANTIQUE, SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: License Required; Fee
3-3-3: Number Of Licenses Limited; Transfer
3-3-4: Application For License
3-3-5: Premises Requirements
3-3-6: Purchase From Minors Prohibited
3-3-7: Penalty
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The term "secondhand stores" shall include antique dealers. All references
herein to the singular shall include the plural, and all references to the
plural shall include the singular. (Ord. 78-756, 4-25-1978)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct any antique, other secondhand or
junk store in the village without first having obtained a license therefor or
without first complying with the provisions of this chapter.
The initial first year nonrefundable application fee and annual license fee
shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, and no license shall be issued except upon payment of all applicable
fees.
There shall be no refund of any portion of the annual license fee imposed under
this chapter for any portion of a year during which the licensee ceases to
operate any antique or other secondhand store within the village.
Dealers in used books, used musical instruments, and used vehicles are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-4257, 6-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-
4921, 9-20-2021)
3-3-3: NUMBER OF LICENSES LIMITED; TRANSFER:
The village board of trustees shall by motion and majority vote determine the
number of licenses for antique, secondhand and junk stores that shall be issued
and outstanding at any given time. No license shall be transferred or
converted. Any transfer, conversion or attempted transfer or conversion shall
automatically render the issued license null and void. Any such license shall
apply only to the premises for which the license was originally issued and
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee.
The mayor may revoke any licenses issued hereunder for a violation of any of
the provisions of this section, subject to notice and an opportunity to be
heard. (Ord. 2008-4173, 1-7-2008)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for licenses shall be made to the business office manager in
writing and shall state the name of the applicant, the location to be used and
all such other information as may be requested by the application form as
amended from time to time. Upon receipt of the application, the business office
manager shall notify the chief of police who shall investigate the character of
the applicant, and shall report to the business office manager the result of
such investigation. No license shall be issued to any person of bad character
nor to any person who shall have been convicted of receiving stolen goods,
burglary, robbery, theft or any other crime or offense involving stealth or
deception. (Ord. 98-2956, 2-2-1998)
3-3-5: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly
inside a building or buildings.
   (B)   Pawnshops are hereby expressly prohibited within the village. (Ord.
96-2825, 12-2-1996)
3-3-6: PURCHASE FROM MINORS PROHIBITED:
All antique dealers and other secondhand stores, together with all dealers of
junk, rags or any secondhand article whatsoever, within the village, be and the
same are hereby forbidden and prohibited from purchasing any article whatsoever
from any minors, without the written consent of their parents or guardian.
(Ord. 78-756, 4-25-1978)
3-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person who is found to have violated or failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter by a court of competent jurisdiction, will be fined
the sum as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed committed on each
day during which any person is or remains in noncompliance with the terms of
this chapter.
(Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Solicitation Permit Required
3-4-3: Application For Permit
3-4-4: Records Of Applications, Permits
3-4-5: Village Policy On Soliciting
3-4-6: Notice Regulating Soliciting
3-4-7: Prohibited Acts
3-4-8: Solicitation On Highways
3-4-9: Solicitation At The Lisle/Burlington Northern Railroad Commuter Parking
Facility, Depot And Platform
3-4-10: Revocation
3-4-11: Penalties
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Solicitation activities conducted by or on behalf of
an entity that operates with a primary objective of making a profit.
NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Solicitation activities conducted by or on behalf
of an entity that operates without a commercial objective. Such entities
include charitable, religious, political, and other not for profit
organizations.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership,
corporation, trust or any combination thereof.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid solicitation permit,
as hereinafter provided.
SERIOUS FELONIES: Any felony which involves violence, deceit, fraud or
misrepresentation except for those which were committed more than ten (10)
years prior to the date of the application for a permit.
SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES: Going upon any premises not owned or leased by the
solicitor for the purpose of engaging in any of the following activities:
opinion taking; distribution of printed information; seeking to obtain
donations of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of
value; selling or acquiring orders or contracts for the purchase of goods,
wares, merchandise, products, or services of any kind for either immediate or
future delivery, by any person.
SOLICITOR: Any person who engages in solicitation activities. (Ord. 2011-4408,
10-17-2011)
3-4-2: SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation activities unless
such person shall have first obtained a solicitation permit from the village as
hereinafter provided, with the following exceptions:
   (A)   Act Of Expressing Ideas: Persons engaging in the act of expressing
ideas or distributing free literature for charitable, benevolent,
philanthropic, patriotic, not for profit, religious, eleemosynary or political
purposes shall not be required to obtain a solicitation permit from the village
unless and until such activities are coupled with a request for donations or
the offering of property or services for sale.
   (B)   Placing Hangers On Doors: Persons placing hangers on doors for
noncommercial solicitation purposes without attracting the attention of the
occupant shall not be required to obtain a solicitation permit from the
village.
   (C)   Constitutional Rights: Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or
enforced to deprive any person of any rights guaranteed under the constitutions
of the state of Illinois or the United States. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   (A)   Contents: Application for a solicitation permit shall be made upon a
form provided by the village which shall contain the following information:
      1.   The full name, mailing address and telephone number of the person or
organization, if any, sponsoring, promoting or conducting the proposed
activities;
      2.   The full name, mailing address and telephone number of the
individual person or persons, if any, who will have responsibility for the
supervision of the proposed activities;
      3.   The full name of the individual person or persons age eighteen (18)
and over who will be engaged in the proposed solicitation activities;
      4.   The mailing address, date of birth and physical description of the
individual person or persons age eighteen (18) and over who will be engaged in
the proposed solicitation activities;
      5.   The dates and hours in which the solicitation is proposed to begin,
the expected duration of the proposed activities, and the geographic area
within the village wherein such solicitation shall be conducted at a particular
time of day;
      6.   Description sufficient for identification of vehicles to be used in
solicitation;
      7.   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application
for a permit under this chapter, if any;
      8.   Whether a solicitation permit issued to the applicant under this
chapter has ever been revoked;
      9.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, or the ordinances of any other Illinois
municipality regulating solicitation;
      10.   In the case of commercial solicitation, a copy of the most recent
annual report filed with the Illinois secretary of state, pursuant to 805
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/14.05, shall be filed by all corporate applicants.
All noncorporate applicants shall submit a copy of the most recent certificate
of registration from the Illinois department of revenue, pursuant to either 35
Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/6, 110/6, 115/6, or 120/2a, whichever provision
is applicable;
      11.   If a domestic corporation has not yet been required to file an
annual report, it shall submit instead a copy of its articles of incorporation.
If a foreign corporation has not yet been required to file an annual report, it
shall submit instead a copy of the certificate of authority issued to it by the
secretary of state. This subsection (A)11 shall not apply to any organization
which is a political subdivision or is associated with a political subdivision
of the state;
      12.   Name and address of the person or organization whom the applicant
is employed by or represents, and the length of time of such employment or
representation, if applicable;
      13.   A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter
of the solicitation in which the applicant or agent will engage;
      14.   Verification that the applicant and agents have never been
convicted of a commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other
state or federal law of the United States;
      15.   In the case of noncommercial solicitation, the applicant shall
submit a financial statement of said noncommercial organization for the
preceding twelve (12) months which shall include a balance sheet and statement
of income and expenses clearly stating forth the following: gross receipts and
gross income from all sources specifying total receipts and income from each
separate solicitation project or source; cost of administration; cost of
solicitation; cost of programs designed to inform or educate the public; funds
or properties transferred out of the state, with explanation as to recipient
and purpose; total net income amount for each major purpose, charitable or
otherwise. Statements shall be signed by the president or other authorized
officer or agent and shall be accompanied by an opinion signed by an
independent certified public accountant that said financial statement fairly
represents the financial operation of the organization.
A copy of the annual report to the attorney general of Illinois required by 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/4 may be presented in lieu of the aforementioned
financial statements. For the purpose of financial statements, the definitions
and standards applicable to the annual report to the attorney general as set
forth in said provision shall be utilized. This subsection (A)15 shall not
apply to any organization which is a political subdivision or is associated
with a political subdivision of the State.
In the event a noncommercial organization has not been established for a period
of twelve (12) months, a copy of the registration statement filed with the
Attorney General of Illinois pursuant to 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/2,
may be utilized;
      16.   All applicants shall submit an indemnification and hold harmless
agreement for the purpose of indemnifying the Village for all claims for
damages to persons or property arising from solicitation activities within the
Village. The agreement shall be in a form provided by the Business Office
Manager;
      17.   All applicants shall provide all such other information as may be
requested by the application form, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Fees: Each application for solicitation permit shall be accompanied by
a license fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (C)   Permit Duration: A permit referred to herein shall be valid for a
period of up to ninety (90) days as specified on the permit application. (Ord.
2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
   (D)   Grounds For Denial: All applications for a solicitation permit shall
be filed with the Village Manager or his/her designee and shall be verified
under oath. The Village Manager or his/her designee, within five (5) business
days of receipt of the application, shall consider the information contained
therein and shall deny only the applications of applicants:
      1.   Who have violated one of the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   Whose solicitation permit issued hereunder has previously been
revoked pursuant to section
3-4-10 of this chapter within the last thirty six (36) months;
      3.   Who are themselves or who employ to solicit any person who has been
convicted of a serious felony (as defined in section
3-4-1 of this chapter) under the laws of any State or Federal law of the United
States; or
      4.   Whose application does not contain all of the information and
documentation required in this section.
If the applicant has complied with the above provisions, a solicitation permit
shall be issued. The grounds set forth above shall be the only grounds under
which an application to solicit will be denied. In addition, failure to render
a decision within five (5) business days shall constitute an approval of the
application and a permit shall be issued. (Ord. 2018-4761, 4-16-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
   (E)   Notification Of Denial; Appeal:
      1.   In the event that any permit to engage in solicitation is denied for
the reasons stated herein, the Business Office Manager shall immediately notify
the applicant in writing of the reasons for said denial.
      2.   If the applicant is denied a permit, an appeal may be filed. The
President and Board of Trustees shall hear appeals concerning a denial. An
appeal must be filed in the Village Manager's Office within twenty one (21)
days after the date of denial of the application of permit by the Business
Office Manager.
      3.   If a hearing is requested, the President and Board of Trustees shall
schedule a hearing at their next regularly scheduled meeting. The appealing
party shall have the right to file additional documents, amend the written
appeal, and to appear at such hearing in person, or by attorney, or otherwise
to examine and cross examine witnesses.
      4.   The President and Board of Trustees shall not be bound by the rules
of evidence prevailing in the courts of law, but shall, in ascertaining the
conditions and practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account
all reliable, probative, and substantial evidence produced at the hearing
relating to the denial of the application. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-4: RECORDS OF APPLICATIONS, PERMITS:
The Village Clerk shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of
every application received and acted upon together with all other information
and data pertaining thereto, all solicitation permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter, and a record of the denial of any and all
applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order
as filed, and every permit issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified
with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. (Ord.
2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-5: VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the governing body of the village
that the occupant or occupants of the residences or businesses in the village
shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be,
invited to their respective premises. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-6: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided
by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter, may post
written notice on or near the main entrance with lettering no less than one-
half inch (1/2") in height, indicating that there is to be no soliciting on the
premises. Such written notice so displayed shall constitute sufficient notice
to any solicitor.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the village to first examine the notice provided for above, if any is
attached, and be governed by the statement contained in said notice. If the
notice states "No Solicitors Invited", or similar wording, then the solicitor
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (C)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-7: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   (A)   Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited: It is hereby declared to be unlawful
and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring
the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention to the occupant of such premises for the
purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in
soliciting as herein defined in defiance of the notice exhibited at the
premises in accordance with the provisions of section
3-4-6 of this chapter.
   (B)   Time Limit On Soliciting:
      1.   Residential Areas: No person shall engage in "commercial
solicitation" as herein defined, in residential areas, prior to nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of any day. No person shall
engage in "noncommercial solicitation" as herein defined, in residential areas,
prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any day.
      2.   Highways: Persons approved to solicit upon highways as provided in
section
3-4-8 of this chapter shall not engage in solicitation prior to six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of any day from April 1 to October
31. There shall be no solicitation upon highways during the period beginning
November 1 and ending March 31.
      3.   Train Station: Persons approved to solicit at the Lisle/Burlington
Northern Railroad commuter parking facility, depot and platform as provided in
section
3-4-9 of this chapter shall not engage in solicitation prior to six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any day.
      4.   Soliciting Outside Of Hours: It is hereby declared to be unlawful
and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this
chapter or not, to violate any portion of this section, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or
rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated
to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, as
herein defined, outside of the hours provided for in this section.
   (C)   False Plans Or Schemes: It shall be unlawful for any person who
engages in solicitation or peddling to use any false plan, scheme or pretense
or make any false statement which indicates or implies that the purpose of such
person's visit is other than to obtain contributions or orders for sales of
goods or services.
   (D)   Right To Cancel: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in
solicitation or peddling to misrepresent the right of a buyer to rescind or
cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.
   (E)   Misrepresentation: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in
solicitation or peddling to cheat, deceive or fraudulently misrepresent,
whether through himself or through an employee, while acting as solicitor in
the village, or to barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or wares other
than those specified in his application for permit.
   (F)   Interfering With Vehicles Or Pedestrians: No solicitor shall interfere
with either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the public right of way.
   (G)   Sound Or Voice Systems: It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to use
sound or voice amplification systems or other mechanical sound devices in any
solicitation or peddling.
   (H)   Safety Badge: Each applicant eighteen (18) years of age and older who
has been issued a permit by the village shall wear a safety badge on outer
garments so as to be visible at all times. Such badge shall be issued by the
village and shall contain, in a form authorized by the business office manager,
the application number of the permit, as set forth in section
3-4-4 of this chapter, together with the following statement:
      PERMIT NUMBER     
      I HAVE BEEN APPROVED BY THE VILLAGE OF LISLE TO SOLICIT WITHIN THE
VILLAGE. MY PERMIT WAS ISSUED ON                    [date] AND EXPIRES ON
                    [date].
   Permitted solicitors under the age of eighteen (18) shall have in their
possession a copy of an approval letter issued by the village business office
manager containing the beginning and expiration date of the permit, together
with the application number of the permit, as set forth in section
3-4-4 of this chapter.
   (I)   Felons: It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to utilize
as a solicitor any person who has been convicted of a "serious felony" (as
defined in section
3-4-1 of this chapter) under the laws of the state or any other state or under
the federal law of the United States.
   (J)   Solicitation Near School Bus Stops: It is hereby declared to be
unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to offer for sale or
for free any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of
value or not, including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets,
publications or subscriptions to publications or brochures within two hundred
fifty feet (250') (except within the confines of an enclosed structure or
building) of any location identified for the picking up or letting off of
schoolchildren by a clearly recognized school bus from thirty (30) minutes
before to thirty (30) minutes after any time at which schoolchildren are
scheduled to be picked up or dropped off. This prohibition shall extend to
sites located at or near school property where schoolchildren are directed to
be dropped off or picked up at the school building and to school bus stops
throughout the village which have been identified by the village or respective
school district as a location where schoolchildren are scheduled to be picked
up or dropped off before, after or during school hours. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-
2011)
3-4-8: SOLICITATION ON HIGHWAYS:
   (A)   Solicitation Of Charitable Contributions On Highways: Solicitation of
charitable contributions on highways within the village shall be permitted;
provided, however, that all such activity shall be conducted in strict
conformity with and shall be limited to that activity permitted under the
provisions of the Illinois vehicle code paragraph 5/11-1006(c) and this code.
Solicitation on highways within the village shall be allowed only at
intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop by a traffic
light. The soliciting agency shall be:
      1.   Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization as
provided by "an act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof and making an
appropriation therefor", approved July 26, 1963, as amended;
      2.   Engaged in a statewide fundraising activity; and
      3.   Liable for any injuries to persons or property during the
solicitation, which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (B)   Age Requirement: Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall
be eighteen (18) years of age or over and shall be wearing a high visibility
vest.
   (C)   Time Limit: There shall be no solicitation on highways within the
village at the same location or for the same group or organization on whose
behalf the solicitation is being conducted, for more than three (3) consecutive
days per fundraising activity.
   (D)   Insurance Coverage: No solicitor shall be permitted to solicit on
highways unless and until the solicitor provides proof to the village of
general liability insurance coverage naming the village as well as its
respective agents, officers and employees, as additional insureds in an amount
as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each occurrence. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-
4921, 9-20-2021)
3-4-9: SOLICITATION AT THE LISLE/BURLINGTON NORTHERN RAILROAD COMMUTER PARKING
FACILITY, DEPOT AND PLATFORM:
   (A)   Solicitation at the Lisle/Burlington Northern Railroad commuter
parking facility, depot and platform shall be allowed only in the following
areas as set forth on exhibit A attached to ordinance 94-2460 and incorporated
herein by reference: the tunnel, the breezeway connecting the depot and tunnel
shelter, and the sidewalk on the southwest side of the depot building.
   (B)   No solicitor shall be permitted to solicit at the commuter parking
facility unless and until the solicitor provides proof to the Village of
general liability insurance coverage naming the Village and the Burlington
Northern Railroad, as well as their respective agents, officers and employees,
as additional insureds in an amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each occurrence.
   (C)   All persons soliciting at the Lisle/Burlington Northern Railroad
Commuter Parking Facility shall be sixteen (16) years of age or older.
   (D)   Solicitation at the Lisle/Burlington Northern Railroad commuter
facility shall be limited to five (5) days per calendar month. Only one
organization may be permitted to solicit at the train station at one time.
(Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-4-10: REVOCATION:
   (A)   Revocation Of Permit: The Village Manager or his/her designee shall
revoke a solicitation permit for a violation of any of the regulations listed
in sections
3-4-1 through
3-4-9 of this chapter, inclusive. Immediately upon such revocation, written
notice thereof shall be given by the Village Manager or his/her designee to the
holder of the permit by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.
Upon receipt of said notice of revocation, all solicitation shall cease.
   (B)   Appeals: In the event the Village Manager or his/her designee revokes
any permit for solicitation, the person aggrieved by said decision shall have
the right to appeal and have a hearing before the President and Board of
Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Manager or his/
her designee within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of revocation, a
written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal.
The President and Board of Trustees shall thereupon set forth the time and a
place for the hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given
to the appellant in the same manner as provided in subsection (A) of this
section. The decision of the President and Board of Trustees on such appeal
shall be by a vote of a majority of all the members then holding office and
shall be final. (Ord. 2018-4761, 4-16-2018)
3-4-11: PENALTIES:
Notwithstanding any other remedies available to the Village pursuant to this
chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day on which the violation occurs or continues to occur.
(Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLING FOODSTUFFS
SECTION:
3-5-1: License Required And Exemptions
3-5-2: Application; Fee
3-5-3: Traffic Hazard Prohibited
3-5-4: Sanitary Regulations
3-5-5: Inspections
3-5-6: Penalty
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED AND EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to peddle any ice
cream, candy, confection, milk, dairy product, beverage or other foodstuff for
immediate human consumption from any vehicle, including motor vehicles and
nonmotorized vehicles, on any public street, alley or parkway in the village
without having a license therefor.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to peddle any beef,
poultry, fish or pork not intended for immediate human consumption from any
vehicle, including motor vehicles and nonmotorized vehicles, on any public
street, alley or parkway in the village. The proscriptions contained in this
section shall not apply to items ordered twenty four (24) hours prior to
transfer of said item to purchaser. (Ord. 98-2958, 2-2-1998)
3-5-2: APPLICATION; FEE:
Application for such licenses shall conform to the regulations of the general
provisions relating to all such applications, as set out under chapter 1 of
this title, and the annual fee shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, which fee shall not be prorated. (Ord. 2002-3425, 11-4-2002; amd.
Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-5-3: TRAFFIC HAZARD PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any such vehicle to stand or remain in any place
where parking vehicles is prohibited, or to sell or offer any commodity for
sale on any through street or at any place or time when an unusual traffic
hazard or danger to prospective customers exists; or within two hundred feet
(200') of the scene of any accident or destructive fire or any place where the
members of the fire or police departments are responding to an emergency call.
(Ord. 136, 8-7-1962)
3-5-4: SANITARY REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Vehicles: All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used. It shall
be unlawful to permit stale foods, decaying matter or any other waste material
or product to accumulate in or on any such vehicle while it is so used.
If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle, such foods shall
be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which is screened and
protected against dust and insects. (Ord. 136, 8-7-1962)
   (B)   Temperature Control: Readily perishable foods or beverages, while in
transit, shall be maintained at a temperature of not more than forty one
degrees Fahrenheit (41°F). The temperature for hot liquid foods or beverages
shall be maintained at not less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140°F); and for frozen foods at not more than zero degrees Fahrenheit (0°F).
The compartments in vehicles used for carrying such food shall be so
constructed, equipped and maintained as to preserve the temperature as above
indicated for the respective types of food. (Ord. 98-2968, 3-16-1998)
3-5-5: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the village president, or his designee, to make or
cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-3425, 11-4-2002)
3-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 6
SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Licenses
3-6-3: Number Of Licenses
3-6-4: License And Franchise Fees
3-6-5: Revocation, Suspension Or Nonrenewal Of License; Refund Of Fees
3-6-6: Prohibited Waste Collection; Collection Of Recyclables
3-6-7: Monthly Reports
3-6-8: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Real property and/or buildings used in whole or in part
for business purposes.
JUNK REMOVAL SERVICE: An individual, firm, organization, corporation or other
entity that does not provide curbside service, but is engaged in the business
of removing and hauling away junk from commercial premises or residential
premises and is not otherwise a "scavenger" as defined in this chapter.
LOCAL OFFICE: A location at which a scavenger conducts normal administrative
and/or business operations, within thirty (30) miles of the corporate limits of
the village of Lisle, which has a local Downers Grove or Naperville telephone
exchange.
MAIN OFFICE: A location at which a scavenger conducts the bulk of its
administrative and/or business operations.
RECYCLABLES: Those articles defined as "recyclables" in section
8-2-1 of this code.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Real property and/or buildings used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including, but not limited to, single-family homes and
multi-family dwellings. Single-family dwelling units which contain a section
devoted to the business purposes of the residential occupant or occupants shall
be considered residential premises for the purposes of this chapter.
SCAVENGER: An individual, firm, organization, corporation or other entity
engaged in the business of curbside waste collection.
SCAVENGER SERVICE: The provision of waste collection within village limits.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle.
WASTE: Garbage, rubbish and refuse of any kind, nature or description,
including, but not limited to, recyclables. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-2: LICENSES:
   (A)   License Required: No person shall engage in the business of junk
removal service or scavenger service within the village limits without first
securing a license to conduct such business.
   (B)   Application For License:
      1.   Application for a junk removal service or scavenger service license
shall be made, in writing, under oath or affirmation, to the business office
manager annually, and shall state whether the application is for a new license
or for a renewal. An application for renewal of any such license must be
received by the business office manager on or before the expiration date of the
applicant's previous license.
      2.   All applications shall state the name and business address of the
applicant's main and local offices, and shall include a list of the make, model
and license plate number of all junk removal or scavenger vehicles operated by
the applicant. The applicant shall disclose any previous revocations of any
similar licenses for junk removal or scavenger service by any other
governmental entity.
      3.   The names and addresses of the applicant, or if the applicant is a
corporation, of the president, vice president, secretary and all persons
owning, beneficially or otherwise, seven and one-half percent (7.5%) or more of
the common stock of said corporation, shall be listed and disclosed on said
application.
      4.   The applicant shall provide all other information as may be
requested by the application form, as amended, from time to time, by the
village manager.
      5.   All applicants for a residential scavenger service license shall
attach to the application, proof of all insurance coverage required by the
contract provided for in section
3-6-3 of this chapter.
      6.   All applicants for a junk removal service license shall attach to
the application proof of all insurance coverage required under section
3-6-3 of this chapter.
      7.   Any application shall be accompanied by the required fee as provided
by section
3-6-4 of this chapter.
      8.   If the business office manager finds and determines that all the
requirements for the license have been met, the license shall be issued.
   (C)   Term: The term of a junk removal or scavenger service license shall be
from January 1 through December 31, inclusive. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-3: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   (A)   Residential Premises: Only one license shall be issued for scavenger
service to residential premises and unlimited number of licenses may be issued
for junk removal services.
   (B)   Commercial Premises: An unlimited number of licenses may be issued for
scavenger service or junk removal services to commercial premises.
   (C)   Terms; Agreement:
      1.   The terms of any residential premises license for scavenger service
shall be subject to an agreement for scavenger service which shall be entered
into by the applicant and the village. The agreement for scavenger services may
be let by the village with or without bid under such terms and conditions as
the village may deem and find advisable and beneficial to the village and to
the best interest of its citizens. The terms of this chapter shall be construed
in accordance with the terms of said agreement for scavenger service.
      2.   The terms of any residential junk removal service license shall be
subject to an agreement for junk removal services which shall be entered into
by the applicant and village. The agreement for junk removal services may be
let by the village with or without bid under such terms and conditions as the
village may deem and find advisable and beneficial to the village and to the
best interest of its citizens. The terms of this chapter shall be construed in
accordance with the terms of said agreement for junk removal service.
   (D)   Junk Removal Services Insurance And Bond Requirements: Any applicant
for a junk removal service license shall procure, at the applicant's sole cost
and expense, and submit with its application a certificate of comprehensive
liability insurance. The comprehensive liability insurance required under this
subsection shall be effective for the full term of the license and shall be in
amounts with liability coverage under the comprehensive liability insurance of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence, and two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in aggregate liability insurance coverage. Each
such policy shall name the village as an additional insured and shall contain
an affirmative statement by the issuer that it will give written notice to the
village at least thirty (30) days prior to any cancellation of its policy. Any
cancellation shall be grounds for automatic revocation of the license. (Ord.
2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-4: LICENSE AND FRANCHISE FEES:
The annual fee for residential premises and commercial premises licenses issued
under this chapter shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. No license for junk removal service or scavenger service shall be
valid unless payment of the entire fee due for the license term has been
received by the village. Notwithstanding any other license fee provisions
contained within this code, no required fee under this chapter shall be
prorated or discounted according to the date on which such fee is paid or
application for license is made. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2021-
4921, 9-20-2021)
3-6-5: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE; REFUND OF FEES:
   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the village board of trustees or renewal of such license may be denied, for any
violation by the licensee of any provisions of local, state or federal law, or
for failure to perform services in accordance with any agreement with the
village or for a false or misleading statement on the license application.
   (B)   At least five (5) days prior to the suspension or revocation of any
such license or the expiration of any license that is to be denied renewal, the
village shall give written notice to the licensee at the licensee's business
address, stating the reason for the suspension, revocation or nonrenewal. The
licensee may, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, appeal to the
village board of trustees by filing a notice of appeal with the business office
manager stating the basis for such appeal. Upon receipt of the notice of
appeal, the village board shall fix a time and place for a hearing, to be held
not more than twenty (20) days following the receipt of the notice of appeal.
The filing of a notice of appeal by the licensee shall not operate as a stay of
a revocation, suspension or nonrenewal during the pendency of the appeal.
   (C)   In the event any license is revoked or suspended pursuant to this
section, no part of any license fees paid shall be refundable. In the event an
application for an initial license is denied, an existing license is not
renewed or a contract for residential junk removal service or scavenger service
expires and is not renewed after the license fee for that year has been paid,
fifty percent (50%) of the license fee paid for that year shall be refundable.
(Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-6: PROHIBITED WASTE COLLECTION; COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person not holding a residential premises
scavenger service license hereunder to remove any recyclables placed in or
adjacent to any village recycling bins or placed at the curb of any village
street for routine pick up by the scavenger service holding a residential
premises license.
   (B)   Where a scavenger licensed to provide scavenger services to commercial
premises is hired to collect waste from a site which contains units for both
commercial and residential use, and where the waste for the entire site is to
be collected from a single container, that scavenger shall provide to the
residential occupants the collection of recyclables comparable to the
recyclables collection services provided to residential premises by the
scavenger licensed to provide scavenger services to exclusively residential
premises. If the commercial premises scavenger is unable to provide such
service, the commercial scavenger may subcontract the service to an appropriate
entity for the collection of recyclables if approved by the village.
   (C)   All scavengers licensed to provide scavenger services, except those
which provide recycling services only, shall provide its customers with
recycling services appropriate to that customer. The recycling services may be
subcontracted to a village licensed provider of such services, but in no event
shall a holder of a junk removal service license be allowed to provide any such
recycling services to any customer in the village. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-7: MONTHLY REPORTS:
Each residential premises scavenger shall prepare and submit a monthly report
which shall provide such information as the village requests pursuant to the
aforementioned agreement for scavenger services.
Each commercial premises scavenger shall prepare a quarterly report on a form
provided by the village and submit the report to the village no later than one
month after the end of the applicable quarter. The report shall state the
following:
   (A)   The amount of waste collected, measured in tons;
   (B)   The amount of waste landfilled, measured in tons;
   (C)   The location of any landfilling;
   (D)   The business address of recycling processors who received village
recyclables; and
   (E)   The amount of recyclables collected, measured in pounds or tons. (Ord.
2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-8: PENALTY:
Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be fined
as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day of
violation. This penalty shall not be exclusive of any other remedy afforded the
village by this code. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-
2021)
CHAPTER 7
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
CHAPTER 8
TAXICABS; PUBLIC LIMOUSINES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Licenses Required
3-8-3: Taxicab Commissioner
3-8-4: Use Of Taxicabs, Public Limousines
3-8-5: Identification Of Taxicab Or Public Limousine By A Licensed Company Or
Livery Company Required
3-8-6: Taximeters
3-8-7: Taxicab And Public Limousine Fares
3-8-8: Transportation Subsidy (Rep. by Ord. 2018-4762, 4-16-2018, eff. 5-1-
2018)
3-8-9: Conduct Of Taxicab And Public Limousine Drivers Generally
3-8-10: Conditions Of Taxicabs And Public Limousines Generally
3-8-11: Books And Records Of Account
3-8-12: Complaints
3-8-13: Cab Company And Livery Company License Required
3-8-14: Application For And Issuance Of Cab Company Or Livery Company License
3-8-14-1: Transfer Of License
3-8-15: Terms Of License; Proration
3-8-16: Changes In Taxicabs Or Public Limousines During License Year
3-8-17: Suspension And Revocation Of Licenses
3-8-18: Mandatory Revocation Of A License
3-8-19: Taxicab Hours Of Service
3-8-20: Changes In The Number Of Taxicabs Or Hours Of Service
3-8-21: Penalty For Violation Of The Provisions Of This Chapter
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CAB COMPANY: A person or company engaged in business as proprietor of one or
more taxicabs.
CAB STAND: An area designated by an official sign for the use of taxicabs duly
registered within the Village for the loading and unloading of passengers and
the waiting for of passengers and potential passengers.
DISABLED/HANDICAPPED PERSON: A Village resident who is unable to engage in any
substantial gainful activity by reason of a medically determinable physical or
mental impairment which can be expected to result in death or which has lasted
or can be expected to last for a continuous period not less than twelve (12)
months. Proof that a claimant is eligible to receive disability benefits under
the Federal Social Security Act (42 USCA section 302 et seq.), as from time to
time amended, shall constitute proof of disability for the purpose of this
section. A disabled person not covered under the Federal Social Security Act
shall provide proof by a physician acceptable to the Village establishing his
or her status as a disabled person determined by using the same standards as
used by the Social Security Administration. The cost of any such examination
shall be borne by the claimant.
DRIVER: A person who drives or is licensed to drive a taxicab or public
limousine on the streets and ways within the Village.
LIVERY COMPANY: A person or company, engaged in the business that offers public
limousines with drivers for hire, and that are not otherwise taxicabs.
MILEAGE: The distance in rate of fare, as mechanically registered, from the
point of passenger pick up to the point of passenger delivery.
OWNER: Every individual, trustee, partnership, association, or corporation
owning, operating or having the use or control of one or more taxicabs or
public limousines in the Village.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
PUBLIC LIMOUSINE: A public conveyance for hire only at lawful rates, which
rates are charged on an hourly, or portion thereof, or on a prearranged
contractual basis.
SENIOR CITIZEN: A village resident who is sixty five (65) years of age or
older. Proof thereof shall consist of a state of Illinois photograph
identification card, containing proof of age.
TAXICAB: A public conveyance for hire only at lawful rates of fare, which rates
are as recorded and indicated by a taximeter.
VILLAGE BOARD: The village of Lisle board of trustees. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-
2005)
3-8-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
Each cab company and livery company shall, as a condition precedent to
operation of a taxicab or public limousine in the village, obtain the
appropriate village license as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-
2005)
3-8-3: TAXICAB COMMISSIONER:
A taxicab commissioner (hereinafter referred to as the commissioner) shall
perform all the duties and functions of commissioner as provided in this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Convening and presiding at certain hearings and meetings required by
this chapter; and
   (B)   Revoking and suspending licenses pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
The village manager shall assume the duties of commissioner. The commissioner
may at any time appoint a deputy commissioner who shall have the power to
perform any of the tasks assigned to the commissioner hereunder. (Ord. 2005-
3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-4: USE OF TAXICABS, PUBLIC LIMOUSINES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to refuse any person transportation in a taxicab
to any place of destination within the village in a taxicab that is unoccupied
by a passenger for hire unless it is on its way to pick up a passenger or
otherwise out of service or unless the person to be served appears intoxicated
or uses profane or abusive language in attempting to contract for service. When
the taxicab is out of service or carrying a passenger, there shall be displayed
on the windshield of that taxicab, a sign reading "not for hire" in letters at
least two inches (2") in height.
   (B)   Group riding is permitted in taxicabs; provided, that the driver
accepts no more than five (5) passengers for any trip, and provided that the
fare charged to any passenger will be not greater than if he rode alone.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any driver to stop, stand or park a taxicab
within the corporate limits of the village, under circumstances manifesting an
intent to solicit a passenger or fare, unless said taxicab is duly registered
with the village as provided in subsection
3-8-14(C) of this chapter. For the purpose of this section, circumstances
manifesting an intent to solicit a passenger or fare shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   The presence or absence of a sign or other indicator, such as a flag
or light, upon or within the taxicab, when the presence or absence of such sign
or indicator signifies that the taxicab is currently available for hire;
      2.   A driver placing or allowing another to place luggage or other
parcels or packages into the taxicab;
      3.   Any other circumstances which tend to show that the driver intended
to pick up a passenger within the village.
   (D)   In addition, there shall be designated by the village board certain
cab stands within the village, which cab stands shall be marked by official
signs. Said cab stands shall be for the purpose of loading and unloading of
passengers and the waiting for of passengers or potential passengers. No
taxicab entering onto premises having a designated cab stand shall park, stop
or stand at any place upon said premises other than the designated cab stand.
Further, no taxicab shall park, stop or stand in any designated cab stand
unless said taxicab either is registered with the village as provided in
subsection
3-8-14(C) of this chapter or is present at a cab stand for the purpose of
dropping off passengers who were initially picked up outside of the village.
   (E)   A public limousine may discharge a person in the village provided that
the pick up was made outside the village and may pick up a person within the
village, but under no circumstances may a public limousine pick up a person
within the village for the purpose of discharging a person within the village.
   (F)   Under no circumstances may a public limousine stand at a cab stand.
   (G)   Under no circumstances may a public limousine park or otherwise travel
any street or road within the village with the intent and purpose to solicit
fares. All fares for public limousines must be prearranged with the customer
based upon the origin, destination and time duration of the trip. In no event
may an hourly fee for a public limousine exceed such fares on file with the
business office manager, as required under subsection
3-8-7(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-5: IDENTIFICATION OF TAXICAB OR PUBLIC LIMOUSINE BY A LICENSED COMPANY OR
LIVERY COMPANY REQUIRED:
   (A)   Every taxicab operated by a cab company licensed by the village
hereunder shall have displayed thereon, in the appropriate place, the following
identification materials:
      1.   On the center of the main panel of the front or rear doors of each
such taxicab, there shall appear the cab number and the cab company's name and
telephone number; provided further, however, that in lieu of placing the cab
company's name on the door, the name may be placed on a lighted sign which must
protrude from the top of the cab.
      2.   On the inside panel separating the front and rear seats of each such
taxicab, facing to the rear, there shall be affixed a copy of the telephone
number of the cab company and the rates charged for trips inside and outside of
the village.
   (B)   Every public limousine operated by a livery company licensed by the
village hereunder shall:
      1.   Keep a copy of a valid and binding license issued under this chapter
in the glove compartment of the public limousine; and
      2.   Keep a copy of the most current hourly rate schedule on file with
the business office manager, as required under subsection
3-8-7(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-6: TAXIMETERS:
Every taxicab operated by a cab company licensed by the village shall be
equipped with a taximeter connected with and operating from the transmission of
the taxicab, subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   No taximeter shall be attached to a taxicab unless it has been
inspected by an approved inspector and found to be accurate. The cab company
shall keep certificates of accuracy from the inspector for each taximeter and
provide the same for inspection by a passenger upon request. The taximeter case
shall be sealed by the inspector if found to be accurate.
   (B)   Each taximeter shall be inspected annually, not more than sixty (60)
days prior to July 1, and a certificate of accuracy, as provided in subsection
(A) of this section, shall be submitted by the cab company to the business
office manager prior to the renewal of the license.
   (C)   All taximeters shall be equipped with a flag that is plainly visible.
This flag shall be kept up only when the taxicab is for hire. Taximeters shall
have a lighted dial or dials to register the tariff in accordance with lawful
rates as expressed herein and the dial shall at all times be maintained by the
cab company so that it is in plain view and readable by the passenger.
   (D)   No driver or cab company shall operate a taxicab with a taximeter that
is unsealed, inaccurate, has not been inspected as provided herein or is
otherwise not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with a taximeter seal or
sealed taximeter.
   (F)   Upon the request of the commissioner, the cab company shall submit any
taximeter installed on a taxicab to an inspection to determine its accuracy.
(Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-7: TAXICAB AND PUBLIC LIMOUSINE FARES:
   (A)   The rates of fare, fees or charges of any kind for taxicabs while
being operated from a point of origin within the corporate limits of the
Village shall be according to a schedule filed with the Business Office Manager
by each company licensed hereunder. A change in rates of fare, fees or charges
of any kind shall not be effective and shall not be quoted to, required by or
requested of any passenger until at least thirty (30) days after an amended
schedule has been filed with the Business Office Manager.
   (B)   The rates of fare, fees, or charges of any kind for a public limousine
shall be on an hourly or prearranged contractual basis. Under no circumstances
may a public limousine use a meter of any kind to charge fares. Each livery
company shall file an hourly rate schedule with the Business Office Manager.
(Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-8: TRANSPORTATION SUBSIDY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-4762, 4-16-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
3-8-9: CONDUCT OF TAXICAB AND PUBLIC LIMOUSINE DRIVERS GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any driver to conduct himself in a disrespectful or
contemptuous manner towards any person, or to use abusive or profane language
while so occupied or in charge of such vehicle. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-10: CONDITIONS OF TAXICABS AND PUBLIC LIMOUSINES GENERALLY:
Every taxicab and public limousine operated in the Village by a cab company or
livery company licensed by the Village shall be maintained in a safe condition
at all times. Each taxicab shall have two (2) doors on each side of the
taxicab. If a taxicab or public limousine shall become unsafe for operation or
if its body or seating facilities shall be so damaged as to render the taxicab
or public limousine unfit for public use, the Commissioner may suspend the
license issued to the cab company or livery company operating that vehicle
until the vehicle is made safe for use by the public. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-
2005)
3-8-11: BOOKS AND RECORDS OF ACCOUNT:
Every licensed cab company or livery company shall keep accurate books and
records of account and log books of services rendered. Each licensed cab
company shall keep such books and records in its dispatching office located in
the Village. The Commissioner shall be permitted to examine those books and
records of account and logs as they may relate to a specific charge that is the
subject of a public hearing under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-
3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-12: COMPLAINTS:
   (A)   Any person may file a written complaint with the Commissioner
regarding the conduct of a driver, cab company, or livery company.
   (B)   The Commissioner shall investigate all complaints against drivers. He
shall notify the driver and cab company or livery company of the complaint and
shall hold a meeting on that matter, if he determines that such a meeting is
necessary, at which meeting the driver and a representative of the cab company
or livery company shall be present. If the Commissioner determines that any
provision of this chapter has been violated, he shall take any further action
consistent with the provisions of this chapter and shall also refer the matter
to the Police Department.
   (C)   The Village Board shall investigate complaints against a cab company
or livery company, notify the cab company or livery company of the complaint
and hold a meeting on the matter, if the Village Board in its sole discretion
determines that such a meeting is necessary, at which meeting a representative
of the cab company or livery company shall be present. If the Village Board
determines that any provision of this chapter has been violated, it shall refer
the matter to the Police Department and the Commissioner for any further action
consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-13: CAB COMPANY AND LIVERY COMPANY LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any cab company or livery company to operate a taxicab
or public limousine for transportation of passengers for hire from a point of
origin or destination within the village unless the cab company or livery
company is licensed by the village. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-14: APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF CAB COMPANY OR LIVERY COMPANY LICENSE:
Each cab company or livery company shall apply to the business office manager
for a cab company or livery company license before operating any taxicabs or
public limousines within the village. The application for a cab company or
livery company license shall be approved by the village manager and a cab
company or livery company license issued pursuant to the following rules and
regulations: (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
   (A)   An application shall be submitted to the business office manager along
with payment of an initial first year nonrefundable application fee and an
annual license fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. Renewal applications shall be subject to the deadlines and late fees
as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
There shall be no refund of any portion of the annual license fee imposed under
this chapter for any portion of a year during which the licensee ceases to
operate a taxi or livery company within the village. (Ord. 2009-4257, 6-1-2009;
amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
   (B)   The cab company or livery company shall be required to include in the
application a true statement of certain facts including, but not limited to,
the state of incorporation if the cab company or livery company is a
corporation; whether the cab company or livery company is organized and
qualified to do business under the laws of the state of Illinois if the cab
company or livery company is a corporation; principal place of business; the
names of the individuals who own the cab company or livery company; whether the
cab company or livery company, if not a corporation, is a limited liability
company, partnership, or sole proprietorship, or other type of business
organization; the registered agent of the corporate cab company or livery
company; principal office if different than principal place of business; and
all such other information as requested by the application form as amended from
time to time.
   (C)   The cab company or livery company shall be required, with its
application for a license, to register each taxicab or public limousine
operated by such company within the village by providing the following
information:
      1.   The year, make, color and serial number;
      2.   The actual owner of the taxicab or public limousine;
      3.   Written certification that required inspections of each taxicab and
each taximeter or public limousine have been completed within sixty (60) days
of such application and that these inspections have demonstrated each taxicab
or public limousine to be safe, and that each taximeter is in proper working
order and accurate;
      4.   The name, address, and home phone number of each driver;
      5.   A valid and current state of Illinois operator's or chauffeur's
license number and license expiration date for each driver; and
      6.   A schedule of rates of fares, fees or charges.
   (D)   The chief of police shall investigate the owners of the applicant cab
company or livery company to determine the good character and business
reputation of those owners and shall report his findings to the business office
manager before issuance of a license. If this investigation uncovers
information showing that any owners have been convicted of a felony, have not
paid a judgment against them, or have misrepresented facts in the application
for a license, the village manager shall not approve such application and no
license shall be issued.
   (E)   The cab company or livery company shall be required to file with the
business office manager, along with its application for a license, a
certificate of insurance showing that the cab company or livery company, its
drivers and employees, are adequately insured against public liability,
property damage, and workers' compensation claims on account of its operation
of taxicabs or public limousines in the village.
   (F)   Failure to fully comply with the application and disclosure
requirements of this section shall constitute grounds for the business office
manager to deny issuance of a license. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-14-1: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
If a licensee holding a cab company or livery company license under this
chapter changes its principal place of business of the company, the cab company
or livery company shall apply to the business office manager for a transfer of
the license.
Upon approval of the village manager, the business office manager shall make
the necessary alterations and endorse the transfer of the license. No fee shall
be required for the transfer of a license for a change in the principal place
of business of the cab company or livery company.
If ownership of a cab company or livery company, licensed under this chapter is
conveyed to a new owner, the new owner shall apply for a new license in his
name in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this section
3-8-14. There shall be no transfer of a license issued under this chapter from
the owner of one cab company or livery company to the owner of another cab
company or livery company. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-15: TERMS OF LICENSE; PRORATION:
The term of all licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
one year from the date of issuance and shall expire at the end of the last day
of the applicable term. The full license fee shall be charged no matter when
the license is applied for or issued. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-16: CHANGES IN TAXICABS OR PUBLIC LIMOUSINES DURING LICENSE YEAR:
During the term of any license, if a cab company substitutes another taxicab
for any taxicab registered with the village or the livery company substitutes
another public limousine for any public limousine registered with the village
pursuant to subsection
3-8-14(C) of this chapter, or adds any additional taxicab or public limousine
to the list of registered taxicabs or public limousines, the company shall
register such substitute or additional taxicab or public limousine with the
village by providing the information required by subsection
3-8-14(C) of this chapter concerning such substitute or additional taxicab or
public limousine. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-17: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended for a violation of the provisions of this chapter by the
commissioner. The commissioner may revoke or suspend a license only after a
public hearing has been held at which hearing the driver, cab company or livery
company may appear to present evidence in his or its behalf. The business
office manager shall give ten (10) days' notice of the public hearing by
certified mail to the driver or the cab company or livery company, as the case
may be, whose license may be revoked or suspended. This notice shall state the
date, time, and place of the public hearing and the nature of the charges that
may result in revocation or suspension of the license. Upon the conclusion of
this public hearing, the commissioner may revoke or suspend the license, in his
discretion or as required by this chapter, if he finds that the preponderance
of the evidence presented at the hearing is such as to substantiate a violation
of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-18: MANDATORY REVOCATION OF A LICENSE:
A license issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the commissioner as
follows:
   (A)   If the cab company or livery company or any driver is convicted of a
felony or violent crime while holding the license;
   (B)   If the cab company or livery company or any driver fails to pay a
judgment;
   (C)   If an owner of the cab company or livery company or any driver is
found in possession of narcotics;
   (D)   If a driver directs anyone to a house of prostitution or to illegal
gambling houses;
   (E)   If a driver is convicted of drunken driving or reckless driving by a
court of competent jurisdiction; or
   (F)   If any other section of this chapter requires revocation for a
violation thereof. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-19: TAXICAB HOURS OF SERVICE:
Not less than forty percent (40%) of the total number of taxicabs registered
for operation, pursuant to subsection
3-8-14(C) of this chapter, by a cab company licensed under this chapter shall
be operated regularly between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on Mondays through Fridays, and may be operated at
such other times, and on weekends, as shall be deemed necessary by the cab
company. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-20: CHANGES IN THE NUMBER OF TAXICABS OR HOURS OF SERVICE:
   (A)   The village board alone shall determine whether the public convenience
and necessity require a change in the number of taxicabs which may be
registered for operation in the village or hours of taxicab services required
by section
3-8-19 of this chapter. In determining whether the public convenience and
necessity require change in the number of taxicabs which may be registered for
operation in the village or hours of taxicab service, due consideration shall
be given by the village board to the following:
      1.   The public demand for taxicab service.
      2.   The effect of increased competition on revenues of taxicab
operators, on cost of rendering taxicab service including provisions of proper
reserves and a fair return on investment in property devoted to such service,
and on the wages or compensation, hours and conditions of service of taxicab
drivers.
   (B)   A cab company may request that the village board amend the number of
taxicabs which may be registered for operation in the village or required hours
of service as required in section
3-8-19 of this chapter in the same manner as if it were requesting a fare
revision under section
3-8-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-21: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER:
The commissioner may revoke or suspend a license issued hereunder upon
violation of any provision of this chapter in accordance with applicable
requirements for hearing and notice. Notwithstanding any revocation or
suspension of a license by the commissioner hereunder, the cab company, livery
company, or driver may be convicted of a violation of any section of this
chapter by a court of competent jurisdiction and shall be subject to the fines
and other penalties established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 9
AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Compliance Required
3-9-2: Definition
3-9-3: License And Permit
3-9-4: Installation Regulations
3-9-5: Operation Regulations
3-9-6: Inspections
3-9-7: Penalty
3-9-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to install, operate or maintain any "automatic dry
cleaning machine", as hereinafter defined, except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or without complying with all of the provisions
pertaining to the installation and operation of such machines herein contained,
or in violation of any laws, rules or regulations of the Illinois department of
health relating thereto. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-2: DEFINITION:
An "automatic dry cleaning machine", as the term is used herein, shall be
construed to include and mean any device or apparatus for the cleaning of
clothes or fabrics, and designed to be used or operated by the owner or an
employee of the owner, which machine or device makes use of or contains
perchloroethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance which may cause
harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or contact. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-3: LICENSE AND PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful to install any automatic dry cleaning machine without
first having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permit shall
contain full information as to the mechanical equipment of such machine and
provisions for ventilation for both the machine and the room in which the
machine will be located. Applicants shall supply all such other information as
may be requested by the permit application form as amended from time to time.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of maintaining any such machine
for use by the public upon payment of a fee without having first secured a
license therefor. The annual fee for such license shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” plus an amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each unit in addition to five (5) maintained in any one
establishment. (Ord. 98-2956, 2-2-1998; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-9-4: INSTALLATION REGULATIONS:
Each machine shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with
intake at the top and the outlet at or near the bottom of such machine. Groups
of machines may be entirely enclosed or supported on all sides by an enclosure
topped with a hood vented as provided for each individual machine.
The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of one hundred (100) cubic feet
per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open.
The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the machines are
located shall extend at least two feet (2') above the level of any window which
can be opened, located within fifty feet (50') of the outlet of the stack, and
shall be at least fifty feet (50') away from any fresh air intake leading to
any premises.
The machines must be so constructed so as to prevent the loading door from
being opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be
equipped with a transparent door or port to allow visual examination of the
status of the cleaning cycle.
Any connection of such machine with the water supply system must be equipped
with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the condenser; with
no control valves downstream from such gap or breaker. Wastewater shall be
discharged through an air gap.
Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent the leakage of
liquids, gas or vapors.
The solvent shall be stored in closed containers and should be transferred from
the containers in a line free of leaks. All storage facilities for solvent,
external from the equipment, must meet the requirements of the village fire
inspectors.
Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be disposed of so as
not to create a health hazard or nuisance.
Respiratory protective equipment shall be provided for maintenance personnel
and must be kept in good repair and available for immediate use. Chemical
cartridge respirators are approved for light solvent concentrations and the
wearer should replace the cartridges immediately upon noting odor.
A utility fire extinguisher of either the carbon dioxide or dry chemical type
must be provided for use against electrical or oil fires.
Only the front or customer side of the dry cleaning machine should be exposed
in the customer area. The working or maintenance portion of the equipment
should be separated from the front of the machine by a solid partition. As a
means of minimizing any solvent buildup in the customer area and also to
control any minor solvent leakage, it is required that there be a minimum flow
rate from the customer area through the partition as follows:
 
Number Of Machines Minimum Flow Rate
                   Per Machine (cfm)
1 - 3              500
4 - 8              400
9 - 16             375
17 or more         360
 
Example: An 8 machine installation requires a minimum continuous exhaust flow
rate of 3,200 cfm.
The exhaust ventilation as described above shall be provided on a continuous
basis while the store is open for business. The fan wiring shall be such that
the dry cleaning equipment cannot be operated unless the fan system is in
operation.
Where grille openings are to be installed in the partition to facilitate air
movement, they should be sized on the basis of about five hundred (500) cfm per
square foot of net grille area and should be placed as close to the machines as
possible. An example would be the use of a thirty inch by six inch (30" x 6")
grille located directly over a machine.
Access doors to the maintenance area shall be kept locked.
It is also required that a general ventilation fan be installed in the back
room or maintenance area to be used in case of serious solvent leakage. This
may be installed in the rear wall and when combined with the system required in
the minimum flow rate table above, should enable the exhausting of a minimum of
one thousand (1,000) cfm per machine.
A satisfactory means of preventing liquid leaks from escaping the enclosure
must be provided. This should include some method of "diking" the floor of the
enclosure or machine base to hold a liquid volume equal to the maximum quantity
of solvent which might possibly escape from the system. Some means must be
provided for draining solvent in the event of a leak and containment. This can
be done by gravity flow with the solvent transferred to a standby holding tank.
This tank should be vented to the outside.
An interlock system must be provided on the machine to prevent the loading door
from being opened during the normal cycle. This system may be either electrical
and/or mechanical and so connected that in the event of a power failure the
machine remains safe.
A step by step instruction list must be posted in a conspicuous location near
the machine for customer use. Competent, trained and maintenance personnel must
be available or on call as long as the premises is open for business.
A solvent vapor sensing device within the tumbler is desirable to control the
drying cycle and to prevent the removal of solvent laden garments.
The machine design must be such that essentially no solvent is retained in the
cleaned items upon completion of the dry cleaning cycle. A simple performance
test which must be satisfied is the lack of any solvent odor in a closed
automobile containing a newly cleaned load.
It is the responsibility of the proprietor to make certain that clothing which
cannot be properly cleaned and dried will not be placed in the machines.
The machine should be checked daily and kept in good repair. All maintenance
personnel should be familiar with necessary machine repairs and instructed as
to the solvent hazards.
Solvent control is to be such that under normal operation and use conditions no
solvent odor can be detected in the customer area.
Only the solvent specified by the equipment manufacturer shall be used.
A supply of tempered (heated to 60 or 65 degrees Fahrenheit) make-up air equal
to or greater than the total volume of air exhausted from the plant should be
provided in order to eliminate any negative pressure conditions which might
otherwise develop.
It is important that solvent contaminated air, even in very low concentrations
(5-20 ppm), be kept out of the air intakes of all combustion equipment so as to
minimize the thermal decomposition of the solvent. Breakdown products such as
hydrochloric acid, free chloride and phosgene corrode metal surfaces including
flues and heater components and can seriously damage cloth through acid burns
or weakening of fibers.
Exhaust ventilation stacks from dry cleaning machines should be located as far
as possible from combustion air or dryer intakes. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-5: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
No such automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all the
equipment described in the foregoing section is properly installed and in good
working condition.
No establishment for which a license is required under this chapter shall be
open for business, and it shall be unlawful to admit the public or customers
into the room where such machines are located unless there is on duty in the
establishment at all times a competent person in charge of the establishment,
and in charge of the operation of such machines. There shall be warning signs
posted in places of easy observation warning of the dangers in the event
leakage of liquids, gas or vapor occurs. It shall be unlawful to permit any
residue containing solvent to flow into the sewer system of the village;
tightly covered metal containers may be used for temporary storage of such
waste outside the building. Such containers shall bear labels indicating the
contents and dangers involved in handling, and shall be locked if in an
unenclosed place.
At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place available to customers
giving the name, address and phone number of the owner of the establishment,
and of the service department or agency responsible for the proper maintenance
of the machine. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-6: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the village president to cause such inspections to be
made as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-
29-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-10-1: Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-10-2: Service Occupation Tax
3-10-3: Use Tax
3-10-4: Leasing Occupation Tax
3-10-5: Automobile Renting Use Tax
3-10-6: Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
3-10-7: Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax
3-10-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file, on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department
of revenue required by section three of "an act in relation to a tax upon
persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended. At the
time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of
revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from sales
of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of
revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 318, 9-2-1969)
3-10-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the business
of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of
all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the
form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this village shall file, on or before the
last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue
required by section nine of the "service occupation tax act", approved July 10,
1961, as amended. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of
revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 319, 9-2-1969)
3-10-3: USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of
using, in the village, any item of tangible personal property which is
purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or
registered with an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of
one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible property with selling
price to have the meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14,
1955.
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the Illinois department of
revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after its
effective date. (Ord. 533, 10-15-1974)
3-10-4: LEASING OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting or
leasing tangible personal property to the users thereof at the rate of one-half
of one percent (0.5%) of the gross receipts from such renting or leasing made
in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance
with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois
municipal code.
Every person engaged in such business in the village shall file with the state
department of revenue the return in the manner as required by section five of
the "leasing occupation tax act" as adopted by the 74th general assembly. At
the time such return is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of
revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
renting or leasing tangible personal property during the preceding month.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of
revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 193, 10-7-1965)
3-10-5: AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the village an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled
or registered with an agency of this state's government in this village at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while this
section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-8 of the Illinois municipal code.
The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose
Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in this
village.
The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois department of
revenue.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of
revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date of this section.
Certified proof of publication shall be forwarded to the Illinois department of
revenue along with the certified copy of this section required by paragraph 4
of this section. (Ord. 82-1029, 1-19-1982)
3-10-6: AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting
automobiles in the village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross
receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this
section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-7 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/1 et seq., of "an act in
relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property to purchasers for use or consumption".
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of
revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date of this section.
This section shall be effective on the first day of the calendar month next
following publication as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-4.
Certified proof of publication shall be forwarded to the Illinois department of
revenue along with the certified copy of this section as required by paragraph
4 of this section. (Ord. 82-1030, 1-19-1982)
3-10-7: HOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX:
Pursuant to authority vested in the village of Lisle by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-3-14, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting, leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel in the village of
Lisle at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental receipts from the
operation of such hotel made in the course of such business while this section
is in effect, except that no tax shall be imposed on the proceeds of renting,
leasing, or letting rooms to permanent residents of that hotel.
Taxes must be paid on or before the fifteenth day of the month immediately
following the month for which a return is being filed. For the purpose of this
section, a "month" shall mean either a calendar month (12 annual tax periods)
or a period of four (4) consecutive weeks (13 annual tax periods). All checks,
money orders or cashier's checks must be made payable to: Village Of Lisle.
As used in this section, a "hotel" shall be defined as any building or
buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters,
sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns, motels,
tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
No funds received pursuant to this section shall be used to advertise for or
otherwise promote new competition in the hotel business.
The amounts collected pursuant to this section shall be expended by the village
of Lisle solely to promote tourism and conventions within the village or to
attract nonresident overnight visitors to the village.
The village of Lisle shall be solely responsible for the collection of the tax
from persons subject to the tax, and may provide for the administration and
enforcement of the tax as deemed necessary or practicable for the effective
administration of the tax. (Ord. 2003-3800, 12-1-2003, eff. 1-1-2004)
CHAPTER 11
UTILITIES TAX
SECTION:
3-11-1: Transmitting Messages Tax Repealed
3-11-2: Electric Utility Tax
3-11-3: Natural Gas Utility Tax
3-11-1: TRANSMITTING MESSAGES TAX REPEALED:
Effective January 1, 2003, there is enacted the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act as set forth in title 11, chapter 11 of this code.
If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal telecommunications tax
act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, or if title 11, chapter
11 of this code is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then
ordinances 614, passed December 22, 1975; 82-1054, passed July 6, 1982; 95-
2687, passed October 2, 1995; 96-2776, passed May 20, 1996; and 98-2995, passed
June 1, 1998, as they pertain to this tax, shall be deemed in full force and
effect as of the date public act 92-0526 or title 11, chapter 11 of this code
is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
3-11-2: ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
   (A)   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed effective with respect to bills issued
on or after June 1, 2008, on the privilege of using and consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate
limits of the village of Lisle at the following rates calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
      1.   For the first two thousand (2,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed
in a month: 0.540 cent per kilowatt hour;
      2.   For the next forty eight thousand (48,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.354 cent per kilowatt hour;
      3.   For the next fifty thousand (50,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed
in a month: 0.319 cent per kilowatt hour;
      4.   For the next four hundred thousand (400,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.310 cent per kilowatt hour;
      5.   For the next five hundred thousand (500,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.301 cent per kilowatt hour;
      6.   For the next two million (2,000,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed
in a month: 0.283 cent per kilowatt hour;
      7.   For the next two million (2,000,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed
in a month: 0.279 cent per kilowatt hour;
      8.   For the next five million (5,000,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.275 cent per kilowatt hour;
      9.   For the next ten million (10,000,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.270 cent per kilowatt hour;
      10.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of twenty million
(20,000,000) kilowatt hours in a month: 0.266 cent per kilowatt hour. (Ord.
2008-4194, 4-21-2008, eff. retroactive to 3-17-2008)
   (B)   Coordination Of Tax:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section is in addition to all taxes, fees
and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state of Illinois or any
other political subdivision of the state.
      2.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax imposed
by this section shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or
collection of the tax would violate the constitution or statutes of the United
States or the constitution of the state of Illinois.
      3.   The tax imposed by this section shall not be imposed upon
transactions involving the distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling of
electricity to the village.
   (C)   Collection Of Tax:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of this section regarding the delivery of
electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this section shall be collected
from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge
for delivering the electricity.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected by this section, and any tax in
fact, collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that
if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.
      3.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect tax from the purchaser
by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse them
for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing
and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon
request. For purposes of this section, any partial payment of a billed amount
not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the
delivery of electricity.
   (D)   Tax Remittance And Return:
      1.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form
prescribed by the village finance director. The return and accompanying
remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the
month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under
this section.
      2.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from
the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this section, then
the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village finance
director and pay the tax directly to the village finance director on or before
the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is
used or consumed.
   (E)   Resales Of Electricity:
      1.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village
finance director and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the
electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or
partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
      2.   If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village
finance director for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing
why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this section on any purchases of
electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the village
finance director may reasonably require.
      3.   Upon approval of the application, the village finance director shall
assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the
applicant.
      4.   The village finance director may cancel the resale number of any
person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this section for
electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained
through misrepresentation, or b) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
      5.   (a) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this section directly to the village finance director on the amount of
electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax
pursuant to this section and remit the tax on the amount of electricity
delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
         (b)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an
active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section
shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the
electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the
village finance director the total amount of electricity delivered to the
reseller, and such other information that the village finance director may
reasonably require.
   (F)   Books And Records For Electric Utility Tax: Every tax collector, and
every taxpayer required to pay the electric utility tax, shall keep accurate
books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books
and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise,
to any tax liability under this section. The books and records shall be subject
to and available for inspection by the village during normal business hours.
   (G)   Credits And Refunds For Electric Utility Tax: Notwithstanding any
other provision of this section, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and
budgeting by the village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit
for, a tax imposed under this section unless the person files a claim for
refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or
remitted to the village finance director.
   (H)   Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the
amount of tax due.
   (I)   Definitions: The terms used in this section shall have the same
meanings ascribed to them as those terms are defined in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-2 and other applicable provisions of the Illinois municipal
code. (Ord. 2008-4189, 3-17-2008)
3-11-3: NATURAL GAS UTILITY TAX:
   (A)   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed on all persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling natural gas for use
or consumption within the corporate limits of the village of Lisle, and not for
resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
   (B)   Coordination Of Tax: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to
any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof;
nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation under the provisions of this
section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under
the provisions of the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by
section
8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
   (C)   Tax Additional: Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money,
or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer
as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
   (D)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply:
      GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that
"gross receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the
definition of gross receipts in section
8-11-2(d) of the Illinois municipal code.
      PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   (E)   Effective Date Of Tax: The tax provided for herein shall be based on
the "gross receipts", as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for
services billed on or after May 1, 2008.
   (F)   Tax Remittance And Return: On or before June 30, 2008, each taxpayer
shall make a return to the village finance director for the month of May 2008,
stating:
      1.   His name;
      2.   His principal place of business;
      3.   His gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which the tax
is imposed;
      4.   Amount of tax;
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall
make a like return to the village finance director for a corresponding one
month period.
   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the village finance director, the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may,
if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
   (G)   Credits And Refunds: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been
paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount.
   (H)   Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the
amount of tax due. (Ord. 2008-4194, 4-21-2008, eff. retroactive to 3-17-2008)
CHAPTER 12
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 96-2801, 8-5-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11 of this code.
CHAPTER 12.1
CABLE CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER
SERVICE STANDARDS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 96-2801, 8-5-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11 of this code.
CHAPTER 12.2
PROCEDURES FOR HEARINGS REGARDING CABLE
TELEVISION FRANCHISES 1
(Rep. by Ord. 96-2801, 8-5-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11 of this code.
CHAPTER 13
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
3-13-1: Definitions
3-13-2: License Required
3-13-3: Operator's License Fee; Proprietor's License Fee
3-13-4: Machine License Fee
3-13-5: Application For License
3-13-6: Increasing Number Of Devices
3-13-7: Evidence Of Ownership
3-13-8: Replays To Players
3-13-9: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-13-10: Number Of Licenses Issued
3-13-11: Hours Of Operation
3-13-12: Location
3-13-13: Direct Route Of Access
3-13-14: Insulation Required
3-13-15: Minimum Age Restrictions
3-13-16: Penalty
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
CHURCH: A church, synagogue, rectory, parish house or similar building
incidental to the particular use which is maintained and operated by an
organized group of people for religious purposes.
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or device which upon insertion of a
coin, slug, token, plate, disc or similar object, may be operated by the public
generally by manipulating special equipment whereby a score is established, the
object of which is to secure a special number or numbers or a total score,
whether a prize is offered or not.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who
sets up for the operation by another or leases or distributes for the purpose
of operation by another, any device as herein defined, whether such setting up
for the operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or
on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or
otherwise.
PLAYGROUND: An area or piece of land used for and equipped with facilities for
recreation especially by children, except for those which are accessory to a
private residence or a prekindergarten daycare facility.
PROPRIETOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club
who, as the owner, lessee, or proprietor has under his or its control any
establishment, place or premises or portion of any place or premises in or at
which such device, as is herein defined, is placed or kept for use or play, or
on exhibition for the purpose of use or play.
SCHOOL: Any school except a prekindergarten daycare facility, having regular
sessions with regularly employed teaching subjects which are fundamental and
essential for a general academic education, under the supervision of and in
accordance with the applicable statutes of the state. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981;
amd. Ord. 82-1056, 7-21-1982; Ord. 91-2131, 2-4-1991)
3-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club shall engage in
the business of an "operator" or "proprietor" of "coin operated amusement
devices", as the terms are defined, without first having obtained the proper
licenses therefor. (Ord. 82-1056, 7-21-1982)
3-13-3: OPERATOR'S LICENSE FEE; PROPRIETOR'S LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for each "operator" and each "proprietor" as herein defined
shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance. In the event that the
proprietor is not an operator, then the operator and proprietor shall apply
jointly for a license as is required in section
3-13-2 of this chapter. All said license fees shall be payable annually in
advance; provided, that where application is made after the expiration of any
portion of any license year, the license may be issued for the remainder
thereof upon payment of the annual fee. In no case shall any portion of said
license fee be repaid to the licensee. (Ord. 89-2004, 11-20-1989)
3-13-4: MACHINE LICENSE FEE:
Every proprietor shall obtain, in addition to an operator's license and a
proprietor's license, prior to setting up or making available to the public, a
license for each machine or device, as herein defined. The license fee shall be
as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each machine or device, as herein defined, set up or made
available for operation. All license fees shall be payable annually in advance;
provided, that where application is made after the expiration of any portion of
any license year, a license may be issued for the remainder thereof upon
payment of the annual fee. In no case shall any portion of said license fee be
refunded to the licensee. The machine or device licenses and all transfers
thereof shall be incorporated and made a part of the operator's and
proprietor's licenses issued in accordance herewith. A machine license may be
transferred to any other coin operated amusement device, so long as the
subsequent coin operated amusement device is used and maintained under the
operator's and proprietor's licenses as was the prior machine. (Ord. 89-2004,
11-20-1989; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-13-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   (A)   Application for licenses hereunder shall be filed in writing together
with the proper license fee with the business office manager, on a form to be
provided by the village and shall specify: (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989; amd. Ord.
94-2583, 9-19-1994)
      1.   Name and address of the applicant(s) if a person, and the name of
the principal officers and directors thereof if the applicant is a firm,
corporation, partnership, association or club.
      2.   Address of the premises where the licensed device or devices are to
be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such
place.
      3.   Trade name and general description of the device to be licensed, the
name of the manufacturer and the serial number and, if the applicant is a
proprietor, the number of devices to be licensed.
      4.   Name and address of the operator(s) of the devices(s), if other than
the proprietor(s). (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989)
      5.   A floor plan of the premises were the licensed device or devices are
to be located including a detail of the area of the premises to be used for the
location of the license or devices. The plan shall be sufficiently dimensioned
to show the gross square footage of the premises and the square footage of the
area in which the devices are to be located. (Ord. 90-2058, 7-2-1990)
      6.   All such other information as may be requested by the application
form as amended from time to time. (Ord. 98-2956, 2-2-1998)
   (B)   An application for a license hereunder shall be referred by the
business office manager to the chief of police and the building commissioner
for investigation of the premises and applicant to be licensed. The
investigation reports shall be forwarded to the business office manager for
review. Based on the application, investigations or any other available
information, the business office manager shall approve the application unless
he finds that: (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
      1.   Applicant, operator or proprietor is not of good character and
reputation in the community in which each resides or transacts business; or
      2.   Applicant, operator or proprietor has been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony under any federal or state law, unless such person
demonstrates that he has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
trust; or
      3.   Applicant, operator or proprietor has had a business license, which
was issued by the village, revoked, unless such person demonstrates through
clear and convincing evidence that a new license should be issued; or
      4.   Applicant, operator or proprietor is not in compliance with any
requirements of this chapter; or
      5.   Business of the applicant, operator or proprietor is conducted by a
manager or agent, and said manager or agent does not possess the same
qualifications required by the licensees; or
      6.   Applicant, operator or proprietor is a copartnership, and if any
general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more
than five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited partner interest in such
copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder; or
      7.   Applicant, operator or proprietor is a corporation, and if any
officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning
in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation,
would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder; or
      8.   Applicant, operator or proprietor is a corporation unless it is
incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is
qualified under the "business corporation act of 1983" to transact business in
Illinois. (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989)
   (C)   If the application is approved by the business office manager, the
license shall be issued and the business office manager shall remit the license
fee to the village treasurer. All licenses under this chapter shall expire on
December 31 following their issuance. The operator/proprietor's license shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. The
business office manager shall also furnish and there shall be prominently
displayed on and affixed to each device, a serially numbered decalcomania
sticker. All licenses shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, except as set
forth in section
3-13-4 of this chapter. All licenses shall apply only to the premises for which
such license is issued. No more than one device shall be operated under one
machine license.
   (D)   If the application is not approved by the business office manager, the
business office manager shall return the license fee and the business office
manager's findings to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the business
office manager's decision to the corporate authorities who shall review all the
information available and shall give the applicant notice and an opportunity to
be heard. The decision of the corporate authorities shall be final. The
decision to deny an application shall be based on one or more of the standards
set forth in subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989; amd. Ord.
94-2583, 9-19-1994)
   (E)   Application for renewal of licenses herein may be granted or denied in
the same manner as an original application. No license shall be renewed unless
information required and set forth by the applicant on the current license is
identical to the information set forth on the application for renewal. (Ord.
89-1884, 8-7-1989)
3-13-6: INCREASING NUMBER OF DEVICES:
In the event a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this chapter
desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase
the number of devices to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his
establishment, he shall surrender his license to the business office manager
who shall issue a new proprietor's license showing the number of devices
licensed thereunder, upon payment of the proper proprietor's license fee plus
the proper license fee together with the entire annual fee for each additional
machine or device. (Ord. 89-2004, 11-20-1989; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
3-13-7: EVIDENCE OF OWNERSHIP:
Any proprietor who owns such device or devices at the time this chapter becomes
effective shall file with the business office manager evidence of such
ownership prior to the issuance of a license; and any proprietor purchasing a
device or devices after the effective date of this chapter shall file with the
business office manager evidence of ownership thereof before exhibiting or
placing said device or devices for use or play. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981; amd.
Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
3-13-8: REPLAYS TO PLAYERS:
A proprietor, operator or person in charge of a coin operated amusement device
may permit free replays to players on the basis of the player's skill,
accumulated score, or any other means, and a machine may record or indicate
free replays; provided, however, no coin operated amusement device shall
provide or contain or have attached thereto a "knockoff" device or switch and
at no time, except at the close of the day's business, may such a proprietor,
operator or person eliminate free replays registered and remaining on any
device after use by any person. No evidence of entitlement to accumulated
games, or to play any device, nor cash, nor anything of value shall be given to
any person in acknowledgment of or for the accumulation of any score or replays
by any player. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981)
3-13-9: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The mayor shall have the right to revoke or suspend any license issued
hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter subject to
notice given and hearing conducted by said mayor. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981)
3-13-10: NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED:
The number of machine licenses issued to a proprietor for a specific building
or structure pursuant to this chapter shall be limited as follows:
   (A)   If the machines are in a room used exclusively for coin operated
amusement devices, the maximum number of licenses shall be derived from the
following calculation:
   Gross Floor Area -   Private Floor Area   = X
               2
      X     = Number of machine licenses
      250
The room used for such machines shall be less than thirty percent (30%) of X.
   (B)   If the machines are not in a room used exclusively for coin operated
amusement devices the maximum number of licenses shall be derived from the
following calculation:
   (Gross Floor Area - Private Floor Area) 0.25 = Y
      Y    = Number of licenses
      250
For the purpose of this section, "private floor area" shall mean that area not
available for public use. "Gross floor area" shall have the same meaning as
given in the building code 1 . (Ord. 97-2841, 2-3-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
3-13-11: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No coin operated devices shall be made available for operation to the public
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
Monday through Friday and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Saturdays and Sundays. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981)
3-13-12: LOCATION:
No coin operated amusement device shall be located or made available to the
public for operation within two hundred feet (200') of any church, school or
playground. (Ord. 2001-3360, 11-19-2001)
3-13-13: DIRECT ROUTE OF ACCESS:
No structure or building wherein four (4) or more coin operated amusement
devices are made available to the public for use or operation shall have a
direct route of access from the outside of such structure or building to the
room or rooms wherein any device is placed or located; provided, however, any
such structure shall in all respects, and in the event of any conflict with the
provisions hereof, conform with all building code 1  provisions applicable
hereof. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
3-13-14: INSULATION REQUIRED:
In addition to any other condition or regulation or statutes, the following
condition and regulation shall be applicable to and shall govern and control
the business of keeping or providing coin operated amusement devices for public
use within the village.
The walls, ceiling or floor, or any combination thereof, of the building or
structure, or portion thereof containing four (4) or more devices shall be
insulated or otherwise constructed so that no noise or vibration is detectable
without the aid of any mechanical device or instrument beyond the outer
perimeter of the licensed premises or such portion thereof. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-
1981)
3-13-15: MINIMUM AGE RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow any person under the age of
seventeen (17) years to use coin operated amusement devices or to be present in
a room used exclusively for such devices, unless such person is under the
direct supervision of a parent or guardian of such person. Further, signs
informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be
posted by every licensee at or near every room containing such devices. Each
sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
   The playing of coin-operated games, or the presence of persons under
seventeen years of age in the game room is prohibited by law, unless under
direct parent or guardian supervision.
(Ord. 97-2841, 2-3-1997)
3-13-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-
20-1996; amd. Ord. 97-2841, 2-3-1997; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 14
RAFFLES 1
SECTION:
3-14-1: Definitions
3-14-2: Limitations Or Terms Of The Raffle
3-14-3: Conditions Of Licenses
3-14-4: License; Application; Issuance Restrictions; Persons Eligible
3-14-5: Conduct Of Raffles
3-14-6: Raffles Manager; Bond
3-14-7: Records
3-14-8: License Fee
 
Notes
  1. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
1 9-4-2(O) of this code relating to gambling, raffles may be conducted in the
  village upon complying with the regulations of this chapter.
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who
have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic
interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to
schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
KEY LOCATION: For a raffle, the location where the winning chances in the
raffle are determined.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other operating expenses
incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for
profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
POKER RUN: A prize-awarding event organized by an organization required to be
licensed under this chapter in which participants travel to multiple
predetermined locations, including a key location, to play a randomized game
based on an element of chance. “Poker run” includes dice runs, marble runs, or
other events where the objective is to build the best hand or highest score by
obtaining an item or playing a randomized game at each location.
POLITICAL COMMITTEE: As that term is defined in the Illinois election code, 10
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1.8.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2
(b) of the "criminal code of 2012", conducted by an organization licensed under
this act, in which:
   (A)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   (B)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
SPLIT THE POT RAFFLE: Any raffle whereby the raffle chances are sold the same
day as the winners are determined, and the raffle prize is cash equal to a
portion of the total proceeds of the sale of the raffle chances.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012; amd. Ord. 2016-4647, 5-2-
2016; Ord. 2019-4849, 11-18-2019)
3-14-2: LIMITATIONS OR TERMS OF THE RAFFLE:
For the purpose of this chapter, raffles shall be conducted under the following
limitations:
   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle should not exceed the amount set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle
should not exceed the amount set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed the amount set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (D)   For raffles where the cost of a single chance is less than fifty
dollars ($50.00), the maximum number of days during which chances may be issued
or sold and winners determined shall not exceed one hundred eighty three (183)
days. For raffles where the cost of a single chance is fifty dollars ($50.00)
or more, the maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
and winners determined shall not exceed three hundred sixty five (365) days.
(Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012; amd. Ord. 2019-4849, 11-18-2019; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
3-14-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES:
Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor,
business, fraternal, educational, veterans', or other bona fide not-for-profit
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been
in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before
making application for a license and which have had during that entire five (5)
year period been engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a nonprofit
fundraising organization that has been organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident or disaster, to any law enforcement agencies and statewide
associations that represent law enforcement officials or to a political
committee that complies with 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/8.1 et seq. The
village board may waive the five-year requirement under this section for a bona
fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, or
veterans’ organization that applies for a raffle license if the organization is
a local organization that is affiliated with and chartered by a national or
State organization that meets the five-year requirement. (Ord. 2016-4647, 5-2-
2016; amd. Ord. 2019-4849, 11-18-2019)
3-14-4: LICENSE; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS; PERSONS ELIGIBLE:
An organization conducting a raffle for which the key location is the Village
of Lisle shall obtain a raffle license from the village. Poker runs are not
required to obtain a license from the village, but must comply with any DuPage
County licensing requirements.
Licenses issued shall be subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or organization shall sell raffle
chances, including door to door or face to face solicitation for the sale of
raffle chances, or determine raffle winners within the village without having
first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   The license and application for license must specify the area or areas
within the village in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time
period during which winning raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time or
times of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at
which winning chances will be determined.
   (C)   The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to
the not for profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed
by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization, and such other
information as may be requested by the application form as amended from time to
time.
   (D)   Each application and license shall be valid for one raffle, except for
split the pot raffles as defined in section
3-14-1 of this chapter. One application and license may cover up to fifteen
(15) split the pot raffles held during a period not to exceed one hundred
eighty three (183) days. Split the pot raffle license applications shall
provide specific dates and places for each raffle held within the one hundred
eighty three (183) day period.
   (E)   The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
      1.   Any person whose felony conviction will impair the person’s ability
to engage in the licensed position;
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or professional
gambling promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      4.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (E)1, (E)2,
or (E)3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such a person is active or employed;
      5.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (E)1, (E)2,
or (E)3 of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether
compensated or not; and
      6.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (E)1, (E)2,
or (E)3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
"raffle" as defined in this chapter.
   (F)   License applications for raffles where either the cost of a single
chance is equal to or greater than fifty dollars ($50.00), or the total value
of all prizes awarded for a single raffle event is equal to or greater than
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be placed on an agenda for approval
or denial by the village board of trustees. License applications for raffles
where the cost of a single chance is less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and the
total value of all prizes awarded is less than twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) may be approved or denied by the village manager or his or her
designee.
   (G)   Political committees applying to conduct a raffle shall at the time of
application present documentation verifying compliance with 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 15/8.1 et seq., including a raffle license approved by the
Illinois state board of elections.
   (H)   Such other information as the village manager or his or her designee
may reasonably require to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2012-
4459, 12-3-2012; amd. Ord. 2016-4647, 5-2-2016; Ord. 2019-4849, 11-18-2019)
3-14-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide director, officer, employee, or member of
the sponsoring organization may manager or participate in the management of the
raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for managing or
participating in the management of the raffle. Sponsoring organizations may
contract with third parties who, acting at the direction of and under the
supervision of the sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the
sponsoring organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may
pay reasonable compensation for such services. Such services may include the
following:
      1.   Advertising, marketing and promotion;
      2.   Legal;
      3.   Procurement of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose
of operating the raffle;
      4.   Rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented;
      5.   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping;
      6.   Website hosting;
      7.   Mailing and delivery;
      8.   Banking and payment processing; and
      9.   Other services relating to the operation of the raffle.
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle provided that the rent is not determined as a
percentage of receipts or profits from the raffle.
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold throughout the State, including beyond the
borders of the village. Winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.
   (F)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012; amd. Ord.
2019-4849, 11-18-2019)
3-14-6: RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND:
All management, operation, and conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The
manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the
village manager in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in
the performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice
shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior
to its cancellation. The bond requirement may be waived by the village board by
including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under
this chapter, provided that such waiver received the affirmative vote of the
requisite number of the members of the licensed organization, or, if the
licensed organization does not have members, or members of the governing board
of the organization, to constitute an affirmative action of the licensed
organization. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012; amd. Ord. 2019-4849, 11-18-2019)
3-14-7: RECORDS:
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state,
and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records
of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, or, if the organization
does not have the members, to its governing board, and to the village, its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of
net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be retained for three (3) years
after expiration of the raffle license, and organizations shall make available
their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at
reasonable times and places. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012; amd. Ord. 2019-4849,
11-18-2019)
3-14-8: LICENSE FEE:
The raffle license fee shall be as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012; amd. Ord. 2019-4849, 11-18-2019; Ord.
2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 15
INTERTRACK WAGERING LOCATIONS
SECTION:
3-15-1: Definition
3-15-2: Prohibition
3-15-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, an "intertrack wagering location" is defined as an
establishment licensed by the state of Illinois racing board to accept legal
wagering on the outcome of simultaneously televised horseraces taking place at
an Illinois racetrack or horseraces of national or international interest held
at racetracks in other states or countries. (Ord. 89-1991, 10-2-1989)
3-15-2: PROHIBITION:
Intertrack wagering locations are prohibited within the corporate limits of the
village. (Ord. 89-1991, 10-2-1989)
CHAPTER 16
TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS
AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES OR VAPE PRODUCTS
SECTION:
3-16-1: Legislative Finding And Declaration
3-16-2: Definitions
3-16-3: License Required
3-16-4: License Review And Approval Procedures
3-16-5: License Fee
3-16-6: Prohibited Sales And Purchases; Prohibited Access To Retail Tobacco
Stores
3-16-7: Vending Machines; Locking Devices
3-16-8: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-16-9: Suspension; Revocation Of License; Fines, Costs
3-16-10: Penalties
3-16-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDING AND DECLARATION:
The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees expressly find and declare that:
   (A)   Cigarette smoking, vaping and the use of electronic cigarettes are
dangerous to human health;
   (B)   There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco
products causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical disorders;
   (C)   The Surgeon General of the United States has declared that nicotine
addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine, and is the most
widespread example of drug dependence in this country;
   (D)   The Director of the National Institute On Drug Abuse concluded that
the majority of the three hundred twenty thousand (320,000) Americans who die
each year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents
before the age of legal consent;
   (E)   The National Institute On Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking
precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use; and
   (F)   The present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco
products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) has proven ineffective in
preventing such persons from using tobacco products; and the State Legislature
has recently enacted Public Act 101-0002, prohibiting sales of tobacco products
to persons under the age of twenty one (21).
The enactment of this chapter directly pertains to and is in furtherance of the
health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Village, particularly those
residents under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 2019-4828, 6-17-2019, eff.
7-1-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-2023)
3-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
                                      A retail establishment that derives less
                                      than 50 percent of its gross revenue from
                                      the sale of tobacco products, alternative
                                      nicotine products, or electronic
ACCESSORY TOBACCO DEALER:             cigarette or vape products as defined in
                                      this Chapter and devotes less than 50
                                      percent of its merchandise display area
                                      within the store for tobacco products,
                                      alternative nicotine products, electronic
                                      cigarette or vape products.
                                      A product or device not consisting of or
                                      containing tobacco that provides for the
                                      ingestion into the body of nicotine,
                                      whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing,
                                      dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing,
                                      or by any other means. "Alternative
                                      nicotine product" excludes cigarettes,
                                      smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT:         products as these terms are defined in
                                      this section and any product approved by
                                      the United States Food and Drug
                                      Administration as a nontobacco product
                                      for sale as a tobacco cessation product,
                                      as a tobacco dependence product, or for
                                      other medical purposes, and is being
                                      marketed and sold solely for that
                                      approved purpose.
                                      Facility providing care, protection and
                                      supervision for children or adults on a
                                      regular basis away from their primary
                                      residence for less than 24 hours per day.
                                      Examples include state-licensed day care
CHILDCARE FACILITY:                   centers, preschools, nursery schools,
                                      head start programs, after-school
                                      programs and adult day care facilities.
                                      Day care expressly includes state-
                                      accredited adult day care facilities and
                                      facilities for childcare, as defined in
                                      the Illinois Child Care Act.
                                      A group home or specialized residential
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FACILITY:         care home serving persons with
                                      disabilities.
                                      Any electronic device that provides a gas
                                      or vapor derived from nicotine and/or
                                      other chemicals intended for inhalation
                                      and any cartridge or container of a
                                      solution or substance intended to be used
                                      with or in the device or to refill the
                                      device, and any solution, whether or not
                                      it contains nicotine intended for use in
                                      the device. The term electronic cigarette
                                      or vape includes electronic cigars,
                                      electronic pipes, electronic hookah
                                      pipes, vape pens, advanced personal
                                      vaporizers, box mods or other devices
                                      capable of delivering aerosolized
                                      nicotine or other chemicals through
                                      inhalation. "Electronic cigarette" does
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR VAPE PRODUCT: not include: tobacco products as defined
                                      in this section, alternative tobacco
                                      products as defined in this section, any
                                      product approved by the United States
                                      Food and Drug Administration as a
                                      nontobacco product for sale as a tobacco
                                      cessation product, as a tobacco
                                      dependence product, or for other medical
                                      purposes, and is being marketed and sold
                                      solely for that approved purpose; any
                                      asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician
                                      for that condition and is being marketed
                                      and sold solely for that approved
                                      purpose; or any therapeutic product
                                      approved for use under the Compassionate
                                      Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
                                      Act.
                                      A place where literary, educational,
                                      artistic, and/or reference materials such
                                      as books, periodicals, and digital
                                      content are kept for use or public
                                      lending as defined by the Illinois
                                      Library System Act (75 ILCS 10/), as
LIBRARY:                              amended. This term includes targeted
                                      services and programs with the mission of
                                      educating, informing, and/or entertaining
                                      a variety of patrons/audiences. Libraries
                                      are controlled by a unit of local
                                      government, academic institution, non-
                                      profit, or may be privately controlled.
                                      Facility for recreational, social or
                                      multi-purpose uses associated with public
                                      parks or open spaces controlled by a unit
PARK:                                 of local government, including
                                      playgrounds, playfields, play courts,
                                      public swimming pools, aquatic recreation
                                      facilities.
                                      A retail establishment that derives more
                                      than 50 percent of its gross revenue from
                                      the sale of tobacco products, alternative
                                      nicotine products, electronic cigarette
PRIMARY TOBACCO DEALER:               or vape products as defined in this
                                      Chapter or devotes 50 percent or more of
                                      its merchandise display area within the
                                      store for tobacco products, alternative
                                      nicotine products, electronic cigarette
                                      or vape products.
                                      Any institution that provides basic,
                                      compulsory state-mandated education at
SCHOOL:                               the primary, elementary, junior high or
                                      high school level. The term school
                                      includes both public and private schools.
                                      Any substance containing tobacco leaf,
                                      including, but not limited to,
                                      cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff,
TOBACCO PRODUCTS:                     chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco,
                                      including pipes, smoking devices, or
                                      paraphernalia for the burning or
                                      consumption of tobacco.
                                      Any mechanical, electric or electronic,
                                      self-service device, which, upon
                                      insertion of money, tokens or any other
VENDING MACHINE:                      form of payment, dispenses tobacco
                                      products. (Ord. 2019-4828, 6-17-2019,
                                      eff. 7-1-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-
                                      2023)
 
3-16-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver
or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering
any tobacco products, alternative nicotine product, and/or electronic cigarette
or vape product within the Village without having first obtained a primary or
accessory tobacco dealer's license pursuant to this chapter. Said license shall
be in addition to any other license required by this Code. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-
18-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-2023)
3-16-4: LICENSE REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Application Filing: Application for a license hereunder shall be made
in writing and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
   (B)   Determination of Licenses Issued and Approval Authority: The Mayor and
Village Board of Trustees shall determine the number of primary and accessory
tobacco dealer's licenses to be issued and shall serve as the final decision
making authority in determining to grant or deny a requested license.
   (C)   Standards and Review Criteria: The following factors may be considered
by the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees when determining to grant or deny a
requested license:
      1.   The advisability of granting such license in view of the public good
and convenience of the village;
      2.   The length of time an applicant has been operating as an entity or
business in the village or elsewhere;
      3.   The experience or history of the applicant with the village,
including the prevalence or lack of contacts with the police department, fire
department, code enforcement department, or any other enforcement body of the
federal, state or county governments;
      4.   The relevance of a tobacco license for successful operation of the
business;
      5.   The applicant's previous experience with the handling of tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or electronic cigarette or vape
products, including prior violations of municipal, state or federal laws,
statutes or ordinances;
      6.   The neighborhood in which such licensed establishment is to be
operated, and the potential impact on such neighborhood if a tobacco license is
granted;
      7.   Surrounding uses of the location the licensed establishment is to be
operated, and the propensity of those surrounding uses to serve or attract
persons under the age of 21.
      8.   The geographical distribution of licenses in the village;
      9.   The number of licenses in the village;
      10.   Input from village staff members and the police department as to
the likely impact of the establishment on the community; and
      11.   Any other factors which may be relevant to the issuance of such
license
   (D)   Term of License: Each license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
terminate on December 31 following the date of its issuance.
   (E)   Expiration or Surrender of License: In the event a license is not
renewed at the expiration thereof or is otherwise surrendered by the licensee
at any time, the license will no longer be available for issuance without
approval of the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees. Nothing in this section
shall prevent the Mayor and Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of
licenses issued in the Village or shall be construed as creating a vested right
in the issuance of a license.
   (F)   Revocation of License: In the event a license is revoked, the license
will no longer be available for issuance without approval of the Mayor and
Village Board of Trustees. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Mayor and
Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses issued in the Village
or shall be construed as creating a vested right in the issuance of a license.
(Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-2023)
3-16-5: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for a primary or accessory tobacco dealer's license shall be as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; amd.
Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-2023)
3-16-6: PROHIBITED SALES AND PURCHASES; PROHIBITED ACCESS TO RETAIL TOBACCO
STORES:
   (A)   Sale to Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person, including any
licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes or vape products, and alternative nicotine products to
any person under the age of twenty one (21) years. Further, signs informing the
public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every
licensee at or near every display of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or
vape products and alternative nicotine products and on or upon every vending
machine which offers tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or vape products,
and alternative nicotine products for sale. Each sign shall be plainly visible
and shall state:
      THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES OR VAPE PRODUCTS, AND
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW
   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
   (B)   Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products, Electronic Cigarettes or Vape
Products, And Alternative Nicotine Products: It shall be unlawful for any
licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee
of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under twenty one (21)
years of age to sell tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or vape products,
and alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises; provided, that the
temporary handling of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or vape products,
and alternative nicotine products by a person under twenty one (21) years of
age in the course of the sale of other nontobacco goods shall not be prohibited
if said person is under the immediate and direct supervision of an employee
twenty one (21) years of age or older and if said employee completes the
transaction.
   (C)   Purchase by Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years to purchase tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or
vape products, and alternative nicotine products, or to misrepresent their
identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose
of purchasing tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or vape products, and
alternative nicotine products.
   (D)   Possession By Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to possess any tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or vape products, and alternative nicotine products; provided, that
the possession by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years under the
direct supervision of a parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the
parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. Further, the temporary
handling of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or vape products, and
alternative nicotine products by a person under twenty one (21) years of age in
the course of the sale of other nontobacco goods shall not be prohibited if
said person is under the immediate and direct supervision of an employee twenty
one (21) years of age or older and if said employee completes the transaction.
   (E)   Location Restrictions:
      1.   No primary tobacco dealer location shall be located within 2,500
feet of any other primary tobacco license location, nor shall any primary
tobacco license be located with 1,250 feet of any school, childcare facility,
community residence facility, park or library.
         (a)   Distances shall be measured from property line to property line.
      2.   No accessory tobacco dealer location shall be located within 100
feet of any school, childcare facility, community residence facility, park or
library.
         (a)   Distances shall be measured from property line to property line.
   (F)   Free Distributions: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any
person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or
advertising tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or vape products, and
alternative nicotine products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or
person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to distribute,
give away or deliver tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or vape products,
and alternative nicotine products free of charge to any person on any right-of-
way, park, playground or other property owned by the Village, any school
district, any park district or any public library.
   (G)   Minors Entering Tobacco Stores: Persons under the age of twenty one
(21) are prohibited from entering the premises of retail tobacco, electronic
cigarette or vape products, and alternative nicotine product stores, as that
term is defined in subsection
8-1-2(A) of this Code, and whereby smoking is permitted under subsection
8-1-2(C)5 of this Code. Further, signs informing the public of this age
restriction shall be posted at each entrance stating the following:
      PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE ARE PROHIBITED BY VILLAGE ORDINANCE
FROM ENTERING THIS PLACE OF BUSINESS
   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 2019-4828, 6-17-2019, eff. 7-
1-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-2023)
3-16-7: VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or
delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or vape products, and
alternative nicotine products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending
machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device
controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the
age of twenty one (21) years.
   (B)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of
businesses located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements set
forth above. (Ord. 2019-4828, 6-17-2019, eff. 7-1-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-4995, 2-
6-2023)
3-16-8: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord.
2019-4808, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-2023)
3-16-9: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES, COSTS:
The Mayor shall be charged with the administration of this chapter. The Mayor
may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter,
if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the Mayor may
instead levy a fine on the licensee for a first offense. A second offense shall
result in mandatory revocation. No license shall be suspended or revoked and no
licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Mayor with a seven
(7) day written notice to the licensee, affording the licensee an opportunity
to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven
(7) day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified
mail or by personal service.
The Mayor shall within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines
after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the
licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written
order and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the
license has been revoked and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7)
days upon the licensee.
Any licensee determined by the Mayor to have violated any of the provisions of
this chapter shall pay to the Village the costs of the hearing before the Mayor
on such violation. The Mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the Village
for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporter fees, the costs
of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing
notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village
or such lesser sum as the Mayor may allow.
The licensee shall pay said costs to the Village within thirty (30) days of
notification of the costs by the Village. Failure to pay said costs within
thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be
cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. (Ord. 2019-
4808, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-2023)
3-16-10: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
violator to penalties and late fees as enumerated in
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-4995, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 17
FRAUDULENT SALES
SECTION:
3-17-1: Purpose
3-17-2: Definitions
3-17-3: License Required; Fee
3-17-4: Transfer
3-17-5: Application For License
3-17-6: Duration Of License
3-17-7: Posting; Advertisements
3-17-8: Certain Purchases Prohibited
3-17-9: Revocation Of License
3-17-10: Penalty; Enforcement
3-17-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter are intended to provide compliance with "the
fraudulent sales act", 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes 350/0.01 et seq., as
amended. The provisions of the act are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord.
99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, the words and phrases
herein shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them:
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: Any sale, whether described by such name or by any
other name (such as, but not limited to, "closing out sale", "liquidation
sale", "lost our lease sale", "forced to vacate sale"), held in such a manner
as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the
business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is
conducted.
GOODS: Includes all goods, wares, merchandise and other personal property,
excepting legal claims and cash.
PERSON: Includes a person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or two
(2) or more persons having a joint or common interest.
REMOVAL SALE: Any sale held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon
disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted, and thereafter will
be moved to and occupy another location. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
No person shall directly or indirectly advertise or cause to be advertised,
represent or cause to be represented, or hold out to the public in any manner
that any sale of goods is an insurance, salvage, removal, going out of
business, insolvent's, assignee's, or creditor's sale of goods, or that it is a
sale of goods which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise,
unless such person shall first have obtained a license to conduct such sale. No
license shall be required for those sales exempt under section 3 of the
fraudulent sales act.
The fee for a license shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” and no license shall be issued except upon payment of this fee. (Ord.
2002-3425, 11-4-2002; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-17-4: TRANSFER:
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or converted. (Ord.
99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for licenses shall be made to the village clerk in writing and
shall state the name of the applicant, the location to be used, contents and
inventory, and all such other information as may be requested on the
application form as amended from time to time. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-6: DURATION OF LICENSE:
A license to conduct a sale issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period not to exceed sixty (60) days from the start of such sale. Such license
may be renewed once for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days upon affidavit
of the licensee that the goods listed in the inventory have not been disposed
of and that no new goods have been or will be added to the inventory previously
filed. The application for renewal of the license shall be made not more than
fourteen (14) days prior to the time of the expiration of the license and shall
contain a new inventory of the goods remaining on hand at the time the
application for renewal is made, which new inventory shall be prepared and
furnished in the same manner and form as the original inventory. No renewal
shall be granted if any goods have been added to the inventory since the date
of the issuance of the license. A fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” shall accompany the request for renewal of the license. (Ord. 2005-
3905, 3-21-2005; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-17-7: POSTING; ADVERTISEMENTS:
A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale including the
inventory filed therewith, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
salesroom or place where the goods are to be sold. A duplicate copy of the
license shall be attached to the front door of the premises where the sale is
conducted in such a manner that it be clearly visible from the street.
Any advertisement or announcement published in connection with the sale shall
conspicuously state on its face the number of the license and the date of its
expiration. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-8: CERTAIN PURCHASES PROHIBITED:
There shall be no substitution for or addition to goods described in the
inventory filed or any change in the time or place for a sale conducted. In the
case of a sale of damaged goods, the goods to be sold shall be clearly marked
or identified as damaged as required by section 10 of the fraudulent sales act.
No goods may be purchased in contemplation of a sale, as provided in section 10
of the fraudulent sales act. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The mayor may revoke any license issued hereunder for a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, subject to notice and an opportunity to be heard.
(Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-10: PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of this act shall be as provided in sections 10, 10.5 and 11 of the
fraudulent sales act. Any violation of these provisions shall be reported to
the state's attorney of DuPage County and the attorney general of the state of
Illinois. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
CHAPTER 18
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-18-1: Definitions
3-18-2: Prohibited Except By Licensed Medical Practitioner
3-18-3: Records To Be Maintained
3-18-4: Prohibitions
3-18-5: Fees
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
BODY PIERCING: Puncturing the skin for the purpose of making a permanent hole
or scar, but does not include acupuncture, injection of medication, or any
other process carried out for medical or therapeutic purposes.
LICENSED MEDICAL PRACTITIONER: A licensed physician, osteopath, registered
nurse or chiropractor.
TATTOOING: Puncturing the skin with a needle, pin, pen or other device for the
purpose of placing ink, dye or other foreign substance in or under the skin to
make a permanent mark, design, symbol, letter, or figure. (Ord. 2003-3444, 2-3-
2003)
3-18-2: PROHIBITED EXCEPT BY LICENSED MEDICAL PRACTITIONER:
No person other than a licensed medical practitioner, or a person acting under
the direct supervision of a licensed medical practitioner, shall engage in the
business of tattooing or body piercing. (Ord. 2003-3444, 2-3-2003)
3-18-3: RECORDS TO BE MAINTAINED:
Any person engaged in the business of tattooing or body piercing shall maintain
a record of each customer, including name, home address and date of birth. Such
record shall be maintained for not less than five (5) years and must be made
available to the business office manager upon request. (Ord. 2003-3444, 2-3-
2003)
3-18-4: PROHIBITIONS:
No person shall engage in tattooing or body piercing on a person who is:
   (A)   Under the age of eighteen (18), except in the presence of and with the
written consent of, a parent or legal guardian;
   (B)   Under the influence of alcohol or drugs; or
   (C)   Suffering from any infection or communicable disease. (Ord. 2003-3444,
2-3-2003)
3-18-5: FEES:
Each application for a tattooing and body piercing establishment license shall
be accompanied by a license fee in the amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2005-3912, 3-21-2005; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 19
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-19-1: Purpose And Findings
3-19-2: Definitions
3-19-3: Business License Required
3-19-4: Employee License Required
3-19-5: Business License Application
3-19-6: Issuance Of Business License
3-19-7: Employee License Application
3-19-8: Issuance Of Employee License
3-19-9: Fees
3-19-10: Expiration And Renewal Of License
3-19-11: Suspension
3-19-12: Revocation
3-19-13: Appeal Rights
3-19-14: Transfer Of License
3-19-15: Additional Regulations
3-19-16: Penalty
3-19-17: Injunction
3-19-18: Effect Of Partial Invalidity
3-19-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
   (A)   Title: This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the LISLE
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSING ORDINANCE, and is also referred to herein
as this chapter.
   (B)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses within the municipality in order to promote the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. The provisions
of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or
communication, including sexually oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not
the purpose nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented entertainment protected by the first amendment, or to deny
access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to
their intended market. Furthermore, it is not the intent or effect of this
chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution or exhibition of
entertainment that is obscene.
   (C)   Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of sexually oriented businesses presented to the municipality from findings
incorporated in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120
S.Ct. 1382 (2000); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of
Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini
Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Berg v. Health and Hospital Corporation, 865 F.2d
797 (7th Cir. 1989); Ellwest Stereo Theaters v. Wenner, 681 F.2d 1243 (9th Cir.
1982); Bamon Corp v. City of Dayton, 730 F.Supp. 80 (S.D. Ohio, 1990); and EWAP
Inc. v. City of Los Angeles, 97 Cal.App. 3d 179, 158 Cal.Rptr. (1979), and on
studies in other cities including the "Report Of The Attorney General's Working
Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses" (Minnesota, 1989);
"Memorandum Re: Adult Entertainment Ordinance", of the assistant chief of
police of Tucson, Arizona (May 1, 1990); Hecht, Peter R., Ph.D., "Report To The
American Center For Law And Justice On The Secondary Impacts Of Sex Oriented
Businesses" (March 31, 1996); "Adult Entertainment Businesses In Indianapolis,
An Analysis" (1984) and McCleary, Richard, Ph.D., and Meeker, James W., Ph.D.,
"Final Report To The City Of Garden Grove: The Relationship Between Crime And
Adult Business Operations On Garden Grove Boulevard", (Garden Grove,
California, October 23, 1991), this legislative body finds:
      1.   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary, unlawful
and unhealthy activities.
      2.   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or rooms for viewing films, videos, or live sexually
oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable
diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
      3.   Offering sexually oriented entertainment under conditions that
encourage such activities creates unhealthy conditions.
      4.   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part because of the failure of owners and operators to regulate
those activities and maintain their facilities.
      5.   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view sexually oriented
films concealed from public view.
      6.   The findings noted in subsections (C)1 through (C)5 of this section
raise compelling and substantial governmental concerns.
      7.   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics, which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those compelling and
substantial governmental concerns.
      8.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of
sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a
heretofore nonexistent incentive on operators to see that sexually oriented
businesses are run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare
of patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the municipality. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business, and fully in possession and control
of the premises and activities occurring therein.
      9.   The regulation of nudity, seminudity, and physical contact between
employees and patrons in sexually oriented businesses will further the
compelling and substantial governmental interests in preventing prostitution
and other sex related crimes, including illegal sex acts, and protecting the
public health, safety, and welfare.
      10.   Requiring open sight lines in sexually oriented businesses and
requiring sufficient lighting will advance the compelling and substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in sexually oriented businesses and will facilitate enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter and other federal, state and local laws, thereby
furthering the compelling and substantial governmental interest in protecting
the public health, safety, and welfare.
      11.   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of sexually oriented
businesses, and by employees of such businesses, will facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other federal, state and
local laws, and will thereby further the compelling and substantial government
interest in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
      12.   A person who recently has been convicted of a sexually related
crime is not an appropriate individual to operate or be employed in a sexually
oriented business.
      13.   Barring such individuals from the management of and employment in
sexually oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and
prevents the commission of sexually related criminal acts, including conduct
which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. (Ord. 2004-
3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
EMPLOYEE: A natural person who performs any service or work on the premises of
a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or
performing support functions, on a full time, part time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent, or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include
a person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the premises
or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
EMPLOYEE STATION: An area on the premises of a sexually oriented business
designated for occupancy exclusively by one or more employees whose duties
include assuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The village manager of the village of Lisle or his or her
designee.
EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS: Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and
menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a public
or employee only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are intended
to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial purpose. It
shall not mean lactation as part of breast feeding an infant, unless performed
or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the
art, science or technique of breast feeding an infant.
LICENSEE: With respect to a sexually oriented business license issued under
this chapter, a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual(s) designated on the
license application as principally responsible for the operation of the
sexually oriented business. With respect to a sexually oriented business
employee license issued under this chapter, licensee means a natural person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually
oriented business.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Lisle, Illinois.
NUDITY OR NUDE: Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device,
costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any specified
anatomical areas.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED: To control or hold primary responsibility for
the operation of a sexually oriented business, either as a business entity, as
an individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared responsibility.
It shall also mean to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A
person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually
oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or
licensee of the business.
OPERATOR: Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business.
PATRON: Any natural person who is not an employee.
PERSON: A natural person, proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
company, firm, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or
combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
SEMINUDITY OR SEMINUDE: Exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque
covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any
portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion
of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or
other clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the following when done in a place where the
public is invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial purpose
including sale and rental, regardless of who pays or receives the consideration
therefor, and regardless of the form of consideration:
   (A)   Exhibition or display of a natural person or people in the state of
nudity or seminudity, or engaged in specified sexual activities or excretory
functions;
   (B)   Premises with a sexually oriented amusement device;
   (C)   Rental or leasing of a hotel room, motel room or similar room for a
period not exceeding ten (10) hours, but not including dining rooms, banquet
rooms, ballrooms, conference rooms and similar facilities unless they are used
or to be used for specified sexual activities or excretory functions;
   (D)   Offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between natural persons of the opposite sex, when one or more of the persons is
nude or seminude, and also the offering of physical contact which constitutes
specified sexual activities regardless of the sex of the person performing or
receiving the contact;
   (E)   Offering of products, services or activities by or with a natural
person or people when one or more of the people, whether a patron, agent,
employee or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
   (F)   Displaying or offering to others any recorded depiction of a natural
person, or created image or character, as in cartoons and animation, by any
medium, including, without limitation, film, videotape, closed circuit
television, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy
disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software,
which is:
      1. Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas; or
      2. Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized
or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas,
including, without limitation, the use of the term "adult" and the use of the
designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX";
   (G)   The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments, devices,
or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any of
the specified anatomical areas.
   (H)   The term sexually oriented business shall exclude the following:
      1.   The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicide or other
nonprescription contraceptives, unless displayed and offered to others on the
premises of a business which would otherwise be considered a sexually oriented
business;
      2.   The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or devices
which require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities, and which are in fact dispensed by or under
the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois;
      3.   The display and offering to others of instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified
sexual activities if they are displayed and offered to others on the premises
where a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois is employed to dispense
prescription drugs, instruments or devices;
      4.   Breast feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a
commercial purpose other than education and training in the art, science or
technique of breast feeding an infant;
      5.   The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any
format, which have received a rating from the Motion Picture Association of
America of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed substantially in
their entirety;
      6.   Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal, state
or local governmental funds;
      7.   The display and offering to others of items which would otherwise
qualify as a sexually oriented business pursuant to this section, if and only
if the display and offering are done for a commercial purpose, and all of the
following apply to the business displaying and offering such items to others:
         (a)   Less than twenty percent (20%) of its gross income comes from
the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:
            (1)   Items which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, and
            (2)   Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the
public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or
specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including, without
limitation, the use of the term "adult" and the use of the designation of one
or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX"; and
         (b)   Less than twenty percent (20%) of its display space is used for
the sale, rental or exhibition of the items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1)
and (H)7(a)(2) of this definition; and
         (c)   Less than twenty percent (20%) of the items it offers to others
are the items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1) and (H)7(a)(2) of this
definition; and
         (d)   The items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1) and (H)7(a)(2) of
this definition are segregated from all other displays and retail areas of the
premises by a solid partition from floor to ceiling with no openings or windows
and with entrance and egress by means of a solid door posted with a sign not
less than one foot by one foot (1' x 1') with the words "UNDER 18 NOT ADMITTED"
lettered on the sign, except that magazines characterized or distinguished by
an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities,
excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof
may be displayed on racks or other display cases only if the magazine is
encased or otherwise covered up and concealed from common view of anything
other than the magazine title or text or other materials which would not be
described as sexually oriented;
         (e)   Certain uses which fall within this definition may also
constitute uses which are illegal under local, state or federal law, such as
obscenity or child pornography. Even if such illegal uses constitute a sexually
oriented business under the definition set forth herein, they shall not be
permitted uses in any district.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the female
breast if less than fully and opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. In
determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy are fully and
opaquely covered, coverage by makeup, paint, or similar matter applied directly
to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: (A) Any of the following offenses, as set forth in
the Illinois criminal code of 1961, as amended, or any substantially similar
offenses to those set forth below under the criminal or penal code of any local
jurisdiction, state, country, or international law: indecent solicitation of a
child, indecent solicitation of an adult, adultery, fornication, public
indecency, sexual exploitation of a child, custodial sexual misconduct,
presence within school zone by child sex offenders prohibited, sexual relations
within families, bigamy, marrying a bigamist, prostitution, solicitation of a
sexual act, soliciting for a prostitute, soliciting for a juvenile prostitute,
pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, keeping a place of juvenile
prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, patronizing a juvenile prostitute,
pimping, juvenile pimping, exploitation of a child, obscenity, child
pornography, commercial film and photographic print processor - reports,
harmful material, tie in sales of obscene publications to distributors,
criminal sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual assault, predatory criminal
sexual assault of a child, criminal sexual abuse, aggravated criminal sexual
abuse, criminal transmission of HIV, ritualized abuse of a child, female
genital mutilation, violation of the sex offender registration act, stalking
(if the basis of the conviction is the threat of immediate or future sexual
assault, or placing a person in reasonable apprehension of immediate or future
sexual assault), first degree murder (if the basis for the conviction is 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1(a)(3), commonly known as felony murder, where
the predicate felony is any felony otherwise set forth in this definition),
burglary (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony
otherwise set forth in this definition), residential burglary (if the basis for
the conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this
definition), armed violence (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to
commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), attempt to commit
any of the foregoing crimes, conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing crimes,
and any other felony or misdemeanor for which an element of the offense is the
commission of any of the foregoing crimes or an intent to commit any of the
foregoing crimes.
   (B)   For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor, business
offense or petty offense; or 2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not prevent such
conviction from constituting a specified criminal activity as defined herein.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following, whether actual or simulated:
   (A)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area,
perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female
breasts, regardless of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a
state of nudity or in a state of seminudity;
   (B)   The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by
the use of any portion of manipulator's body, whether covered or uncovered, or
by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or the person
receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
   (C)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual,
including, without limitation, intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, analingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism,
and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
   (D)   Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or
with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: (A) The sale,
lease, or sublease of the business;
   (B)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   (C)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfers
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
sexually oriented business license issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter.
   (B)   No person shall, in connection with operating a sexually oriented
business, retain the services of a person as an employee who is not licensed as
a sexually oriented business employee by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-4: EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall act as an employee on the premises of a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-5: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION:
   (A)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
submitted to the municipality's business office manager on a form provided by
the enforcement officer. The application may request and the applicant shall
provide such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to
enable the municipality to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications established in this chapter.
   (B)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall identify
the following persons and be signed under oath by said persons that the
information contained therein is true:
      1.   If the business entity is a sole proprietorship, that sole
proprietor;
      2.   If the business entity is a corporation, each officer and director
of the corporation and each individual with a ten percent (10%) or greater
ownership interest in the corporation;
      3.   If the business entity is a partnership, each general partner, and
each limited partner who owns ten percent (10%) or more of total limited
partnership interest;
      4.   If the business is a limited liability company, each manager, and
each member with a ten percent (10%) or greater ownership interest in the
company. If the limited liability company does not have any managers, then each
member.
   (C)   An application for a sexually oriented business license must designate
one or more natural persons who are to be principally responsible for the
operation of the proposed sexually oriented business, if a license is granted.
At least one natural person so designated must be involved in the day to day
operation of the proposed sexually oriented business on a regular basis. Each
natural person so designated, as well as the business entity itself, shall be
considered a license applicant, must qualify as a licensee under this chapter,
and shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
   (D)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
completed according to the instructions of the application form, which shall
require the following:
      1.   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, state the legal name, date of birth, home
address, home phone number, social security number, driver's license number,
and any aliases of such individual;
         (b)   A partnership, state the complete name of the partnership and
all of its partners and whether the partnership is general or limited, and
provide a copy of the partnership agreement, if any, and the information
specified in subsection (A) of this section for each partner;
         (c)   A corporation, state the complete name of the corporation and
the date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and of Illinois, and
state the names and capacity of all officers and directors, all persons owning
ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of the corporation, the name of the
registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for
service of process, and the information specified in subsection (A) of this
section for each officer, director and owner of ten percent (10%) or more of
the stock;
         (d)   A limited liability company, state the complete name of the
company and the date of its organization, provide evidence that the company is
in good standing under the laws of its state of organization and of Illinois,
and state the names and capacity of all members, owners and managers, the name
of the registered agent, and the address of the registered office for service
of process, and the information specified in subsection (A) of this section for
each member, owner and manager.
      2.   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, state the fictitious name to be
used and submit copies of documentation evidencing the registration of the
business's name under applicable laws.
      3.   State whether any applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the
date, place, and jurisdiction of each such conviction.
      4.   State whether any applicant has had a previous license under this
chapter or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction denied, suspended
or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business
for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
the denial, suspension or revocation; and state whether the applicant has been
a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or ten percent (10%) or
greater owner of a corporation, or a member or manager of a limited liability
company, licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the business for which
the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation.
      5.   State whether any applicant holds any other licenses under this
chapter or other similar regulation from this or another jurisdiction and, if
so, the names and locations of other such licensed businesses.
      6.   State the nature of the sexually oriented business for which the
applicant is filing.
      7.   State the location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property (i.e., block and lot), street
address, telephone number(s), e-mail address and internet web site URL, if any.
      8.   State the mailing address of each applicant and each person signing
the application.
      9.   For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and identify the
location of any tattoos on such person's face, arms, legs, or hands, or any
other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such person is on the
premises of the proposed sexually oriented business.
      10.   Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural person is at
least eighteen (18) years old.
      11.   Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises of the sexually oriented business, including the location of all
stages, walls, partitions, designated sales areas, bookcases, and patron
seating, and a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the sexually oriented business
license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. The sketch or diagram need
not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus one foot (±1').
      12.   Confirmation of applicant's citizenship, place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-
17-2004)
3-19-6: ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a sexually oriented
business license, the municipality's business office manager shall immediately
file a copy of the completed application with the enforcement officer.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business license, the enforcement officer, or any peace officer
designated by the enforcement officer, shall promptly investigate the
information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of
the applicants and shall record the results of the investigation in writing
within five (5) days of the completion of the investigation. If the
investigation is done by a peace officer designated by the enforcement officer,
then the written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the
enforcement officer within five (5) days of the completion of the
investigation.
   (C)   Within five (5) days of receipt of a copy of a completed application
for a sexually oriented business license, the enforcement officer shall notify
the municipality's fire chief and building department of such application. In
making such notification, the enforcement officer shall request that the fire
chief and the building department promptly inspect the premises for which the
sexually oriented business license is sought to assess compliance with the
regulations under their respective jurisdictions.
   (D)   The fire chief shall provide to the enforcement officer a written
certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the fire code
within five (5) days of completing the inspection.
   (E)   The building department shall provide the enforcement officer a
written certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the
building code, the planning and zoning code, and the provisions of this chapter
related to physical characteristics of the premises within five (5) days of
completing the inspection.
   (F)   The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless the enforcement officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
      1.   An applicant is a natural person under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or has
provided false information.
      3.   An applicant has been denied a sexually oriented business license or
has had a license to operate a sexually oriented business revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months by any jurisdiction.
      4.   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
      5.   The proposed sexually oriented business or the premises on which it
would operate would violate or fail to be in compliance with any provisions of
the zoning code, the provisions of this chapter related to physical
characteristics of the premises, or any state or federal law.
      6.   The application and investigation fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.
      7.   An applicant is otherwise in violation of or is not in compliance
with any provision of this chapter.
      8.   An applicant is not a citizen of the United States.
   (G)   If the enforcement officer determines that no grounds for denial of a
license exist under this section, the enforcement officer shall not delay
approval of the application.
   (H)   A sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its
face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration
date, and the address of the licensed sexually oriented business. All sexually
oriented business licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near
the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read at any time.
   (I)   The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either
served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class postage
prepaid. The enforcement officer may, but is not required to serve the written
license denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2004-
3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-7: EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION:
   (A)   An application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall
be submitted to the municipality's business office manager on a form provided
by the enforcement officer. The application may request and the applicant shall
provide such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to
enable the municipality to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications established in this chapter.
   (B)   An application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall
be completed according to the instructions of the application form, signed by
the applicant under oath that the information contained therein is true, and
shall require the following:
      1.   State the applicant's name and any other names (including "stage"
names) or aliases used by the applicant.
      2.   State the applicant's date and place of birth.
      3.   State the applicant's height, weight, and hair and eye color.
      4.   Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the applicant's
face, arms, legs, or hands, or any other anatomical area that normally would be
visible when the applicant is on the premises of the proposed sexually oriented
business.
      5.   State the applicant's present and intended business address and
telephone number, identifying the sexually oriented business at which the
applicant intends employment.
      6.   Submit proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years old.
      7.   Provide a statement detailing the sexually oriented business
employee license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such
applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate a sexually oriented
business, in this or any other jurisdiction, and whether the applicant has ever
had a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business
employee license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or
suspended by this or any other jurisdiction. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or
suspension. Attach a copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension.
      8.   State whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the
date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction, and the date of release
from confinement, if any, for such conviction.
      9.   State applicant's home address, home phone number, social security
number, and driver's license number. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-8: ISSUANCE OF EMPLOYEE LICENSE:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a sexually oriented
business employee license, the municipality's business office manager shall
immediately file a copy of the completed application with the enforcement
officer.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business employee license, the enforcement officer, or any peace
officer designated by the enforcement officer, shall promptly investigate the
information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of
the applicant and shall record the results of the investigation in writing
within five (5) days of the completion of the investigation. If the
investigation is done by a peace officer designated by the enforcement officer,
then the written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the
enforcement officer within five (5) days of the completion of the
investigation.
   (C)   The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless the enforcement officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings are true:
      1.   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or has given
false information.
      2.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      3.   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
      4.   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local, state, or federal law, statute,
rule or regulation.
      5.   The sexually oriented business where the applicant intends
employment is not a licensed sexually oriented business pursuant to this
chapter.
      6.   The applicant has been denied a sexually oriented business license
or a sexually oriented business employee license, or has had a sexually
oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months by any jurisdiction.
   (D)   The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either
served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class postage
prepaid. The enforcement officer may, but is not required to serve the written
license denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2004-
3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-9: FEES:
   (A)   Every application for a new sexually oriented business license shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (B)   Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (C)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required in
subsection (A) or (B) of this section, every applicant that is granted a
sexually oriented business license (new or renewal) shall pay to the
municipality an annual, nonrefundable license fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” prior to or at the time of issuance or renewal.
   (D)   Every application for a new sexually oriented business employee
license shall be accompanied by an annual, nonrefundable application,
investigation, and license fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (E)   Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business employee
license shall be accompanied by an annual, nonrefundable application,
investigation, and license fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-19-10: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December
31 and may be renewed by making application as provided in this section. Annual
license fees for all licenses except those issued for Lisle commuter parking
lot mobile concessionaire/merchandiser shall be paid to the village no later
than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on December 15 of the preceding year for which
the license is issued. A fee paid after that date shall include a late fee as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (B)   An application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license or
sexually oriented business employee license shall be submitted to the
municipality's clerk on a form provided by the enforcement officer. The renewal
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as
reasonably necessary to enable the municipality to determine whether the
applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter. The completed
renewal application shall describe any changes or additions to, or deletions
from, the information provided in the applicant's initial license application.
The completed renewal application shall be accompanied by copies of any
document or material submitted in connection with the initial license
application that has been revised or requires revision to reflect any change in
circumstances or conditions. Sketches or diagrams submitted with an initial
sexually oriented business license application may be resubmitted with
subsequent renewal applications, provided that the applicant certifies in
writing that the sketch or diagram still depicts the premises accurately.
   (C)   The enforcement officer shall make the determination concerning the
approval of license renewals based on the same criteria and using the same
procedures used to evaluate applications for new licenses under this chapter.
   (D)   The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any renewal denial, and shall serve the written renewal denial on
the applicant in the same manner as a denial of an initial application.
   (E)   When the enforcement officer denies an application for renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from
the date of denial. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-19-11: SUSPENSION:
   (A)   The enforcement officer shall suspend a sexually oriented business
license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the enforcement officer
determines that a licensee: 1) has violated or is not in compliance with any
section of this chapter except as set forth in subsection (B) of this section;
or 2) has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to comply with any
section of this chapter.
   (B)   The enforcement officer shall suspend a sexually oriented business
employee license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the enforcement
officer determines that a licensee has violated or is not in compliance with
any section of this chapter, except as set forth in subsection (C) of this
section.
   (C)   The enforcement officer shall advise the licensee in writing of the
reasons for any suspension. The written suspension shall be either served on
the applicant personally on or before five (5) days before the suspension is to
take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the licensee
at the address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United
States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five
(5) days before the suspension is to take effect. The enforcement officer may,
but is not required to serve the written suspension by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-12: REVOCATION:
   (A)   The enforcement officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license if a cause of suspension
under section
3-19-11 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended two (2) times
within the preceding twelve (12) months.
   (B)   The enforcement officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business
license if he/she determines that:
      1.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application or renewal process;
      2.   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
      3.   A licensee has knowingly allowed any specific criminal activity, or
the commission of any felony on the premises;
      4.   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during
a period of time when the licensee's license was pending initial application,
expired or suspended;
      5.   A licensee has knowingly allowed one or more specified sexual
activities to occur in or on the licensed premises;
      6.   A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
during the term of the license; or
      7.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the municipality for any
taxes or fees past due that were assessed or imposed in relation to any
business or business property.
   (C)   The enforcement officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business
employee license if he/she determines that:
      1.   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application or renewal process;
      2.   The licensee has knowingly acted as an employee on the premises of a
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license
was pending initial application, expired or suspended; or
      3.   The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
during the term of the license.
   (D)   The enforcement officer shall advise the licensee in writing of the
reasons for any revocation. The written revocation shall be either served on
the applicant personally on or before five (5) days before the revocation is to
take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the licensee
at the address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United
States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five
(5) days before the revocation is to take effect. The enforcement officer may,
but is not required to serve the written revocation by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above.
   (E)   When the enforcement officer revokes a license, the licensee shall not
be issued another license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-13: APPEAL RIGHTS:
   (A)   Any denial, suspension, or revocation of a new or renewal license
under this chapter may be appealed to the mayor by written notice filed with
the municipality's clerk within ten (10) days of the effective date of such
denial, suspension, or revocation.
   (B)   The mayor shall notify the appellant in writing of the date for the
hearing on the appeal. The written notice shall be either served on the
appellant personally on or before five (5) days before the hearing, or by
placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the appellant at the address set
forth in the application, and depositing it with the United States postal
service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before seven (7) days before
the hearing. The mayor may, but is not required to serve the written notice by
certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
   (C)   The mayor shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within fourteen (14)
days of receipt of the written notice of appeal by the municipality's clerk, at
which hearing the appellant may present witnesses or other evidence opposing
the denial, suspension or revocation. The enforcement officer may also present
witnesses or other evidence supporting the denial, suspension or revocation.
Both parties shall have the right to cross examine witnesses.
   (D)   The mayor shall determine whether the preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing supported the decision of the enforcement officer to
deny, suspend or revoke the license of the appellant.
   (E)   The mayor shall issue a written decision setting forth his findings
regarding the evidence presented at the hearing, and his decision to affirm or
overrule the decision of the enforcement officer. The mayor shall serve a copy
of his written decision on the appellant and the enforcement officer in
writing. The written decision shall be either served on the parties personally
on or before five (5) days after the date of the hearing, or by placing it in a
sealed envelope, addressed to the respective parties at the address set forth
in the application and at the enforcement officer's ordinary business address,
and depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class
postage prepaid, on or before five (5) days after the hearing. The mayor may,
but is not required to serve the written decision by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above.
   (F)   The written decision of the mayor shall be considered a final
decision. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-14: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   (A)   A sexually oriented business license is not transferable from one
licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported transfer of
a sexually oriented business license shall automatically and immediately revoke
that license.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business employee license is not transferable from
one licensee to another, but the use of the license by the individual to whom
it was issued may be transferred from one licensed sexually oriented business
to another such licensed establishment during the term of the license, provided
that the licensee gives written notice of such transfer to the enforcement
officer within fifteen (15) days after such transfer. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-
2004)
3-19-15: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Certain Activities Prohibited: No employee on the premises of a
sexually oriented business may engage in any specified criminal activity,
specified sexual activities or excretory functions.
   (B)   Nude Or Seminude Employees Must Be On Stage; Specifications: Any
employee appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented business, in a place
that can be viewed by patrons, when said employee is in a state of nudity or
seminudity must be on a stage that is at least forty five inches (45") from the
floor, and at a distance at least seventy two inches (72") from all parts of a
clearly designated area in which patrons will be present, and no patron shall
be permitted in any area closer than seventy two inches (72") from the stage.
   (C)   Touching Prohibited: No employee appearing on the premises of a
sexually oriented business in a state of nudity or seminudity may intentionally
or knowingly touch a patron or a patron's clothing or permit himself or herself
to be touched by a patron or a patron's clothing. No employee may intentionally
or knowingly touch a patron's genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft
or cleavage, buttocks, pubic hair, or female breast either directly or through
clothing or other covering. No employee may intentionally or knowingly permit a
patron to touch the employee's genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft
or cleavage, buttocks, pubic hair, or female breast either directly or through
clothing or other covering. For purposes of this subsection, touching need not
be accomplished by the hand, and includes the touching by any part of the
toucher's body, clothing or device held by the toucher.
   (D)   Dressing Rooms: All sexually oriented businesses that offer live
entertainment must provide separate dressing room facilities for female and
male employees, and which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone
other than employees.
   (E)   Minors Prohibited: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years
shall be permitted on the premises of a sexually oriented business. Mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section, unless the person under
the age eighteen (18) who was permitted on the premises exhibited to the
employee a driver's license, or other apparently official government issued
identification card bearing the patron's photograph, and purporting to show
that the person was eighteen (18) years of age or over, and the employee to
whom that document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to
believe that the person seeking admittance was under eighteen (18) years.
   (F)   Hours Of Operation: No sexually oriented business shall remain open at
any time between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays, nor shall any entertainment, service,
or product be provided to a patron on the premises of a sexually oriented
business during those hours.
   (G)   Minimum Lighting Level:
      1.   The premises of every sexually oriented business shall be equipped
with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access, including restrooms, at an
illumination level of not less than one hundred fifty (150) foot-candles as
measured at floor level.
      2.   The illumination described in subsection (G)1 of this section shall
be maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. In the
event of a power failure, the business shall stop operating immediately and all
patrons shall be cleared from the premises. The premises shall not be reopened
until the minimum illumination level is restored.
   (H)   Exterior Display: No sexually oriented business shall be operated in
any manner that permits the observation from outside the premises of any image,
material or entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions,
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or any person in a
state of nudity or seminudity, whether by means of display, decoration, sign,
window or any other means. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-16: PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person who violates or who intentionally or knowingly permits the
violation of any section of this chapter shall be fined the amount as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” and may additionally be sentenced to a term of incarceration not to
exceed six (6) months.
   (B)   Each day that a sexually oriented business or employee operates in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense or violation.
(Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
3-19-17: INJUNCTION:
Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for ordinance violations as provided in section
3-19-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-18: EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be deemed to
be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining
sections, subsections, clauses and phrases shall not be affected. (Ord. 2004-
3838, 5-17-2004)
CHAPTER 20
ANNUAL BUSINESS REGISTRATION
SECTION:
3-20-1: Required
3-20-2: Definition Of Business
3-20-3: Exemptions
3-20-4: Applications
3-20-5: Registration Deadlines
3-20-6: Changes To Registration
3-20-7: Fees
3-20-8: Penalties
3-20-1: REQUIRED:
Every "business" as defined in this chapter, whether or not subject to any
licensing requirements of the village or of any other governmental agency,
shall annually register with the village in the manner and at the times
prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-2: DEFINITION OF BUSINESS:
For purposes of this chapter, the term "business" shall include any and all
persons selling or providing any type of service or product. It shall also mean
any for profit or not for profit entity, including, without limitation, any
sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability
partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, franchisee, or
cooperative that leases or owns a building or space within a building located
in the village of Lisle for occupational purposes. Businesses that operate from
distinct spaces or buildings with separate addresses shall be deemed to be
separate businesses regardless if such businesses are owned or operated by the
same sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association,
franchisee, or cooperative. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The registration requirements of this chapter shall not apply to educational,
governmental, religious, or political organizations, or home based businesses.
Those entities not required to register may do so at their discretion. (Ord.
2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-4: APPLICATIONS:
Annual business registration applications shall be on forms prepared and
supplied by the village. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-5: REGISTRATION DEADLINES:
Every business subject to the regulations in this chapter shall renew their
registration on or before June 30 of each year. Each new business must register
prior to commencing operations. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-6: CHANGES TO REGISTRATION:
Every business shall submit written notice of any change to a previously
submitted annual business registration application to the village within thirty
(30) days of the occurrence of such change. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-7: FEES:
Business registration fees shall be as enumerated in the village of Lisle
annual fee ordinance. The fee is waived for charitable and other not for profit
organizations. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-8: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
violator to penalties and late fees as enumerated in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 21
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
SECTION:
3-21-1: Purpose
3-21-2: Findings
3-21-3: Definitions
3-21-4: Electricity Aggregation Program Adopted
3-21-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter are designed to describe the manner in which the
village shall implement an opt out electricity aggregation program authorized
by section 1-92 of the Illinois power agency act. (Ord. 2012-4440, 6-4-2012)
3-21-2: FINDINGS:
The mayor and board of trustees hereby make the following findings of fact:
   (A)   Section 1-92 of the Illinois power agency act, 20 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 3855/1-1 et seq. (the "act"), authorizes municipalities to aggregate
the electric loads of residential and small commercial retail customers and to
then solicit bids, select a retail electric supplier, and enter into a supply
agreement to facilitate the purchase of electricity and related services and
equipment on behalf of its participating residents and small businesses
(collectively, an "aggregation program").
   (B)   At the March 20, 2012, general primary election, electors of the
village of Lisle approved a referendum authorizing the village to adopt an "opt
out" aggregation program.
   (C)   The village held public hearings on the proposed plan of operation and
governance (the "plan") for the aggregation program on May 21, 2012, and June
4, 2012, notice of which was given prior to the first hearing once a week for
two (2) consecutive weeks in the "Daily Herald", a newspaper of general
circulation in the village.
   (D)   On June 4, 2012, the village adopted the plan of operation and
governance for the electricity aggregation program herein described, a copy of
which shall be available for public inspection and copying at the village hall.
(Ord. 2012-4440, 6-4-2012)
3-21-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this chapter, shall be
defined as follows:
ACT: The Illinois power agency act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3855/1-92, as
may be amended from time to time.
ALTERNATIVE RETAIL ELECTRIC SUPPLIER OR ARES: An entity certified by the
Illinois commerce commission ("ICC") to offer electric power or energy for
sale, lease or in exchange for other value received to one or more retail
customers, or that engages in the delivery or furnishing of electric power or
energy to such retail customers, and shall include, without limitation,
resellers, aggregators and power marketers but shall not include the incumbent
electric utility. For purposes of this chapter, the definition of alternative
retail electric supplier is more completely set forth in 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/16-102.
CUSTOMER: Recipients of residential and small commercial retail electric loads
as provided in the act.
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM: A program pursuant to the act for the
aggregation of residential and small commercial retail electric loads located
within the corporate limits of the village that provides customers with the
opportunity to opt out of participating in that program as provided in the act.
PLAN OF OPERATION AND GOVERNANCE: The plan of operation and governance adopted
by the village on June 4, 2012, or as thereafter amended, which describes: a)
how the aggregation program will provide for universal access to all applicable
residential customers and equitable treatment of applicable residential
customers; b) how demand management and energy efficiency services will be
provided to each class of customers; and c) how the aggregation program will
meet any other legal requirements concerning aggregated electric service. (Ord.
2012-4440, 6-4-2012)
3-21-4: ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM ADOPTED:
   (A)   The village is authorized and hereby adopts an electricity aggregation
program in a manner not inconsistent with the act.
   (B)   The village is authorized to exercise its power to operate an
electricity aggregation program jointly with two (2) or more other
municipalities or counties.
   (C)   The electricity aggregation program shall operate in the manner
prescribed in the plan of operation and governance, as amended from time to
time.
   (D)   The village manager is designated as the village's authorized
representative for the purpose of: 1) cooperating with other municipalities or
counties for the joint exercise of the power herein described, and 2)
soliciting bids for electricity and other related services in the manner
provided by the act and the plan of operation and governance, for the provision
of electric power to customers participating in the electricity aggregation
program.
   (E)   Except for those customers who opt out of the electricity aggregation
program pursuant to the plan of operation and governance and the act, the
electricity aggregation program shall automatically apply to each person
owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to
be aggregated in the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2012-4440, 6-4-
2012)
CHAPTER 22
RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS
SECTION:
3-22-1: Definitions
3-22-2: Restriction On The Retail Sale Of Animals
3-22-3: Exemptions
3-22-4: Penalty
3-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL: Any living member of the kingdom Animalia, comprising multicellular
organisms that have a well-defined shape and usually limited growth, can move
voluntarily, actively acquire food and digest it internally, and have sensory
and nervous systems that allow them to respond rapidly to stimuli.
ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: Any facility operated by or under contract for the
State, County, or any Municipal corporation or political subdivision of any
state for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless,
abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats, and other animals. "Animal control facility"
also means any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or
veterinarians licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act
of 2004 which operates for the above mentioned purpose in addition to its
customary purposes (from the State of Illinois Animal Welfare Act).
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other non-profit
organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of animals. "Animal shelter" also means any
veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians
licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 2004 which
operates for the above mentioned purpose in addition to its customary purposes
(from the State of Illinois Animal Welfare Act).
CAT: A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG: Means a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
PET SHOP OPERATOR: Any person who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers
for adoption with or without charge or donation dogs, cats, birds, fish,
reptiles, or other animals customarily obtained as pets in the Village.
However, a person who sells only such animals that he has produced and raised
shall not be considered a pet shop operator under this chapter, and a
veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians
licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 2004 shall
not be considered a pet shop operator under this chapter (from the State of
Illinois Animal Welfare Act).
RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS: To display, sell, deliver, offer for sale or adoption,
advertise for sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of an
animal. (Ord. 2019-4832, 7-15-2019)
3-22-2: RESTRICTION ON THE RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS:
No pet shop operator shall display, sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter,
auction, give away or otherwise transfer or dispose of cats or dogs. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit pet shop operators from collaborating with animal
control facilities or animal shelters to offer space for such entities to
showcase adoptable dogs and cats provided the pet shop operator shall not have
any ownership interest in the animals offered for adoption and shall not
receive a fee for providing space for the adoption of any of these animals.
(Ord. 2019-4832, 7-15-2019)
3-22-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The restriction on retailers set forth in section
3-22-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any veterinary hospital or clinic
licensed pursuant to the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 2004,
codified at 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115, or to a person who offers for
sale only dogs or cats that he has produced and raised, provided the person
owns, has possession of, or harbors four (4) or less females capable of
reproduction. (Ord. 2019-4832, 7-15-2019)
3-22-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of any section of this chapter shall be
fined as established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense, and each day of violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2019-4832, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 23
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
3-23-1: Definitions
3-23-2: Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
3-23-3: Public Nuisance Declared
3-23-1: DEFINITIONS: 
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, dispensing organization
                                        or transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 2019-4840,
                                        10-7-2019)
 
3-23-2: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in the
Village of Lisle. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be
operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation within the Village of Lisle
of any of the following:
   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization;
   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; or
   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter. (Ord. 2019-
4840, 10-7-2019)
3-23-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the village
in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 2019-
4840, 10-7-2019)
CHAPTER 24
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-24-1: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-24-1: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Tax imposed; Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the village at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 8-11-23, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-23).
   (B)   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
department. The department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 2020-4855, 1-6-2020)
CHAPTER 25
COMMERCIAL FILMING
SECTION:
3-25-1: Definitions
3-25-2: Permits And Exemptions
3-25-3: Permit Application
3-25-4: Permit Fee
3-25-5: Permit Issuance; Conditions
3-25-6: Cost Of Additional Services
3-25-7: Insurance
3-25-8: Hold Harmless Agreement
3-25-9: Clean-Up And Restoration
3-25-10: Administrative Regulations
3-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
 
                                  Mean commercials, motion pictures,
                                  television, digital media or still
                                  photography produced by a nonprofit
                                  organization, which qualifies under Section
CHARITABLE FILMS:                 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a
                                  charitable organization. No person, directly
                                  or indirectly, shall receive a profit from
                                  the marketing and production of the film or
                                  from showing the films, tapes, or photos.
                                  Shall mean and include all activity attendant
                                  to staging or shooting commercial motion
                                  pictures, television shows or programs,
MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION, STILL commercials, digital media, still photography
PHOTOGRAPHY:                      and student films produced to satisfy a post-
                                  secondary school course requirement at an
                                  educational institution in any medium
                                  including film, tape or digital format.
                                  Shall mean the photographing, filming or
                                  videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous,
NEWS MEDIA:                       unplanned television news broadcasts
                                  ("breaking news") or reporting for print
                                  media by reporters, photographers or
                                  camerapersons.
                                  A fixed place of business certified as such
                                  by a local fire authority having jurisdiction
STUDIO:                           where filming activities (motion or still
                                  photography) are regularly conducted upon the
                                  premises. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
 
3-25-2: PERMITS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall use any public or private property,
facility or residence for the purpose of taking motion pictures, television,
digital media or commercial still photography without first applying for and
receiving a permit from the village manager or his or her designee.
   (B)   Exemptions:
      1.   News Media: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or
affect reporters, photographers or camerapersons in the employ of a newspaper,
news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot print media, publishing
or broadcasting, of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences
which are in the news and of general public interest.
      2.   Personal/Family Video: The recording of visual images (motion or
still photography) solely for private personal use, and not for commercial use.
      3.   Studio Filming: Filming activities (motion or still photography)
conducted at a studio. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
3-25-3: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make
application on the appropriate form provided by the village manager's office.
The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold
harmless agreement and insurance certificate required by this chapter before it
will be processed. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
3-25-4: PERMIT FEE:
Fees shall be set and amended, as necessary, by a resolution adopted by the
village board. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
3-25-5: PERMIT ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS:
The village manager or his or her designee shall issue a permit as provided for
in this chapter when, from a consideration of the application and from such
other information as may be otherwise obtained, he/she finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or
pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be
completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time.
   (B)   The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal
governmental or village operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment
to public property, or result in the village incurring costs or expenditures in
either money or personnel not reimbursed by the applicant.
   (C)   At the determination of the Village or his or her designee as wells
the Lisle- Woodridge Fire Protection District, Lisle police department and the
village's public works department, that the condition of such activity will not
constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all property safety
precautions will be taken as determined by the aforementioned agencies. (Ord.
2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
3-25-6: COST OF ADDITIONAL SERVICES:
If deemed necessary by the village manager or his or her designee, additional
police and other village services shall be provide for the purpose of
protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed activity. The cost of
providing such additional services shall be paid to the village by the
applicant. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
3-25-7: INSURANCE:
   (A)   As a condition of issuing such a permit, the applicant shall furnish
insurance, showing evidence of a commercial liability policy and additional
insured endorsement naming the Village of Lisle, its officials, employees,
agents, and volunteers as an additional insured on a primary and non-
contributory basis, with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
aggregate, covering any such claims for bodily injury and property damage is
required for commercial filming.
   (B)   Applicant shall also submit verification that adequate worker's
compensation insurance coverage is maintained. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
3-25-8: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT:
The applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provide by the village
prior to the issuance of any permit. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
3-25-9: CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION:
To ensure cleanup and restoration of any public property, an applicant may be
required to submit a refundable deposit. Upon completion of filming and
inspection of the site by the village, if no verifiable damage or debris has
occurred, the security deposit shall be returned to the applicant. If such
damage or debris is determined to be the result of film permit activities, the
security deposit shall be applied to cover clean-up or repair costs with the
remainder returned to the applicant. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
3-25-10: ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS:
The village manager and his or her designee is hereby authorized to promulgate
and enforce administrative regulations in the implementation and enforcement of
this chapter. (Ord. 2020-4860, 2-17-2020)
CHAPTER 26
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
3-26-1: Permit Required
3-26-2: Application For Permit; Fees
3-26-3: Standards For Issuance
3-26-4: Application Approval; Rejection
3-26-5: Notice To Village And Other Officials
3-26-6: Duties Of Permittee
3-26-7: Insurance, Indemnification And Hold Harmless Required
3-26-8: Public Conduct During Special Events
3-26-9: Revocation Of Permit
3-26-10: Emergency Termination Of Special Event
3-26-11: Penalties
3-26-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A special event permit application is required when a community event is
located in whole or in part on public property (or on private property within
the Village) when it may have a direct effect upon public property, traffic
flow or public health or safety, and which may require the use of special
Village services. A special event permit shall have been obtained from the
Village Manager's Office not less than sixty (60) days prior to the event,
except that this time requirement may be shortened by the Village for good
cause shown.
   Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities, and provided such conduct
does not require traffic control;
   (C)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions,
including, but not limited to, functions sponsored and operated totally within
the property of such governmental agency which do not impact the general policy
requirements for such event by the Village;
   (D)   Any event to be held at the Village of Lisle/Benedictine University
Sports Complex that has been included in the most current facilities schedule,
as required under section 4.3 of the facilities use agreement, by and between
the Village and Benedictine University, dated February 12, 2004, and on file
with the Village Clerk; or
   (E)   Neighborhood block parties authorized through the block party/event
street closure permitting process.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEES:
   A person seeking issuance of a special event permit shall file an
application with the Village Manager's Office. The fee for a special event
permit shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" and must be submitted with the application for a special event
permit.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-3: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
   The Village Manager's Office shall review a special event permit application
and provide an assessment to the Village Board to confirm that:
   (A)   The application for a special event has been properly completed with
all required information and has been filed at least sixty (60) days prior to
the special event, except this time requirement may be shortened by the Village
for good cause shown.
   (B)   The special event will not be held on the same day as another special
event that would require the diversion of so great a number of police officers
so as to negatively affect other police department administrative or public
safety responsibilities.
   (C)   The event is not to be held for any unlawful purpose.
   (D)   The conduct of the event will not unreasonably interfere with the
public use of the public ways of the Village.
   (E)   The conduct of the event will not reduce normal police protection of
the Village.
   (F)   The event will not be a breach of the peace.
   (G)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas, nor interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a
fire elsewhere in the Village.
   (H)   The conduct of the event will not endanger the safety of the
participants or spectators of the special event.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-4: APPLICATION APPROVAL; REJECTION:
   The Village Manager's Office shall complete a review of the application and
forward an assessment to the Village Board. The Village Board shall consider
and rule on the application at its next regularly scheduled board meeting.
(Ord. 2024- 5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-5: NOTICE TO VILLAGE AND OTHER OFFICIALS:
   The Village Manager's Office shall send a copy of the special event permit
to the Chief of Police, the Public Works Director, the Development Services
Director and the Chief of the Lisle/Woodridge Fire Protection District.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-6: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The special event coordinator
shall carry the special event permit upon his/her person at all times during
the conduct of the event.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-7: INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS REQUIRED:
   The Village will not accept any liability for injury or damage to any person
or property resulting from any activities related to a special event.
   (A)   Insurance: Any person, organization, or group requesting a special
event permit shall provide a certificate of insurance and additional insured
endorsements, issued by a company acceptable to the Village and authorized to
do business in the state of Illinois. In order to meet its obligations under
this section, an applicant shall submit with its application for a special
event permit, evidence of commercial liability insurance in an amount
reasonably acceptable to the Village, as determined by the Village manager's
office, naming the Village, its elected and appointed officials, attorneys,
employees, contractors, and volunteers as additional insured on a primary and
noncontributory basis, with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
aggregate covering any such claims, unless such requirement is reduced or
waived by the Village manager for good cause shown. Events occurring over
multiple days or higher risk events which pose a greater likelihood of
resulting bodily injury may require higher liability insurance limits.
   (B)   Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement: The permit application
shall be accompanied by an indemnification agreement in which the applicant
and/or sponsor of the special event agrees to the fullest extent permitted by
law, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officials, agents,
employees and volunteers against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims,
suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses (including attorney fees),
which may in any way accrue against the Village, its officials, agents,
employees and volunteers arising in whole or in part or in consequence of the
applicant's use of the public property, public right of way, public equipment
or public personnel or volunteers at, during, or in conjunction with the
special event described in the permit. The duty to indemnify and hold harmless
under this section shall not apply to injuries, death, loss, damages, claims,
suits, liabilities, judgments, and costs arising out of the sole legal cause of
the Village, its officials, agents or employees.
(Ord. 2024- 5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-8: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING SPECIAL EVENTS:
   (A)   Interference: No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede,
or interfere with any special event covered by this chapter, or with any
person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in such special event.
   (B)   Driving Through Parades: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are
part of a parade.
   (C)   Special Event Traffic and Parking: The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to direct, control and regulate traffic in and around a special event
through the temporary designation of signs, personnel or other traffic control
devices, and to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or
part thereof constituting a part of the special event area. The Chief of Police
shall cause to be posted signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. Any sign
or device posted per order of the chief of police shall be deemed an official
Village sign, and shall be valid for as long as public safety requires.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-9: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   The Village Manager's Office shall have the authority to revoke a special
event permit issued under this chapter upon a finding that the permittee has
violated any of the standards set forth in this Chapter. Any revocation will be
reviewed by the Village Board unless time does not permit. In no event will a
permit be revoked without prior notification to the Village Board.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-10: EMERGENCY TERMINATION OF SPECIAL EVENT:
   The Chief of Police has the authority to immediately shut down a special
event in the case of a disaster or severe weather or in order to preserve the
safety and welfare of participants of the special event.)
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-26-11: PENALTIES:
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine as established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day that
such violation exists.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 27
VENDING DEVICES
SECTION:
3-27-1: License And Fee Required
3-27-2: Definitions
3-27-3: Location Restrictions
3-27-4: Conditions And Revocation Of License
3-27-5: Removal Of Vending Devices
3-27-6: Emergency Provisions
3-27-7: Penalties
3-27-1: LICENSE AND FEE REQUIRED:
   No vending device shall be placed in or upon any premises within the Village
without first having obtained a license for such device. The applicant shall
pay an annual fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each vending device is installed.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-27-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                     That area of Lisle generally lying south of the centerline
                     of Burlington Avenue, north of the centerline of Front
                     Street east of the centerline of Main Street and west of
                     easterly property line of the Lisle Village hall, 925
                     Burlington Avenue, north of the railroad tracks, and west
LISLE TRAIN STATION: of the easterly property line of the south tunnel shelter
                     990 Front Street south of the railroad tracks. The
                     definition of the "Lisle train station" shall include, but
                     not be limited to, any and all sidewalks and walkways,
                     parking areas, bus and cab stations, commuter platforms
                     and waiting areas.
                     A mechanical device or mechanical container constructed of
                     metal or other material of substantially equivalent
                     strength and durability whose primary purpose is the sale
VENDING DEVICE:      of food, candy, gum, beverages and other similar items.
                     Containers used for the dispensing of newspapers, flyers,
                     handbills, or other similar printed materials either at a
                     cost or free of charge are explicitly excluded from the
                     definition of "vending device" as used in this chapter.
 
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7- 2024)
3-27-3: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   No vending device shall be placed within a public right of way, along
streets, thoroughfares, parkways, sidewalks or on any other Village of Lisle
property whether owned or leased by the Village within the Village of Lisle.
   (B)   No vending device shall be placed at the Lisle Train Station.
(Ord. 2024- 5098, 10-7-2024)
3-27-4: CONDITIONS AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   Any license issued for the placement of a vending device in or upon any
premises in the Village shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in
Title 3, Chapter 1 of this code and may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Title 3, Chapter 1 of this code.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-27-5: REMOVAL OF VENDING DEVICES:
   (A)   In the event any vending device is placed or remains within any public
right of way, street, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk or other Village property
or remains in or upon any premises in the Village after the expiration or
revocation of a previously issued license, or is in violation of any other
provision of this chapter, the Village shall send, by certified mail, with
return receipt requested, a written notice to the address of the owner or user
of the vending device. The notice shall state the address and telephone number
of the Village, a description of why the vending device is in violation of the
requirements of this chapter; that the owner or user is ordered to cause
immediate removal of the vending device; and that the vending device will be
removed by the Village after a date designated in the notice. The date shall be
no less than ten (10) days after the date the notice is mailed or first posted
as the case may be; unless the owner or user requests a hearing before the
Village Board by filing a written appeal with the business office manager on or
before the designated removal date.
   (B)   When any appeal is filed pursuant to this provision, the Village Board
shall set the hearing on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled Village
Board meeting and notice of such time and place shall be given in the manner as
specified herein. In making its determination, the Village Board shall only
consider the standards set forth in this chapter. Its decision shall be
rendered on the same day as the hearing. The decision of the Village Board
shall be final.
   (C)   If any vending device is still on public property or otherwise in
violation of this chapter after the ten (10) day period described above, or if
an appeal is made and denied after hearing before the Village Board the vending
device shall be removed.
   (D)   The owner of any vending device removed in accordance with the terms
of this chapter shall be responsible for all the expenses of the removal and
the storage of such vending device. Should the vending device fail to be
claimed or should the owner fail to pay any money due the Village within thirty
(30) days of invoice by the Village, such vending device shall be deemed to be
unclaimed property and may be disposed of pursuant to law.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-27-6: EMERGENCY PROVISIONS:
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, however, the Village
may remove any vending device from a location in the Village, which, because of
its location or condition, poses an immediate threat to the health, safety and
welfare of the public or a member thereof. In this event, a hearing shall be
held, upon owner request, within three (3) days following the removal, for the
purpose of determining whether there is a continued need for the removal. The
Village Manager and his or her designee shall issue a ruling immediately at the
time the hearing is concluded. The decision of the Village Manager and his or
her designee may be appealed to the Village Board provided that a written
notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, is filed with
the Village Manager and his or her designee within ten (10) days after the
hearing. The Village Board shall set hearing on the appeal at its next
regularly scheduled Village Board meeting and notice of such time and place
shall be given in the same manner as specified in this Chapter. The Village
Board shall have the power to reverse, affirm, or modify the original decision.
Its decision shall be rendered the same day as the hearing. The decision of the
Village Board shall be final.
(Ord. 2024- 5098, 10-7-2024)
3-27-7: PENALTIES:
   Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day a
violation continues.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 28
NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICES
SECTION:
3-28-1: Definitions
3-28-2: Prohibited Locations
3-28-3: Permit Required
3-28-4: Public Property Location, Application, Permit And Fee
3-28-5: Permit Conditions Of Approval
3-28-6: Removal
3-28-7: Appeal Process
3-28-8: Revocation Of Permits
3-28-9: Emergency Provisions
3-28-10: Enforcement
3-28-11: Penalties
3-28-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
                             That area of Lisle generally lying south of the
                             centerline of Burlington Avenue, north of the
                             centerline of Front Street east of the centerline
                             of Main Street and west of easterly property line
                             of the Lisle village hall, 925 Burlington Avenue,
                             north of the railroad tracks, and west of the
LISLE TRAIN STATION:         easterly property line of the south tunnel shelter
                             990 Front Street south of the railroad tracks. The
                             definition of the "Lisle train station" shall
                             include, but not be limited to, any and all
                             sidewalks and walkways, parking areas, bus and cab
                             stations, and commuter platforms and waiting
                             areas.
                             A container constructed of metal or other material
                             of substantial equivalent strength and durability,
NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICE: which is used for the dispensing of newspapers,
                             flyers, handbills, or other similar printed
                             materials either at a cost or free of charge.
 
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-2: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS:
   No private newspaper dispensing device shall be placed or located within the
B-3A or B-3B zoning districts as defined in Title 5 of the Lisle Village Code,
or within any area bounded by the B-3A and/or B-3B zoning districts, including
the Lisle Train Station.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   No private newspaper dispensing device shall be placed or located within a
public right of way, along the streets, thoroughfares, parkways, sidewalks or
on any other Village of Lisle property, whether owned or leased by the Village,
unless a permit has been issued therefor by the Village in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-4: PUBLIC PROPERTY LOCATION, APPLICATION, PERMIT AND FEE:
   (A)   Applications for such permit shall be made on forms approved by the
Village. The application must include a site plan and state the exact location
where the applicant wishes to install a newspaper dispensing device. The
application must also include a description of and the size and color
specifications for the intended newspaper dispensing device. Misrepresentation
of information, false statements or any other fraudulent information supplied
on or with the application shall be grounds for revocation of a permit in
compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Within five (5) business days of receipt of a completed application
for a permit and payment of applicable fee, the Village shall issue a permit,
provided that the applicant meets the conditions of approval contained in this
Chapter. In the event that the conditions of approval, where applicable, are
not met, the Village shall, within five (5) business days of receipt of an
application for a permit, deny the application, state the reasons in writing
for such denial and notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for the
denial. Any such denial may be appealed pursuant to the procedure set forth in
this Chapter.
   (C)   The applicant shall pay an annual fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each location where a newspaper dispensing device is installed.
   (D)   Permits shall be for a term of one year and shall not be assignable.
Permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Applications and fees for
renewal of permits shall be filed with the village business office manager no
later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon December 15 of each year. Fees paid
after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon December 15 shall include a late fee as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". In the event the renewal fees are not paid on or before January 16
of the applicable license year, the village shall issue a citation of an
ordinance violation and an additional late fee, as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures", shall be charged, and the location where the device is placed shall
be considered forfeited. If the permittee desires to retain the location for
placement of a device by payment of the required permit fees, said fees shall
include an additional late fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" if paid after January 16 of the permit year.
   (E)   A permit shall allow the installation of a newspaper dispensing device
only at the location described in the application for the permit. The permit
shall contain a description of the authorized location and permits shall not be
transferable from one location to another nor from one person to another.
   (F)   As an express condition of the acceptance of a permit hereunder, the
permittee thereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the village, its
trustees, officers and employees against any loss or liability or damage,
including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury and for property
damage sustained by any person as the result of the installation, use or
maintenance of a device within the village.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-5: PERMIT CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
   (A)   A permit issued for a newspaper dispensing device shall be subject to
and granted upon the following conditions, restrictions and requirements:
      1.   Privately owned newspaper dispensing devices shall not be placed at
the "Lisle train station" as defined in this Chapter, nor placed within any
other area located in or bounded by the B-3A and/or B-3B zoning districts.
      2.   Newspaper dispensing devices shall be placed adjacent and parallel
to building walls not more than six inches (6") distant therefrom, or near and
parallel to the curb not less than eighteen inches (18") and not more than
twenty four inches (24") distant from the curb.
      3.   No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed, installed, located
or maintained:
         (a)   Within ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant or other emergency
facility;
         (b)   Within fifteen feet (15') of any intersecting driveway, alley or
street;
         (c)   Within five feet (5') of any bus stop, bench, street sign,
stoplight, parking meter, streetlight, utility pole, display window, handicap
access ramp, or marked crosswalk;
         (d)   Within five hundred feet (500') of another newspaper dispensing
device containing the same newspaper or news periodical;
         (e)   So as to be chained, or otherwise secured, to any tree, utility
pole, light pole, parking meter, traffic control post, street signpost, bench,
refuse receptacle or other public property;
         (f)   On or within any median within any public right of way;
         (g)   Within a rectangular area stretching from the entire width of
any building entranceway to the curb;
         (h)   At any location where the width of paved clear space in any
direction for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet
(5');
         (i)   Adjacent to parallel or angle parking spaces;
         (j)   Within three feet (3') of any area improved with lawn, flowers,
shrubs, planters, or trees.
      4.   No publication may be displayed, offered for sale, or offered free
to the public on any public right of way by means of a newspaper dispensing
device in such manner as to expose to the public view any photograph, drawing
or depiction of any kind contained within such publication displaying any of
the following:
         (a)   The genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region on any person;
         (b)   Any portion of the breast, at or below the areola, of any female
person.
      5.   The permittee shall maintain the newspaper dispensing device in good
working order, in a safe and clean condition, in such a manner so that:
         (a)   It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
         (b)   It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof;
         (c)   It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon;
         (d)   The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which
the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks,
dents, blemishes and discoloration;
         (e)   The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably
free of tears, peeling or fading;
         (f)   The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshaped
and the device is level on the ground and not leaning or placed on uneven
portions of ground.
      6.   A legible telephone number shall be displayed on the newspaper
dispensing device for a user to call to obtain a refund in case of malfunction
of the newspaper dispensing device.
      7.   Newspaper dispensing devices may have the name of the newspaper or
the applicable publication displayed on the side, front and back of the device
provided that the lettering is no larger than two inches (2") in height.
      8.   The newspaper dispensing device shall not be used for advertising
signs or publicity purposes other than the purposes dealing with the display,
sale or purchase of the newspaper sold or distributed free therein.
      9.   Upon removal of the newspaper dispensing device, the permittee shall
restore the property of the village to the same condition as when the newspaper
dispensing device was initially installed, ordinary wear and tear excepted. If
those repairs are not made within thirty (30) days, the village shall undertake
that repair work and collect from the owner or permittee the costs thereof,
including reasonable attorney fees and related costs of collection.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-6: REMOVAL:
   (A)   In the event any newspaper dispensing device is placed or remains
within any public right of way, street, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk or
other village property without a permit being issued for the newspaper
dispensing device, or after the expiration or revocation of a previously issued
permit, or in violation of any other provision of this Chapter, the Village
shall send, by certified mail, with return receipt requested, a written notice
to the address of the owner or user of the newspaper dispensing device. The
notice shall state the address and telephone number of the Village, a
description of why the newspaper dispensing device is in violation of the
requirements of this Chapter; that the owner or user is ordered to cause
immediate removal of the newspaper dispensing device from public property; and
that the newspaper dispensing device will be removed by the village after a
date designated in the notice. The date shall be no less than ten (10) calendar
days after the date the notice is mailed; unless the owner or user requests a
hearing before the Village Board by filing a written appeal pursuant to this
Chapter on or before the designated removal date.
   (B)   If any newspaper dispensing device is still on public property after
the ten (10) calendar day period described above, or if an appeal is filed and
denied after hearing before the Village Board, the newspaper dispensing device
shall be removed by the Village.
   (C)   The owner of any newspaper dispensing device removed in accordance
with the terms of this chapter shall be responsible for all the expenses of the
removal and storage of such newspaper dispensing device. Should the newspaper
dispensing device fail to be claimed or should the owners fail to pay any money
due the village, after six (6) months, such newspaper dispensing device shall
be disposed of according to law.
   (D)   If a newspaper dispensing device is unused for a period of more than
thirty (30) days in that no newspapers, flyers, handbills or other similar
printed materials are placed within the device and offered for sale or for
distribution at no cost, the newspaper dispensing device shall be considered
abandoned by the owner or permittee. The procedures of this section shall then
be followed.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-7: APPEAL PROCESS:
   (A)   The decision of the Development Services Director in refusing to grant
or renew a permit shall be appealable. The applicant shall have the right to
appeal the decision to the Village Board provided that the applicant file a
written notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, with
the Development Services Director, within ten (10) calendar days after the date
of the notice of denial. The Village Board shall set a hearing on the appeal at
its next regularly scheduled Village Board meeting and notice of such time and
place shall be given to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The Village Board shall have the power to reverse, affirm, or modify
the original decision. In making its determination, the village board shall
only consider the standards set forth in this chapter. The decision of the
Village Board shall be rendered the same day as the hearing. The decision of
the Village Board shall be final.
   (B)   The decision of the Village to remove a newspaper dispensing device
shall be appealable. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision
to the Village Board provided that the applicant file a written notice of
appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, with the Development
Services Director, within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the notice
of removal.
   The Village Board shall set a hearing on the appeal at its next regularly
scheduled Village Board meeting and notice of such time and place shall be
given to the owner/user of the newspaper dispensing device by certified mail,
return receipt requested. The newspaper dispensing device may remain in place
during the appeal period. The Village Board shall have the power to reverse,
affirm or modify the original decision. In making its determination, the
Village Board shall only consider the standards set forth in this chapter. The
decision of the Village Board shall be rendered the same day as the hearing.
The decision of the Village Board shall be final.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-8: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
   The Village Board shall revoke a permit issued under the terms of this
chapter after a finding of guilt for any of the following causes, which shall
constitute violations of this section including:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
   (B)   Violation of any term or condition of the permit granted to the
permittee;
   (C)   Violation of any term, condition or provision of this Chapter or any
other chapter of this code.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-9: EMERGENCY PROVISIONS:
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the village may remove
any newspaper dispensing device from public property which, because of its
location or condition, poses an immediate threat to the health, safety and
welfare of the public or a member thereof. In this event, a hearing before the
Village Manager shall be held, upon the request of the owner, within three (3)
days following the removal, for the purpose of determining whether there is a
continued need for the removal. The Village Manager shall issue a ruling
immediately at the time the hearing is concluded. This decision is appealable
pursuant to the appeal provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   Except as otherwise specifically stated herein, the Development Services
Director, and his designees, shall be responsible for enforcement of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-28-11: PENALTIES:
   Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day a
violation continues.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 29
LISLE COMMUTER RAIL STATION CONCESSION LICENSE
SECTION:
3-29-1: Licenses Required
3-29-2: Licenses Issued, Term, Fees
3-29-3: Operations Of Concessions; General
3-29-4: Operations Of Concessions; Health And Sanitation
3-29-5: Denial Or Revocation Of License
3-29-6: Penalty
3-29-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
association to sell or offer to sell, or otherwise peddle any food, beverage,
convenience item, merchandise, good or service of any kind or nature whatsoever
from any cart, table, vending machine unit, vehicle, including motor and
nonmotorized vehicles, or otherwise on, about, or within the property
encompassing the Lisle Commuter Rail Station and surrounding commuter parking
lots, which property is leased by the Village pursuant to and in accordance
with that certain "Lisle, Illinois Station Contract", as amended and on file
with the office of the Village Clerk, without any such person, organization, or
business entity having first obtained a license provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-29-2: LICENSES ISSUED, TERM, FEES:
   (A)   There shall be one (1) license for a nonmotorized mobile vendor cart
serving coffee, food, newspapers, and other convenience items inside the Lisle
Commuter Rail Station.
   (B)   The Village Manager is authorized to solicit requests for proposals or
qualifications, and negotiate and enter into agreements for the license
provided in subsection (A) of this section, subject to the approval of the
Village Board.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-29-3: OPERATIONS OF CONCESSIONS; GENERAL:
   (A)   The licensee must comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local
laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
   (B)   Prior to commencing business, the licensee shall provide:
      1.   Proof of insurance required under the Workers' Compensation Act, or
proof of exemption under 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 305/3(20); and
      2.   Proof of insurance for commercial general liability as established
by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal
injury, and property damage; excessive liability in umbrella form may be
provided to meet a portion of the required insurance.
      3.   For insurance required under this subsection:
         (a)   Name the Village, its President, Trustees, officers, employees,
attorneys, agents, and volunteers, and the Burlington Northern Railroad, its
officers, agents, and employees, as additional insureds; and
         (b)   It may not be canceled, permitted to expire, or be changed
without thirty (30) days' advance notice to the Village Manager.
   (C)   Hours of operation of concessions within the Lisle Commuter Rail
Station shall be limited to the hours established for the station's waiting
room. The licensee may store a cart, table, or vending unit in the station when
the cart, table, or vending unit is not in use, and at their sole and absolute
risk; provided, however, that no such cart, table, or vending unit may be
stored unless and until the licensee executes an agreement in a form provided
by the Village in which the licensee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the
Village, its President, Trustees, officers, employees, attorneys, agents, and
volunteers from and against any and all loss, cost, damage, or expense,
including, without limitation, court costs and attorney fees, which any of them
may suffer, incur, or sustain, or for which any of them may become liable by
virtue of the injury to or the death of any person, or the damage to or loss,
theft, or destruction of any property arising out of, or in connection with,
the storage cart, table, or vending unit.
   (D)   Concession locations shall be determined and designated by the
Village. Any concession area within the Lisle Commuter Rail Station shall
occupy a space that does not exceed six feet by eight feet (6' x 8').
   (E)   The license is not assignable and nontransferable without prior
approval of the Village Board.
   (F)   The license shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place on
the mobile vendor cart of the licensee.
   (G)   Proof of insurance shall be carried with the mobile vendor cart at all
times.
   (H)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, no license
shall be entered into by the Village for any concession operation within the
Lisle Commuter Rail Station unless and until such license is authorized in
writing by the Northern and Santa Fe Railway Company.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-29-4: OPERATIONS OF CONCESSIONS; HEALTH AND SANITATION:
   (A)   The licensee must be certified and in compliance with all applicable
rules and regulations of the DuPage County Department of Health.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to permit stale foods, decaying matter, or other
waste material or product to accumulate in, on, about, or around concessions
while they are so used, or to fail to maintain all such concessions in a clean
and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-29-5: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may refuse issuance of a license if, in its sole
and absolute discretion, it appears that such issuance would not further the
public health, safety, comfort, morals, or welfare or would not otherwise be in
the best interests of the Village.
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the authority to revoke any license issued under
this chapter for the following reasons:
      1.   The licensee, or those under the licensee's control, has violated
any Federal, State, or local laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations;
      2.   The licensee, or those under the licensee's control, has acted in a
manner that does not promote or is otherwise detrimental to the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, or welfare of the Village; or
      3.   The licensee, or those under the licensee's control, has otherwise
acted in a manner that is not in the best interests of the community.
      Before revoking such license, the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall
provide the licensee with at least three (3) days' written notice of such
pending revocation, the reasons therefor, and the date and location of a
hearing in front of the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, upon the matter.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything in this section, the Mayor, or the Mayor's
designee, shall have the authority when the Mayor, in the Mayor's sole and
absolute discretion, deems a situation sufficiently serious and likely to
result in imminent harm to the public or certain members thereof, or which
otherwise threatens the public health, safety, comfort, morals, or welfare, to
invoke emergency powers to revoke licenses issued under this chapter without
prior notice and hearing. The licensee so affected shall be entitled to a post
revocation hearing to be conducted by the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee.
   (D)   Any license revoked under this section shall result in the immediate
cessation of business by the licensee on, about, or within the property
encompassing the Lisle Commuter Rail Station and surrounding commuter parking
lots. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or association whose
license has been revoked and fails to cease business operations and vacate the
Lisle Commuter Rail Station premises or surrounding parking lots shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures", and each day such a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense, and shall be grounds for the Village Attorney to commence
appropriate action in law or in equity in the Circuit Court of DuPage County to
force cessation of business and the removal from the Lisle Commuter Rail
Station and surrounding commuter parking lots.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
3-29-6: PENALTY:
   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association that violates any
provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2024-5098, 10-7-2024)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
4-1-1: Adoption
4-1-2: Amendments
4-1-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Building Code (Building Code), and
Appendix H, for the purpose of establishing minimum requirements to provide a
reasonable level of safety, health and general welfare through structural
strength, means of egress, stability, sanitation, light and ventilation, energy
conservation, and for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property
protection from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous conditions, and to
provide a reasonable level of safety to fire fighters and emergency responders
during emergency operations is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
though fully set forth, except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified
or amended. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-1-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Building Code of the Village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended
in the following respects:
   (A)   Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended to:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
      2.   Section 103.1. Insert: Development Services Department
      3.   Delete building exemptions of Section 105.2 and replace with:
         (a)   Building:
            (1)   Retaining walls that do not exceed 2 feet in height above
existing grade.
            (2)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, wall cabinets, and
similar finish work. All materials shall comply with required flame spread and
smoke development ratings.
            (3)   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to an R-3 occupancy
that are less than 24 inches deep and not designed to have a circulation
system.
            (4)   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to an R-
3 occupancy.
      4.   Delete plumbing exemptions of Section 105.2.
      5.   Delete Section 105.5 and replace with:
      105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the
work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 90 days after
its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended
or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the time the work is commenced. If
the work on site authorized by such permit is not completed within one (1) year
from the date of issuance, the permit shall become invalid. The building
official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time,
for periods not more than 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in
writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
      6.   Delete Section 107.2.6 and replace with:
      107.2.6 Plat of survey. The construction documents submitted with the
application for permit shall be accompanied by a recent plat of survey drawn to
scale, signed and sealed by an Illinois licensed Professional Land Survey,
showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on
the site and distance from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the plat of
survey shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of
existing structures and construction that is to remain on the site. The
building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirements for a plat
of survey where the application for permit is for repair or where otherwise
warranted.
      7.   Delete Section 109.2 and replace with:
      109.2 Schedule of permit fees. Where a permit is required, a fee for each
permit shall be paid in accordance with
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
      8.   Delete Section 109.4 and replace with:
      109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Permit fees shall double
for any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits.
      9.   Delete Section 109.6 and replace with:
      109.6 Refunds. Plan review fees are nonrefundable. 50% of building permit
fees may be refunded if the permit is cancelled and no work has been performed.
Building permit fees are nonrefundable if the permit has expired (90 days or
more from the date of permit issuance). Building permit fees are nonrefundable
when work has been performed.
      10.   Delete Section 113.3
      11.   Delete Section 114.4 and replace with:
      114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this
code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by law and punishable by a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
      1.   Add or amend the following definitions:
      Board of appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
      Building official: The Development Services Director or individual
designated by the Development Services Director.
      Change of occupancy: Any of the following shall be considered as a change
of occupancy where this code requires a greater degree of safety,
accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of egress,
ventilation, or sanitation than is existing in the current building or
structure:
         (a)   Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or
structure.
         (b)   Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the level of
activity within, a building or structure.
         (c)   Any change of tenant, in which case, compliance with the Life
Safety Code (NFPA 101) is required.
   (C)   Chapter 4, Special Detailed Requirements Based on Occupancy and Use,
is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 403.5.1 and replace with:
      403.5.1 Remoteness of interior exit stairways. Required interior exit
stairways shall be separated by a distance not less than one-third of the
length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building or area to be
served. The distance shall be measured in a straight line between the nearest
points of the enclosure surrounding the interior exit stairways. In buildings
with three or more interior exit stairways, no fewer than two of the interior
exit stairways shall comply with this section. Interlocking or scissor stairs
shall be counted as one interior exit stairway.
      2.   Section 404.6. Delete: Exception #3
   (D)   Chapter 7, Fire and Smoke Protection Features, is amended to:
      1.   Section 708.3. Delete: Exception #2
   (E)   Chapter 9, Fire Protection and Life Safety Systems, is amended to:
      1.   Section 903.2. Delete exception.
      2.   Modify condition 1 of Section 903.2.1.1 as follows:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas
containing group A-1 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
      3.   Modify condition 1 of Section 903.2.1.3 as follows:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas
containing group A-3 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
      4.   Modify condition 1 of Section 903.2.1.4 as follows:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas
containing group A-4 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
      5.   Modify condition 1 of Section 903.2.3 as follows:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas
containing group E occupancies.
      6.   Section 903.2.3. Delete exception.
      7.   Modify condition 1 of Section 903.2.4 as follows:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas
containing group F-1 and F-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
      8.   Section 903.2.6. Delete exceptions.
      9.   Modify condition 1 of Section 903.2.7 as follows:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas
containing group M occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
      10.   Delete Section 903.2.9 and replace with:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas
containing group S-1 occupancies.
      11.   Delete Section 903.2.9.1 and replace with:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas used
as repair garages.
      12.   Delete Section 903.2.10 and replace with:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas
containing group S-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area. All
parking garages, open or enclosed, shall be equipped with an automatic fire
sprinkler system.
      13.   Delete Section 903.2.10.1 and replace with:
      An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas used
as commercial parking garages.
      14.   Section 903.2.11.3. Delete exception.
      15.   Insert Section 903.2.13 as follows:
      Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire
areas containing group B occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
      16.   Section 903.3.1.1.1. Delete exemptions #3 and #4.
      17.   Delete Section 907.2.1 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group A
occupancies. Delete exception.
      18.   Delete Section 907.2.2 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group B
occupancies. Delete exception.
      19.   Delete Section 907.2.3 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group E
occupancies. Delete exception #1, #3, and #4.
      20.   Delete Section 907.2.4 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group F
occupancies. Delete exception.
      21.   Delete Section 907.2.5 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group H
occupancies.
      22.   Delete Section 907.2.6 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group I
occupancies.
      23.   Delete Section 907.2.7 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group M
occupancies. Delete exception #2.
      24.   Delete Section 907.2.8 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group
R-1 occupancies.
      25.   Delete Section 907.2.9 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group
R-2, R-3, and R-4 occupancies.
      26.   Delete Section 907.2.10 and replace with:
      An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group S
occupancies. Delete exception.
      27.   Delete Section 907.2.11 and replace with:
      907.2.11 Single - and Multiple-station alarms. Smoke detection devices of
a type approved by the fire inspector shall be provided in all buildings
equipped with an automatic fire alarm system. Devices shall be located as
determined necessary to provide early fire detection based upon the use and as
required under applicable provisions of NFPA 72. All smoke detectors shall be
connected to and supervised by the fire alarm control panel where one is
required.
   (F)   Chapter 15, Roof Assemblies and Rooftop Structures, is amended to
      1.   Insert Section 1502.4.1 as follows:
      1502.4.1 Rain gutter discharge. All rain gutter systems installed on
commercial use buildings shall be directly connected to an on-site stormwater
control system using approved materials. The discharge of rain gutters to grade
is not permitted.
   (G)   Chapter 18, Soils and Foundations, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 1807.1.4 in its entirety.
      2.   Delete Section 1808.8.5 and replace with:
      1808.8.5 Forming of concrete. All concrete footings shall be placed by
use of proper forming installed in accordance with chapter 6 of ACI 318. The
earth may not be used as a form.
      3.   Insert Section 1808.10 as follows:
      1808.10 Frost protection. Foundation walls, piers and other permanent
supports of buildings and structures shall be constructed not less than 42
inches below grade. Footings shall not bear on frozen ground.
      Exception: Free standing non-occupiable single story accessory use
structures not to exceed 600 square feet in area may be constructed on slab-on-
grade foundations. Slab foundations shall be designed and constructed to
support and distribute the imposed loads and shall be no less than 16 inches
wide x 18 inches deep (12 inches below grade and 6 inches above grade) with 2-
#5 bars around the entire perimeter. The slab shall be poured monolithically
with the footing and shall be no less than 5 inches thick reinforced with 6
inch by 6 in /10 gage welded wire fabric supported on a minimum 6 inch
compacted stone base.
   (H)   Chapter 33, Safeguarding During Construction, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 3302.2 and replace with:
      3302.2 Waste removal. Debris and trash shall be controlled and contained
within a dumpster at all times. The permit holder shall be responsible for this
provision and shall specify the location of the dumpster on the building plans.
      2.   Insert Section 3302.4 as follows:
      3302.4 Security fence. A chain-link security fence a minimum of 6 feet in
height shall be erected around the perimeter a construction area when:
         (a)   The construction area is adjacent to a residential use, or
         (b)   As ordered by the Code Official.
      3.   Insert Section 3302.5 as follows:
      3302.5 Sanitation facilities: The permit holder shall provide a portable
toilet on the construction site. The location of the portable toilet shall be
approved by the code official.
      4.   Insert Section 3302.6 as follows:
      3302.6 Construction traffic: Construction site parking shall be only on
one side of the street and shall not interfere or obstruct through traffic.
      5.   Delete Section 3303.4 and replace with:
      3303.4 Vacant lot. Demolition of a structure shall include demolition of
all below and at grade improvements. The lot shall be filled, seeded and
restored to existing grade.
      6.   Delete Section 3303.6 and replace with:
      3303.6 Utility connections. Service utility connections shall be
discontinued and capped in accordance with the approval rules and the
requirements of the applicable governing authority. No permit shall be issued
for demolition or removal of a building, where served by a private well, until
a written verification is received from the DuPage County Health Department
that said well has been sealed and capped except when said well is to be used
for new construction when a public water supply system is not available. (Ord
2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 2
RESIDENTIAL ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS CODE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Adoption
4-2-2: Amendments
4-2-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Residential Code (Residential One and Two
Family Dwellings Code), for the purpose of establishing minimum requirements to
provide a reasonable level of safety, health and general welfare through
affordability, structural strength, means of egress, stability, sanitation,
light and ventilation, energy conservation and safety to life and property from
fire and other hazards and to provide a reasonable level of safety to fire
fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations is hereby adopted
and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth, except such portions
as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-2-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Residential One and Two Family Dwellings Code of the Village of Lisle, as
hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the following respects:
   (A)   Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended to:
      1.   Section R101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
      2.   Delete Section R103.1 and replace with:
      R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Development Services
Department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known
as the building official.
      3.   Delete building exemptions of Section R105.2 and replace with:
         (a)   Building:
            (1)   Portable storage sheds, bins, and cabinets that do not exceed
25 square feet.
            (2)   Retaining walls that do not exceed 2 feet in height above
existing grade.
            (3)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, wall cabinets,
countertop replacement, and similar finish work.
            (4)   Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches
deep and not designed to have a circulation system.
            (5)   Swings and other playground equipment.
            (6)   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not
project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.
      4.   Delete plumbing exemptions of Section R105.2.
      5.   Delete Section R105.5 and replace with:
      R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the
work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 90 days after
its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended
or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the time the work is commenced. If
the work on site authorized by such permit is not completed within one (1) year
from the date of issuance, the permit shall become invalid. The building
official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time,
for periods not more than 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in
writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
      6.   Delete Section R106.2 and replace with:
      R106.2 Plat of survey. The construction documents submitted with the
application for permit shall be accompanied by a recent plat of survey drawn to
scale, signed and sealed by an Illinois licensed Professional Land Survey,
showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on
the site and distance from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the plat of
survey shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of
existing structures and construction that is to remain on the site. The
building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirements for a plat
of survey where the application for permit is for repair or where otherwise
warranted.
      7.   Delete Section R108.2 and replace with:
      R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Where a permit is required, a fee for
each permit shall be paid in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle
Village Code.
      8.   Delete Section R108.5 and replace with:
      R108.5 Refunds. Plan review fees are nonrefundable. 50% of building
permit fees may be refunded if the permit is cancelled and no work has been
performed. Building permit fees are nonrefundable if the permit has expired (90
days or more from the date of permit issuance). Building permit fees are
nonrefundable when work has been performed.
      9.   Delete Section R108.6 and replace with:
      R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Permit fees shall be
double for any person who commences work before obtaining necessary permits.
      10.   Delete Section R112.3
      11.   Delete Section R113.4 and replace with:
      R114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this
code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by law and punishable by a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
      12.   Insert Section R113.5 as follows:
      R113.5 Recording of notice of violation. If the owner of the property has
not complied with the requirements as stated in a notice of violation within
the time specified, the building official may file an appropriate instrument to
be recorded in the public records of the jurisdiction in which the violation
occurred, indicating that violations of this ordinance exist upon the property
involved. The recording of the notice of violation shall constitute legal
notice to all concerned, as well as to any subsequent purchasers, transferees,
grantees, mortgagees, lessees and all persons claiming or acquiring interest in
the property. When the violation specified in the notice of violation has been
corrected and all fees have been paid, the building official shall file a
certificate attesting that the violation has been corrected.
   (B)   Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
      1.   Add or amend the following definitions:
      Board of appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
      Building official: The Development Services Director or individual
designated by the Development Services Director.
   (C)   Chapter 3, Building Planning, is amended to:
      1.   Table R301.2. Insert:
      Ground Snow Load: 25 psf
      Wind Design Speed: 115 mph ultimate design wind speed
      Wind Design Topographical Effects: NA
      Wind Design Windborne Debris Zone: NA
      Seismic Design Category: A
      Weathering: Severe
      Frost Line Depth: 42 inches
      Termite: Moderate to Heavy
      Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: Yes
      Flood Hazards: Refer to DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance as amended by the Lisle Village Code.
      Air Freezing Index - 2,000
      Mean Annual Temperature - 50.3 °F
      2.   Delete Section R302.3 and replace with:
      R302.3 Two-family dwellings. Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall
be separated from each other by wall and floor assemblies having not less than
a 2-hour fire-resistance rating where tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or
UL 263. Such separation shall be provided regardless of whether a lot line
exists between the two dwelling units or not. Fire-resistance-rated floor/
ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be tight against the exterior
wall, and wall assemblies shall extend from the foundation to the underside of
the roof sheathing.
         (a)   Exceptions:
            (1)   A fire-resistance rating of 1-hour shall be permitted in
buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with NFPA 13.
            (2)   Wall assemblies need not extend through attic spaces where
the ceiling is protected by not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) type X gypsum
board, an attic draft stop constructed as specified in section R302.12.1 is
provided above and along the wall assembly separating the dwellings and the
structural framing supporting the ceiling is protected by not less than 1/2-
inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board or equivalent.
      3.   Delete Section R313 in its entirety.
   (D)   Chapter 4, Foundations, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section R401.1 and replace with:
      R401.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the
design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for buildings.
      2.   Delete Section R402.1 in its entirety.
      3.   Delete Section R403.1.1 and replace with:
      R403.1.1 Minimum size. Concrete footings shall be provided and sized so
as to support and distribute all imposed loads based upon the load-bearing
value of the soil but not less than 8 inches thick by 16 inches wide when
supporting an 8 inch thick wall, and 10 inches thick by 20 inches wide when
supporting a 10 inch thick wall.
      4.   Delete Section R403.1.4.1 and replace with:
      R403.1.4. 1. Frost protection. Foundation walls, piers and other
permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be extended a minimum of
42 inches below final grade. Footing shall not bear on frozen soil.
      5.   Delete Section R403.2 in its entirety.
      6.   Delete Section R403.3 in its entirety.
      7.   Delete Section R404.1.5.3 in its entirety.
      8.   Delete Section R404.2 in its entirety.
      9.   Insert Section R404.6 as follows:
      R404.6 Earth anchors. Earth anchor systems may be used for non-habitable
accessory buildings that do not exceed 200 square feet.
      Earth anchors shall be installed a minimum of 24 inches deep and in
accordance with manufacturer specifications. One earth anchor shall be used at
each corner of the building. An additional earth anchor shall be installed mid-
point of any wall span exceeding 10 feet.
      10.   Insert Section R404.7 as follows:
      R404.7 Concrete pier foundations. Concrete pier foundation systems may be
used to support exterior decks, screen rooms, sheds, gazeebos, or otherwise as
approved by the Code Official Piers must be sized to support and distribute the
imposed load but shall be no less than 10 inches in diameter and 42 inches deep
.
      11.   Insert Section R404.8 as follows:
      R404.8 Trench foundations. Poured concrete trench foundations may be used
to support single story frame additions to existing structures not to exceed
350 square feet in area. Trench foundations must be designed and constructed to
support and distribute the imposed loads and shall be 42 inches deep, have
foundation walls not less than 8 inches thick, and have a belled base not less
than 16 inches in width.
      12.   Insert Section R404.9 as follows:
      R404.9 Thickened edge slab foundations. Monolithic slab on grade
foundations may be used to support single-story non-habitable accessory
buildings not to exceed 600 square feet in area. Slab foundations shall be
designed and constructed to support and distribute the imposed loads and shall
be no less than 12 inches wide by 18 inches deep (12 inches below grade and 6
inches above grade) with two #5 rebar around the entire perimeter. The slab
shall be poured monolithically with the footing and shall be no less than 4
inches thick reinforced with 6 inch by 6 inch welded wire mesh supported on a
minimum 4 inch compacted stone base.
      13.   Section R405.1. Delete exception.
      14.   Delete Section R405.2 in its entirety.
      15.   Delete Section R406.3 in its entirety.
      16.   Insert the following table in Chapter 4:
Foundation Design Summary Table
 
Foundation Type      Building Type        Maximum Building Minimum Design
                     Limitation           Area (sq. ft.)   Requirements
                                                           - 24 inches deep
                                                           - One anchor at each
                                                           corner of the
                                                           building
                     Non-habitable,                        - Additional anchor
Earth Anchors        single story         200              required at the
                     accessory                             midpoint of any wall
                                                           span that exceeds 10
                                                           feet
                                                           - Per manufacturer
                                                           specifications
                                                           - Monolithic pour
                                                           - 18 inches deep (12
                                                           inches below grade
                                                           and 6 inches above
                                                           grade).
                     Single story, non-                    - 12 inches wide
Thickened Edge Slab  habitable accessory  600              - Two #5 perimeter
                                                           rebar
                                                           - 4 inch compacted
                                                           stone base
                                                           - 4 inch thick slab
                                                           with 6 inch by 6
                                                           inch wire mesh
                     Exterior decks,
                     screen rooms, sheds,                  - 10 inch diameter
Pier Foundation      gazeebos, or         NA               - 42 inches deep
                     otherwise approved
                     by the Code Official
                                                           - 42 inches deep
Trench Foundation    Additions to         350              - 8 inches thick
                     existing structures                   - 16 inches wide at
                                                           base
                                                           - Footing 8 inched
                                                           thick and 16 inched
                                                           wide when supporting
                                                           8 inch foundation
Footing / Foundation NA                   NA               wall.
Wall                                                       - Footing minimum 10
                                                           inches thick and 20
                                                           inched wide for 10
                                                           inch foundation
                                                           wall.
 
   (E)   Insert Section R408.9 as follows:
   R408.9 Crawl space floor. A minimum 2-inch thick concrete slab shall be
poured in all crawl space areas. The required slab shall be installed over a
minimum of 4 inches of stone over a 6-mil polyethylene film moisture barrier
installed as required by this code.
   (F)   Chapter 5, Floors, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section R502.7.1 and replace with:
      R502.7.1 Bridging. All floor joists with a clear span greater than 8 feet
shall be supported laterally at mid-span by solid blocking or diagonal bridging
(wood or metal).
      Exception. Trusses, structural composite lumber, structural glued-
laminated members, and I-joists shall be supported laterally as required by the
manufacturer’s recommendations.
      2.   Delete Section R504 in its entirety.
      3.   Delete Section R506.1 and replace with:
      R506.1 General. Concrete slab-on-ground- floors shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section or ACI 332.
Floors shall be a minimum of 4 inches thick (for expansive soils, see Section
R403.1.8. The specified compressive strength of concrete shall be as set forth
in Section R402.2.
      4.   Delete Section R507.3 and replace with:
      R507.3 Footings. Decks shall be supported on pier foundations.
      5.   Delete Section R507.3.1 and replace with:
      R507.3.1 Minimum size. Deck pier foundations shall be sized in accordance
with Table R507.3.1. The minimum size of deck pier foundations shall be 10
inches in diameter.
      6.   Delete Section 507.3.2 and replace with:
      R507.3.2 Minimum depth. Deck pier foundations shall extend a minimum of
42 inches below final grade.
   (G)   Chapter 8, Roof-Ceiling Construction, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section R801.3 and replace with:
      R801.3 Roof drainage. All dwellings shall be provided with rain gutters
and downspouts that will collect and discharge all roof drainage to the ground
surface at least 5 feet from foundation walls or to an approved drainage
system.
   (H)   Delete Chapters 25 through 33
   (I)   Delete Chapters 34 through 43 (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Adoption
4-3-2: Amendments
4-3-1: ADOPTION:
The 2020 edition of the National Electric Code (hereinafter Electrical Code),
and Annex H, for the purpose of practical safeguarding of persons and property
from hazards arising from the use of electricity, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as though fully set forth, except such portions as
are hereafter deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-3-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Electrical Code of the Village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is
amended in the following respects:
   (A)   Article 110, Requirements for Electrical Installations, is amended to:
      1.   Delete 110.5 and replace with:
      110.5 Conductors. Conductors normally used to carry current shall be of
copper. Where the conductor material is not specified, the material and sizes
given in this Code shall apply to copper conductors.
   (B)   Article 210, Branch Circuits, is amended to:
      1.   Modify 210.19 as follows:
      210.19 Conductors - Minimum Ampacity and Size. Insert: The minimum size
conductor for use in residential wiring systems shall be #14 AWG. The minimum
size conductor for use in nonresidential wiring systems shall be #12 AWG.
      2.   Modify 210.21 as follows:
      210.21 Outlet Devices. Insert: All outlet devices in nonresidential uses
shall be a minimum 20 amp rated devices.
   (C)   Delete Article 320, Armored Cable: Type AC
   (D)   Delete Article 322, Flat Cable Assemblies: Type FC
   (E)   Delete Article 324, Flat Conductor Cable: Type FCC
   (F)   Delete Article 326, Integrated Gas Spacer Cable: Type IGS
   (G)   Article 330, Metal - Clad Cable: Type MC, is amended as follows:
      1.   Delete 330.10 and replace with:
      330.10 Uses Permitted. Type MC cable shall be permitted to be used in
exposed and concealed locations in lengths not in excess of 6 feet, unless
otherwise approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   (H)   Delete Article 332, Mineral - Insulated, Metal Sheathed Cable: Type MI
   (I)   Delete Article 334, Nonmetallic - Sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC, NMS
   (J)   Delete Article 336, Power and Control Tray Cable: Type TC
   (K)   Article 338, Service-Entrance Cables: Types SE and USE, is amended as
follows:
      1.   Delete Type SE.
   (L)   Delete Article 340, Underground Feeder and Branch - Circuit Cable:
Type UF
   (M)   Article 348, Flexible Metal Conduit: Type FMC, is amended as follows:
      1.   Delete 348.10 and replace with:
      348.10 Uses Permitted. Type FMC shall be permitted to be used in exposed
and concealed locations in lengths not in excess of 6 feet, unless otherwise
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   (N)   Article 350, Liquidtight Flexible Metal Conduit: Type LFMC
      1.   Delete 350.10 and replace with:
      350.10 Uses Permitted. Type LFMC shall be permitted to be used in exposed
and concealed locations in lengths not in excess of 6 feet, unless otherwise
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   (O)   Article 352, Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit: Type PVC, is amended as
follows:
      1.   Delete 352.10 (A) Concealed, unless otherwise approved by the
Authority Having Jurisdiction.
      2.   Delete 352.10 (F) Exposed, unless otherwise approved by the
Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   (P)   Delete Article 354, Nonmetallic Underground Conduit with Conductors:
Type NUCC
   (Q)   Delete Article 355, Reinforced Thermosetting Resin Conduit: Type RTRC
   (R)   Article 356, Liquidtight Flexible Nonmetallic Conduit: Type LFNC
      1.   Delete 356.10 and replace with:
      356.10 Uses Permitted. Type LFNC shall be permitted to be used in exposed
and concealed locations in lengths not in excess of 6 feet for residential use
only, unless otherwise approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   (S)   Delete Article 360, Flexible Metallic Tubing: Type FMT
   (T)   Delete Article 362, Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing: Type ENT
   (U)   Delete Article 370, Cablebus
   (V)   Delete Article 372, Cellular Concrete Floor Raceways
   (W)   Delete Article 374, Cellular Metal Floor Raceways
   (X)   Delete Article 382, Nonmetallic Extensions
   (Y)   Delete Article 393, Low-Voltage Suspended Ceiling Power Distribution
Systems
   (Z)   Delete Article 394, Concealed Knob and Tube Wiring
   (AA)   Delete Article 396, Messenger-Supported Wiring
   (BB)   Delete Article 398, Open Wiring and Insulators
   (CC)   Article 410.16 Luminaires, Lampholders, and Lamps is amended as
follows:
      1.   Insert: A luminaire shall be installed in all storage space over 5
square feet in area.
      2.   Insert: Luminaires in storage spaces with a depth greater than 28
inches shall be controlled by a wall switch.
   (DD)   Annex H, Administration and Enforcement, is hereby adopted and
amended as follows:
      1.   Modify 80.2 Definitions as follows:
      Authority Having Jurisdiction: Village of Lisle
      Electrical Inspector: An individual authorized by the Village of Lisle
      2.   Delete 80.15 Electrical Board
      3.   Delete 80.19 (E) and replace with:
      80.19 (E) Fees. Fees shall be paid by the permit applicant prior to
permit issuance in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village
Code. Permit fees shall be double for any person who commences work before
obtaining necessary permits.
      4.   Delete 80.19 (F) 3 and replace with:
      80.19 (F) 3. No portion of the electrical installation shall be concealed
until it has been inspected and approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
      5.   Modify 80.19 (F) Inspection and Approvals as follows:
      Insert: All wiring shall be installed prior to rough inspection.
      6.   Modify 80.19 (F) Inspection and Approvals as follows:
      Insert: Electrical contractor or authorized individual shall be present
at the time of inspection to provide access to all electrical equipment or
electrical installation.
      7.   Delete 80.23 (B) and replace with:
      80.23 (B) Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the code adopted by reference herein shall, on conviction, be
fined as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code for each
offense; and every person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
day such violation shall continue, and shall be subject to the penalty under
this section for each and every separate offense.
      8.   Delete 80.25 (C) Notification
      9.   Delete 80.27 Inspector’s Qualifications
      10.   Modify 80.29 Liability for Damages as follows:
      Insert: Village of Lisle
      11.   Delete 80.35 Effective Date
      12.   Insert 80.37 Licensed Electrical Contractor Requirements
      13.   No person shall, within the Village, install electrical conductors,
equipment, and raceways; signaling and communications conductors, equipment,
and raceways, or otherwise perform electrical work without possessing an
electrical contractor license issued in the State of Illinois.
      Exceptions:
         (a)   A homeowner performing electrical work on his / her primary
residence.
         (b)   Public utilities under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce
Commission.
         (c)   Electrical contractors shall be identified on all permit
applications, shall submit a copy of an electrical contractor license issued in
the State of Illinois, and shall submit a letter of intent for the electrical
work to be performed. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 4
ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Adoption
4-4-2: Amendments
4-4-1: ADOPTION:
The Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
though fully set forth, except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified
or amended in accordance with Sections 36 and 38 of the Illinois Plumbing
License Law (the “Law”; 225 ILCS 320) and Section 750.800(b) of the Illinois
Plumbing Licensing Code (the “Code”; 78 Ill. Adm. Code 750). (Ord. 2022-4942,
1-3-2022)
4-4-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Illinois Plumbing Code, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the
following respects:
   (A)   Definitions: The following definitions are added supplemental to the
definitions contained within the Illinois plumbing code;
   “Code”: The latest edition of the Illinois plumbing code as adopted and
amended by the village of Lisle.
   “Existing Legal Non-Conforming Plumbing System”: A plumbing system, or
portion thereof, presently in existence on a premises which lawfully existed
prior to the enactment of this code and which complies with the plumbing code
in effect at the time of installation.
   “Existing Non-Conforming Piping”: Any part of an existing plumbing system
installed without proper permit approval and which does not comply with the
requirements of the plumbing code in effect at the time of installation.
   “Strip Mall”: A single story commercial building arranged or divided into
several occupiable areas, each with independent entrance and egress, lacking a
common core area, with the potential need for the addition or reconfiguration
of plumbing fixtures within each unit.
   (B)   Materials: Only the following materials are permitted for the
following locations:
      1.   All PVC piping shall be primed and glued. Cell core PVC is not
permitted.
      2.   Underground Water Supply Piping: Type “K” copper or ductile iron is
permitted. Polyethylene plastic pipe or tubing may be used for private wells
only.
      3.   Above Ground Water Supply Piping: Only type “L” copper, type “M”
copper and properly installed cross-linked polyethylene tubing is permitted.
      4.   Repairs to existing plumbing systems using dissimilar materials
shall be allowed only if the repair results in one material transition between
the point of repair and the building sewer or waste/vent stack.
      5.   Fixture Supply Stops and Fixture Supply Lines: Non- metallic stops
and slip-on stops/supply lines are not permitted. Fixture supply lines shall be
copper tubing or flexible braided stainless steel fixture supplies sized for
the use and installed without loops or kinks.
         (a)   Exception: Fixture supplies that are integral to the faucet by
the manufacture will be allowed.
   (C)   Water And Sanitary Sewer Service: All building water and sewer
services must comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Water and sewer services shall be installed a minimum of five feet
(5') in depth and shall have a horizontal separation of ten feet (10').
      2.   All single-family residential building drains must be minimum four
inch (4") in diameter. A commercial building sewer must be brought into the
building a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter. All strip malls require six-
inch (6") sanitary waste line for future tenant build out at thirty-six inches
(36") below finished floor with six-inch (6") cleanout in last tenant space.
      3.   The minimum size water service is one inch (1"). Copper water
service lines must be continuous one piece lengths of pipe from the service
stop to the water meter.
      4.   A full port shut-off valve is required on the inlet side of the
water meter. The first joint of the valve inlet shall be a flared type adapter
with brass-threaded connections to meter adapter.
      5.   Private wells are prohibited within the corporate boundaries of the
Village and must be sealed in accordance with the DuPage County Health
Department regulations once connection to the public water system has occurred.
      6.   Minimum one-inch (1") cold water supply to water heater inlet or
branch piping is required.
   (D)   Fixtures: The following special fixture requirements shall apply in
the Village:
      1.   All residential kitchen sinks require a minimum two-inch (2") waste
opening with two-inch (2") cleanout.
      2.   Commercial kitchens, deli’s, and catering business with triple bowl
sinks and mop basins must have a ½" hot water supply at fifty four inches (54")
above finish floor for future chemical feeder water supply.
      3.   Tank type urinals are not permitted.
      4.   All new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after
the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as
designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program),
when such labeled fixtures are available.
      5.   No residential water softeners may use more than seventy five (75)
gallons (285 liters) during the entire regeneration cycle, and sized to cycle
no more than three (3) times per week.
   (E)   Drainage System: The following additional requirements will apply to
drainage systems:
      1.   Grease interceptors must be installed outside of a building in a
location convenient to being pumped out. Outside grease interceptors must be
properly vented into the building using a minimum three-inch (3") vent
separately terminated thru roof.
         (a)   Exception 1: Non-grease producing kitchens & restaurants may
install in floor grease interceptors meeting IL plumbing code and DuPage health
department requirements.
         (b)   Exception 2: An inside grease trap may only be used with the
prior approval of the plumbing inspector when field conditions absolutely
prohibit the use of an outside grease trap.
      2.   Floor and/or trench drains are prohibited in private residential
garages unless drained to all approved gas and oil interceptor. Drywells are
not permitted.
      3.   Any proposed acid or chemical waste systems must be approved by the
DuPage County department of environmental concerns.
      4.   Properly installed floor drains with tamper proof covers must be
installed in each commercial restroom. In residential basements the floor drain
must be within five feet (5') of a furnace, boiler or water heater.
      5.   Individual pump units for the use of lifting waste from a fixture is
prohibited unless prior approval from the plumber inspector.
      6.   Floor drains in mechanical rooms, fire sprinkler equipment rooms,
and adjacent to reduced pressure zone principle backflow preventor assembly
(RPZ) must have eight and a half inch (81/2") round top with rough finish.
   (F)   Special Requirements: The following special requirements will apply:
      1.   Where piping is installed through studs, joist or rafters close
enough to be pierced by nails, nail guards or stud guards must be installed.
      2.   All new or remodeled car wash facilities must have a water recycling
system installed to recycle the water used for car washing.
      3.   A minimum two-inch (2") sewage pump is required where laundry
facilities discharge into a sanitary ejector pit.
      4.   All irrigation sprinkler systems shall have unthreaded valve
connections or hose bibbs after the reduced pressure zone principle backflow
preventor assembly (RPZ). (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 5
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-5-1: Adoption
4-5-2: Amendments
4-5-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Mechanical Code (Mechanical Code), for
the purpose of establishing minimum requirements to provide a reasonable level
of safety, health, property protection and general welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation, and maintenance or use of mechanical equipment or systems
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth,
except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2022-
4942, 1-3-2022)
4-5-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Mechanical Code of the Village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is
amended in the following respects:
   A)   Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended to:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
      2.   Section 103.1. Insert: Development Services Department
      3.   Delete Section 109.2 and replace with:
      109.2 Schedule of permit fees. Where work requires a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle
Village Code.
      4.   Delete Section 109.4 and replace with:
      109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Permit fees shall be double
for any person who commences work before obtaining necessary permits.
      5.   Delete Section 114.3.
      6.   Delete Section 115.4 and replace with:
      115.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install,
alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and
punishable by a fine as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle
Village Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
      1.   Add or amend the following definitions:
      Board of appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
      Code Official: the Development Services Director or individual designated
by the Development Services Director. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 6
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
4-6-1: Adoption
4-6-2: Amendments
4-6-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code (Fuel Gas Code), for the
purpose of establishing minimum requirements to provide a reasonable level of
safety, health, property protection and general welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation and maintenance or use of fuel gas equipment or systems is
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth, except
such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2022-4942,
1-3-2022)
4-6-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Fuel Gas Code of the village, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the
following respects:
   (A)   Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended to:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
      2.   Section 103.1. Insert: Development Services Department
      3.   Delete Section 109.2 and replace with:
      109.2 Schedule of permit fees. Where work requires a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle
Village Code.
      4.   Delete Section 109.4 and replace with:
      109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Permit fees shall be double
for any person who commences work before obtaining necessary permits.
      5.   Delete Section 113.3.
      6.   Delete Section 114.
      7.   Delete Section 115.4 and replace with:
      115.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install,
alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and
punishable by a fine as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle
Village Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
      1.   Add or amend the following definitions:
      Board of appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
      Code Official: the Development Services Director or individual designated
by the Development Services Director.
   (C)   Chapter 4, Gas Piping Installations, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 403.3.3 and replace with:
      403.3.3 Copper and copper alloy. Copper and copper alloy pipe is
prohibited as a fuel gas piping material.
      2.   Delete Section 403.4.3 and replace with:
      403.4.3. Copper and copper alloy tubing. Copper and copper alloy tubing
prohibited as a fuel gas piping material. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 7
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
4-7-1: Adoption
4-7-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (Energy
Conservation Code), as deleted, modified, or amended by the State of Illinois,
for the purpose of establishing minimum requirements to provide a reasonable
level of safety, health, property protection and general welfare by regulating
and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation, and maintenance or use of mechanical equipment or systems
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth.
(Ord. 2021-4942, 1-3-2022; amd. Ord. 2024-5053, 2-19-2024)
CHAPTER 8
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
4-8-1: Adoption
4-8-2: Amendments
4-8-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Fire Code (Fire Code), including Appendix
C and Appendix D, for the purpose of establishing the minimum requirements
consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable
level of life, safety and property protection from hazards of fire, explosion
or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures and premises,
and to provide a reasonable level of safety to fire fighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as though fully set forth, except such portions as are hereafter
deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-8-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Fire Code of the village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in
the following respects:
   (A)   Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended to:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
      2.   Section 103.1. Insert: Development Services Department
      3.   Delete Section 107.2 and replace with:
      107.2 Schedule of permit fees. Where a permit is required, a fee for each
permit shall be paid in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle
Village Code.
      4.   Delete Section 107.4 and replace with:
      107.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Permit fees shall be double
for any person who commences work before obtaining necessary permits.
      5.   Delete Section 111.3
      6.   Delete Section 112.4 and replace with:
      112.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code shall be subject to penalties
as prescribed by law and punishable by a fine as established by Title 1,
Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
      1.   Add or amend the following definitions:
      Board of Appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
      Building Official: The Development Services Director or individual
designated by the Development Services Director.
      Change of occupancy: Any of the following shall be considered as a change
of occupancy where this code requires a greater degree of safety,
accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of egress,
ventilation, or sanitation than is existing in the current building or
structure:
         1.   Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or
structure.
         2.   Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the level of
activity within, a building or structure.
         3.   Any change of tenant, in which case, compliance with the Life
Safety Code (NFPA 101) is required.
      Fire Code Official: The Development Services Director or individual
designated by the Development Services Director.
   (C)   Chapter 5, Fire Service Features, is amended to:
      1.   Delete 507.5.1 and replace with:
      507.5.1 Where required. In conjunction with the fire hydrant spacing
requirement of appendix C of this code, hydrants shall be located along public
streets so that no portion of a building will be over 300 feet from a fire
hydrant. Where this is not possible, additional hydrants shall be located on
the premises accessible to motorized fire apparatus.
      One hydrant shall be located at each street intersection and intermediate
hydrants shall be provided where distance between intersections exceeds 400
feet.
      In apartments, townhouses, condominiums, town/row or cluster housing
areas where streets or parking lots dead end, hydrants shall be placed along
the access route.
      At least two (2) fire hydrants shall be located within 300 feet of the
building. Hydrants shall be located no closer than 25 feet to a building.
      Additional fire hydrants shall be provided within 500 feet of the
building so that the fire flow required divided by 1,000 will equal the number
of hydrants available.
      Hydrants should be located approximately ten (10) feet from all-weather
roadways. If this cannot be done, the closest part of the hydrant shall be set
back at least five (5) feet from the curb.
      Access to fire hydrants shall be from all-weather roadways adequate in
width, clearance and strength for firefighting purposes. Such routes including
private roadways, shall be maintained accessible during all seasons of the
year. Legal provisions will be required for private roads.
      Fire hydrants used in conjunction with water supplies shall meet the
standards of the American Water Works Association standard no. C-502, and shall
have two (2-1/2) inch and one (4-1/2) inch outlets with auxiliary gate valves
on the hydrant branch line. Threads shall be American national standard. Pumper
outlets shall face roadways.
      Fire hydrants shall be protected from accidental damage by approved
methods when located in areas subject to vehicular damage.
      Where non-pressurized water systems are allowed, supplies shall be
located not less than 300 feet from the building. Access to the supply shall be
by an all-weather roadway.
      Water supplies including hydrant distribution for fully sprinklered
buildings need only meet the design standard of NFPA 13, 2013 edition. Water
supplies for sprinkler systems may be supplied in accordance with NFPA 13,
sprinkler systems, 2013 edition or in an equivalent manner.
   (D)   Chapter 9, Fire Protection and Life Safety Systems, is amended to:
      1.   Section 903.2. Delete exception.
      2.   Delete Section 903.2.1.1 and replace with:
      903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
all fire areas containing group A-1 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in
area.
      3.   Delete Section 903.2.1.2 and replace with:
      903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
all fire areas containing group A-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in
area.
      4.   Delete Section 903.2.1.3 and replace with:
      903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
all fire areas containing group A-3 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in
area.
      5.   Delete Section 903.2.1.4 and replace with:
      903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
all fire areas containing group A-4 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in
area.
      6.   Delete Section 903.2.3, including exception, and replace with:
      903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all
fire areas containing group E occupancies.
      7.   Delete Section 903.2.4 and replace with:
      903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
all fire areas containing group F-1 and F-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square
feet in area.
      8.   Section 903.2.6. Delete exceptions.
      9.   Delete Section 903.2.7 and replace with:
      903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all
fire areas containing group M occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
      10.   Delete Section 903.2.8 and replace with:
      903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all
fire areas containing group R-1, R-2 and R-4 occupancies. R-3 occupancies shall
be regulated under the 2021 International Residential Code.
      11.   Delete Section 903.2.9 and replace with:
      903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
all fire areas containing group S-1 occupancies.
      12.   Delete Section 903.2.9.1 and replace with:
      903.2.9.1 Repair garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
for all fire areas used as repair garages.
      13.   Delete Section 903.2.10 and replace with:
      Group S-2 parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided for all fire areas containing group S-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000
square feet in area. All parking garages, open or enclosed, shall be equipped
with an automatic fire sprinkler system.
      14.   Delete Section 903.2.10.1 and replace with:
      903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided for all fire areas used as commercial parking garages.
      15.   Insert Section 903.2.13 as follows:
      903.2.13 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all
fire areas containing group B occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
      16.   Delete Section 903.3.1 and replace with:
      903.3.1 Standards. Sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, unless otherwise permitted by other chapters
of this code, as applicable. All sprinkler systems shall be designed with a 10-
psi or 10% safety factor, whichever is greater. Flexible sprinkler heads are
not permitted.
      17.   Section 903.3.1.1.1. Delete exemptions #3 and #4.
      16.   Delete Section 903.3.1.2 in its entirety.
      19.   Delete Section 903.3.1.3 in its entirety.
      20.   Section 903.3.5. Delete International Plumbing Code reference and
replace with Illinois Plumbing Code.
      21.   Delete Section 903.3.5.1 and replace with:
      903.3.5.1 Domestic services. Domestic water service lines shall be
permitted to serve limited area sprinkler systems only.
      22.   Delete Section 903.3.5.2 in its entirety.
      23.   Insert Section 903.3.5.3 as follows:
      903.3.5.3 Water supply test. As part of the sprinkler plan review
submittal, test results from a current water supply test shall be provided. The
test shall have been performed within one year of the date of plan submittal.
All tests shall be witnessed and documented by the Village of Lisle Public
Works Department.
      24.   Delete Section 907.1.3 and replace with:
      907.1.3 Equipment. Systems and components shall be listed and approved
for the purpose for which they are installed. All new fire alarm systems shall
be addressable type systems only. All new fire alarm systems shall be
hardwired. Wireless systems are not permitted.
      25.   Delete Section 907.2.1, including exception, and replace with:
      907.2.1 Group A. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all Group A occupancies.
      26.   Delete Section 907.2.2, including exception, and replace with:
      907.2.2 Group B. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group B occupancies.
      27.   Delete Section 907.2.3, including exceptions, and replace with:
      907.2.3 Group E. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group E occupancies.
      28.   Delete Section 907.2.4, including exception, and replace with:
      907.2.4 Group F. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group F occupancies.
      29.   Delete Section 907.2.5 and replace with:
      907.2.5 Group H. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group H occupancies.
      30.   Delete Section 907.2.6, including exceptions, and replace with:
      907.2.6 Group I. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group I occupancies.
      31.   Delete Section 907.2.7, including exceptions, and replace with:
      907.2.7 Group M. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group M occupancies.
      32.   Delete Section 907.2.8 and replace with:
      907.2.8 Group R-1. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group R-1 occupancies.
      33.   Delete Section 907.2.9 and replace with:
      907.2.9 Group R-2. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group R-2 occupancies.
      34.   907.2.10 Group S. Amend section to read:
      907.2.10 Group S. An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in all group S occupancies.
      35.   Delete Section 907.2.11 and replace with:
      907.2.11 Single - and multiple-station smoke alarms. Smoke detection
devices of a type approved by the fire inspector shall be provided in all
buildings equipped with an automatic fire alarm system. Devices shall be
located as determined necessary to provide early fire detection based upon the
use and as required under applicable provisions of NFPA 72.
      36.   Insert Section 907.11 as follows:
      907.11 Outside Alerting Devices. All fire alarm and fire suppression
systems shall have an outside alerting device (strobe) of a type and at a
location approved by the Fire Code Official.
      37.   Insert Section 907.12 as follows:
      907.12 Tenant Space Light. Each tenant space in a multiple tenant
building shall have a light visible in a public access area indicating which
tenant space the activated detector is in or identified on an accessible
enunciator or control panel. If tenant lights are used, then a strobe light
shall be installed above each designated apartment or tenant space entry door.
The indicator light shall operate upon activation of a detector within the
tenant space.
      38.   Insert Section 912.2.1.1 as follows:
      912.2.1.1 Approved Location. A fire department connection serving
sprinkler systems and/or standpipe systems shall be located within seventy five
(75') feet of a fire hydrant.
      39.   Insert Section 913.2.3 as follows:
      913.2.3 Back-Up Power. All required fire pumps shall be equipped with
back-up generators to protect against interruption of service in the event of
an electrical power outage.
      40.   914.3.1 Automatic Sprinkler System. Delete exception.
   (E)   Delete Chapter 10 in its entirety. All means of egress systems for new
buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with requirements of
the current Village of Lisle Building Code.
   (F)   Chapter 58, Flammable Gases and Flammable Cryogenic Fluids, is amended
to:
      1.   Delete Section 5804.2 and replace with:
      Section 5804.2 Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of flammable gases in
amounts exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area indicated in
table 5003.1.1(3) is not permitted.
   (G)   Chapter 58, Flammable Solids, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 5904.2 and replace with:
      5904.2 Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of flammable gases in amounts
exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area indicated in table
5003.1.1(1) is not permitted.
   (H)   Chapter 60, Highly Toxic and Toxic Metals, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 6003.2, including subsections, and replace with:
      6003.2 Outdoor storage and use. Outdoor storage and use of highly toxic
and toxic materials is not permitted.
      2.   Delete Section 6004.3, including subsections, and replace with:
      6004.3 Outdoor Storage and use. The outdoor storage and use of highly
toxic and toxic compressed gases is not permitted.
   (I)   Chapter 64, Pyrophoric Materials, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 6404.2, including subsections, and replace with:
      6404.2 Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of pyrophoric materials is not
permitted.
   (J)   Chapter 66, Unstable (Reactive) Materials, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 6604.2, including subsections, and replace with:
      6604.2 Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of unstable (reactive) materials
is not permitted.
   (K)   Chapter 67, Water-Reactive Solids and Liquids, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 6704.2, including subsections, and replace with:
      6704.2 Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of water reactive solids and
liquids is not permitted. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 9
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
4-9-1: Adoption
4-9-2: Amendments
4-9-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Existing Building Code (Existing Building
Code), for the purpose of establishing flexibility to permit the use of
alternative approaches to achieve compliance with minimum requirements to
provide a reasonable level of safety, health, property protection and general
welfare insofar as they are affected by the repair, alteration, change of
occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as though fully set forth, except such portions as
are hereafter deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-9-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Existing Building Code of the Village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is
amended in the following respects:
   (A)   Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended to:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
      2.   Section 103.1. Insert: Development Services Department
      3.   Delete Section 108.2 and replace with:
      Section 108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Where a permit is required, a fee
for each permit shall be paid in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 20, of the
Lisle Village Code.
      4.   Delete Section 108.4 and replace with:
      108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Permit fees shall double
for any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits.
      5.   Delete Section 112.3
      6.   Delete Section 113.4 and replace with:
      113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this
code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who repairs or
alters or changes the occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by law and punishable by a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
      7.   Delete building exemptions of Section 105.2 and replace with:
         (a)   Building:
            (1)   Retaining walls that do not exceed 2 feet in height above
existing grade.
            (2)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, wall cabinets, and
similar finish work. All materials shall comply with required flame spread and
smoke development ratings.
            (3)   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to an R-3 occupancy
that are less than 24 inches deep and not designed to have a circulation
system.
            (4)   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to an R-
3 occupancy.
      8.   Delete plumbing exemptions of Section 105.2
   (B)   Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
      1.   Add or amend the following definitions:
      Board of appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
      Change of occupancy: Any of the following shall be considered as a change
of occupancy where this code requires a greater degree of safety,
accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of egress,
ventilation, or sanitation than is existing in the current building or
structure:
         1.   Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or
structure.
         2.   Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the level of
activity within, a building or structure.
         3.   Any change of tenant, in which case, compliance with the Life
Safety Code (NFPA 101) is required.
      Code Official: the Development Services Director or individual designated
by the Development Services Director.
   (C)   Chapter 7, Alteration - Level 1, is amended to:
      1.   Insert condition 3 of Section 702.5 as follows:
      The replacement of a code compliant egress window with a new window unit
shall not result in the window being made non-compliant with the minimum
dimensional requirements of the code for egress openings.
   (D)   Chapter 10, Change of Occupancy, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 1001.3 and replace with:
      1001.2 Certificate of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy
shall be issued where a change of occupancy occurs. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 10
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
SECTION:
4-10-1: Adoption
4-10-2: Amendments
4-10-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (Swimming Pool
and Spa Code), for the purpose of establishing a reasonable level of safety,
health, property protection and general welfare by regulating and controlling
the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location and
maintenance or use of pools and spas is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as though fully set forth, except such portions as are hereafter
deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-10-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the Village of Lisle, as hereinabove adopted,
is amended in the following respects:
   (A)   Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended to:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
      2.   Section 103.1. Insert: Development Services Department
      3.   Delete Section 108.2 and replace with:
      108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Where work requires a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle
Village Code.
      4.   Delete Section 108.4 and replace with:
      108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Permit fees shall double
for any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits.
      5.   Delete Section 111.3.
      6.   Delete Section 112.1.
      7.   Delete Section 113.4 and replace with:
      113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, or repair a pool or spa in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
subject to penalties as prescribed by law and punishable by a fine as
established by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (B)   Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
      1.   Add or amend the following definitions:
      Board of appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
      Code Official: the Development Services Director or individual designated
by the Development Services Director.
   (C)   Chapter 3, General Compliance, is amended to:
      1.   Delete exception #2 of section 305.1 (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 11
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
4-11-1: Adoption
4-11-2: Amendments
4-11-1: ADOPTION:
The 2021 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code (hereinafter
Property Maintenance Code), and Appendix A, for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the maintenance of existing buildings, structures and
properties, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set
forth, except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended.
(Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-11-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Property Maintenance Code of the Village, as hereinabove adopted, is
amended in the following respects:
   (A)   Chapter 1, Administration, is amended to:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
      2.   Section 103.1. Insert: Development Services Department
      3.   Delete Section 104.1 and replace with:
      104.1 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as
established by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
      4.   Delete Section 107.3.
      5.   Delete Section 108.1.
      6.   Delete Section 110.4 and replace with:
      110.4 Failure to comply: Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
to a fine as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
   (B)   Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
      1.   Add or amend the following definitions:
      Board of appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
      Code Official: the Development Services Director or individual designated
by the Development Services Director.
   (C)   Chapter 3, General Requirements, is amended to:
      1.   Delete Section 302.4.
      2.   Section 304.14. Insert: May 1st to October 31st.
   (D)   Chapter 6, Mechanical And Electrical Requirements, is amended to:
      1.   Section 602.3. Insert: October 1st to May 1st
      2.   Section 602.4. Insert: October 1st to May 1st
      4.   Delete Section 606.
   (E)   Appendix A, Boarding Standard, is hereby adopted and amended to:
      1.   Add exception to section A101:
      Exception. Section A101 shall not apply when board-up is ordered by the
Village of Lisle or Lisle Woodridge Fire District as an emergency measure.
      2.   Add exception to section A102:
      Exception. Section A102 shall not apply when board-up is ordered by the
Village of Lisle or Lisle Woodridge Fire District as an emergency measure.
      3.   Add exception to section A103:
      Exception. Section A103 shall not apply when board-up is ordered by the
Village of Lisle or Lisle Woodridge Fire District as an emergency measure.
(Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 12
ELEVATOR SAFETY CODE
SECTION:
4-12-1: Adoption
4-12-2: Inspections; Fees
4-12-3: Amendments
4-12-4: Violations
4-12-5: Penalty
4-12-1: ADOPTION:
For the purpose of assuring that conveyances are correctly and safely installed
and operated within the Village of Lisle by regulating the installation,
construction, operation, inspection, testing, maintenance, alteration, and
repair of elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, moving sidewalks, platform lifts,
stairway chairlifts, and automated people movers, there is hereby adopted by
the Village the following codes, standards, and recommended practices:
   (A)   American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), Three Park Avenue,
New York, NY 10016-5990:
      1.   Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2019/CSA B44-
2019) and Performance-Based Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME
A17.7-2007 reaffirmed 2017/CSA B44.7-07 reaffirmed 2017).
      2.   Modification and Exclusion to the Safety Code for Elevators and
Escalators (ASME A17.1-2019/CSA B44-2019) adopted by the Illinois Elevator
Safety Review Board:
         (a)   Modification: Witnessing of Initiating Devices for Fireman’s
Emergency Operation. All initiating devices for all elevators shall be tested
every 5 years. The test shall be witnessed by an elevator inspector.
Documentation of the results of the testing of initiating devices must be kept
on site in the maintenance records. All hydraulic elevators shall have this
documentation completed no later than December 31, 2023. All traction elevators
shall have this documentation completed at the time of their first Category 5
test after January 1, 2023. After the initial test, subsequent tests of the
elevator’s initiating devices shall be conducted no later than 5 years after
the date of the last test.
      3.   Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, and Moving Walks
(ASME 17.2- 2017);
      4.   Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.3-2005),
but only as required under section 35 (h) and (i) of the State of Illinois
Elevator Safety Act and subsection (d) of section 1000.60 of the Illinois
General Assembly’s Administrative Code;
      5.   Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME
A18.1-2017);
      6.   Standard for the Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QE1-
2018).
   (B)   American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), 1801 Alexander Bell Drive,
Reston, VA 20191-4400: Automated People Mover Standards (ANSI/ASCE/T & DI 21-
13). (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-12-2: INSPECTIONS; FEES:
   (A)   No passenger or freight elevator shall be operated until it is tested,
inspected and approved as to its safety. An application fee, to compensate the
Village for initial inspection services, in an amount as established by the
annual fee ordinance per elevator, shall be due and payable prior to the
issuance of building permits.
   (B)   For each conveyance, there shall be an annual inspection fee as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
   (C)   Inspection and testing shall be conducted by an elevator inspector
authorized by the Village of Lisle. After making the inspection, the inspector
shall affix a certificate of inspection to the elevator. If the inspector finds
that the elevator is unsafe, he shall order that the elevator not be used until
the deficiencies are corrected. The inspector shall immediately report a
finding of lack of safety to the Village of Lisle who shall immediately give
notice of the unsafe elevator to the owner. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-12-3: AMENDMENTS:
The Elevator Safety Code of the Village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is
amended in the following respects:
   (A)   All elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, moving sidewalks, platform
lifts, stairway chairlifts, and automated people movers regulated by this code,
except those conveyances in single-family dwellings, shall be tested and
inspected as to its safety at least once within a 12-month period.
   (B)   All conveyances shall have the inspector’s certification clearly
posted within the elevator car or lift, or shall be displayed near the main
entrance to the conveyance, within clear view of users of the conveyance. (Ord.
2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-12-4: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
   (A)   Fail to pay the application or inspection fee;
   (B)   Fail to affix the inspector’s certification within the elevator;
   (C)   Operate or allow to be operated an elevator prior to initial
inspection and approval;
   (D)   Operate or allow to be operated an elevator found unsafe by the
elevator inspector;
   (E)   Operate or allow to be operated an elevator not in compliance with the
codes, standards, and recommended practices set forth in this chapter; or
   (F)   Resist or oppose the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-12-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter, including the Safety Codes adopted by reference and
made a part hereof, shall be fined for each offense as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code. Each day such violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-
3-2022)
CHAPTER 13
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-13-1: Numbering System Adopted
4-13-2: System For North And South Streets
4-13-3: System For East And West Streets
4-13-4: Numbering Assignment
4-13-5: Penalty
4-13-1: NUMBERING SYSTEM ADOPTED:
All buildings in the Village shall be numbered as hereinafter set forth. (Ord.
2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-13-2: SYSTEM FOR NORTH AND SOUTH STREETS:
   (A)   Buildings fronting on the west side of streets running north and south
shall bear even numbers.
   (B)   Buildings fronting on the east side of streets running north and south
shall bear odd numbers. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-13-3: SYSTEM FOR EAST AND WEST STREETS:
   (A)   Buildings on the north side of streets running east and west shall
bear even numbers.
   (B)   Buildings on the south side of streets running east and west shall
bear odd numbers. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-13-4: NUMBERING ASSIGNMENT:
The Village shall assign building numbering upon application for a building
permit. (Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-13-5: PENALTY:
Any owner or occupant failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and be subject to a fine as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
CHAPTER 14
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
4-14-1: Adoption
4-14-2: Complaint Procedures
4-14-1: ADOPTION:
Article 3 of the Illinois Human Rights Act, Real Estate Transactions (775 ILCS
5/3), as it exists or amended, for the purpose of securing for all individuals
within the Village of Lisle the freedom from discrimination against any
individual because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
ancestry, age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental
disability, military status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, or unfavorable
discharge from military service in connection with real estate transactions is
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth. (Ord.
2022-4942, 1-3-2022)
4-14-2: COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
   (A)   The Village shall act as a local source for assistance and information
for persons who have complaints related to unfair housing practices.
   (B)   The Development Services Director shall be responsible for
coordinating and directing the Village’s fair housing procedures. (Ord. 2022-
4942, 1-3-2022)
TITLE 5
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LEGAL FRAMEWORK
SECTION:
5-1-1: Official Name
5-1-2: Authority
5-1-3: Effective Date
5-1-4: Applicability And Jurisdiction
5-1-5: Exemptions
5-1-6: Purposes
5-1-7: Minimum Requirements
5-1-8: Compliance Required
5-1-9: Conflicting Provisions
5-1-10: Rules Of Language And Construction
5-1-11: Zoning Map And District Boundaries
5-1-12: Transitional Provisions
5-1-13: Severability
5-1-1: OFFICIAL NAME:
The official name of this document (Title 5) is the “Zoning Ordinance of the
Village of Lisle, Illinois.” For convenience, it is referred to throughout this
title as the “Zoning Ordinance.” (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This Zoning Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations
imposed by Illinois law, including 65 ILCS 5/. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance become effective on January 1, 2022,
except as otherwise expressly stated. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-4: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance apply to all public and private
development within the Village, except as provided by state or federal law or
as otherwise expressly stated in this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021)
5-1-5: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Public utility exemptions. The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance
shall not be exercised to impose regulations on any of the following:
      1.   The type or location of any underground installations, poles,
towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other similar distributing
equipment of a public utility as defined in the Public Utilities Act, if the
public utility is subject to the Messages Tax Act, the Gas Revenue Tax Act or
the Public Utilities Revenue Act, or if such facilities or equipment are
located in any rights-of-way and are used for railroad purposes; or
      2.   Uses, buildings, or structures of a public utility as defined in the
Public Utilities Act.
   (B)   FERC-regulated pipeline exemptions. Pipelines subject to regulation by
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and above-ground equipment
associated with such pipelines are permitted in all zoning districts and are
exempt from compliance with minimum lot area, lot width and setback
regulations. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-6: PURPOSES:
This Zoning Ordinance is adopted for the purposes of:
   (A)   To protect the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of
the citizens of the Village;
   (B)   To protect the stability of the residential and business areas within
the Village and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such
areas;
   (C)   To conserve the values of property throughout the Village;
   (D)   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property;
   (E)   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open space surrounding buildings which is necessary to provide adequate
light and air, and to protect the public health;
   (F)   To divide the Village into districts of such number, shape, area and
of such different classes, according to the use of land and buildings, the
height and bulk of buildings, the intensity of use, and the area of open
spaces;
   (G)   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential and business or other uses within such areas;
   (H)   To prohibit locations and use of buildings or structures and uses of
land that are incompatible with the type of development for specified districts
of the Village;
   (I)   To prevent additions and alterations to or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed hereunder;
   (J)   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other dangers;
   (K)   To limit congestion in the public streets and to protect the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
   (L)   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall
conform;
   (M)   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
Village;
   (N)   To lessen the hazard to persons and damage to property resulting from
the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters;
   (O)   To facilitate and insure the preservation of sites, areas and
structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance;
   (P)   To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value
of existing or desirable development in each district;
   (Q)   To define the limits, powers and duties of administrative officers and
bodies as provided herein;
   (R)   To implement the policies and goals contained in the comprehensive
plan and other officially adopted plans of the Village;
   (S)   To accommodate and promote sustainable building and development
practices;
   (T)   To require provisions for safe and adequate circulation of motor
vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians;
   (U)   To provide for the opportunity to create a variety of housing
opportunities and life styles, employment, industrial, commercial enterprises,
and recreational opportunities;
   (V)   To require provisions that promote adequate police and fire
protection;
   (W)   To require provisions for adequate and essential facilities, services,
utilities, and facilities necessary for public use. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-1-7: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are the minimum requirements
deemed necessary to carry out the zoning ordinance’s stated purposes.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, all uses,
development, and construction activities must comply with all other applicable
ordinances, laws and regulations of the Village.
   (C)   All references in this Zoning Ordinance to other governmental
regulations are for informational purposes only and do not necessarily
constitute a complete list of other applicable regulations. These references do
not imply responsibility for the Village to enforce regulations imposed by
other government authorities. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-8: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   (A)   Structures and land shall not be occupied, used, erected,
reconstructed, structurally altered, or enlarged, and uses shall not be
located, commenced or continued, unless such structure or use complies with all
applicable zoning ordinance provisions.
   (B)   Building permits, certificates of occupancy, or other required permits
or licenses, shall not be approved, and permits or licenses shall not be issued
by the Village that would authorize the use or change in use of any land or
structure contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, or for the
erection, moving, alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any structure
designed or intended to be used for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Lots shall not be divided into 2 or more lots unless all lots
resulting from the division or sale and all improvements on such lots comply
with the lot and building standards of the subject zoning district. (Ord. 2021-
4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Conflict with State or Federal Regulations. If the provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state or federal
government, the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by
law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent
controls.
   (B)   Conflict with Other Village Regulations. If the provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with
provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the Village, the
more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
      1.   Provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be used in determining
classification of construction types, occupancy, or use for the purpose of
determining the application of the Village’s adopted building codes.
   (C)   Conflict with Private Agreements. This Zoning Ordinance is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed
restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by an agreement
or covenant among private parties, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance
govern. *(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-10: RULES OF LANGUAGE AND CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Meanings and Intent. The language of this Zoning Ordinance must be
read literally. Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Words and
terms expressly defined in this Zoning Ordinance have the specific meanings
assigned unless the context indicates another meaning. General usage terms that
are not expressly defined in this Zoning Ordinance have the meaning given in
the latest edition of Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary.
   (B)   Public Officials and Agencies. All employees, public officials, bodies
and agencies to which references are made are those of the Village of Lisle
unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (C)   Computation of Time
      1.   References to “days” are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly
stated. References to “business days” are references to regular Village
government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by
Village government.
      2.   The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by excluding
the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday
or holiday observed by Village government, that day is excluded.
      3.   A day concludes at the close of business of Village Hall and any
materials received after that time will be considered to have been received the
following day.
   (D)   Tenses and Usage
      1.   Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also
true.
      2.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The
reverse is also true.
      3.   The words “must,” “will,” and “shall” are mandatory.
      4.   The words “should”, “may” are advisory, not mandatory or required.
      5.   When used with numbers, “up to x,” “not more than x” and “a maximum
of x” all include “x.”
      6.   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust company or corporation, as well as an individual.
      7.   The words “used” and “occupied” include “intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied.”
   (E)   Conjunctions. Unless the context otherwise expressly indicates,
conjunctions have the following meanings:
      1.   “and” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
      2.   “or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
   (F)   Headings and Illustrations. Headings and illustrations are provided
for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any
provision of this Zoning Ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this Zoning Ordinance and any heading, drawing,
table, figure or illustration, the text governs.
   (G)   Current Versions. All references in this Zoning Ordinance to other
Village, state or federal regulations refer to the most current version of
those regulations in effect at the time of interpretation.
   (H)   Lists and Examples. Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of
items or examples that use “including,” “such as,” or similar terms are
intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive
lists of all possibilities. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-11: ZONING MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   (A)   Official Zoning Map. In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-13-19, the
Village Board shall cause to be published no later than March 31 of each year a
zoning map clearly showing the existing zoning, divisions, restrictions,
regulations and classifications of the Village for the preceding calendar year.
   (B)   Zoning Map Maintenance. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for
directing revisions to the Village’s geographic information system and the
official zoning map to reflect zoning map amendments after the effective date
of zoning map amendments. No unauthorized person shall alter or modify the
Village’s geographic information system or official zoning map. The Zoning
Administrator may authorize printed copies of the official zoning map to be
produced and maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the
official zoning map for historical reference.
   (C)   Zoning district boundary lines must be described by legal description
or by a map that accompanies the ordinance establishing the district or
amending the district boundaries. When a legal description is used, the zoning
district boundary is deemed to extend to the centerline of abutting streets.
When a map is used, district boundary lines must be established by dimensions,
property lines, recorded lot lines, or the centerline of abutting streets,
alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, as those features were of record at the time
of adoption.
   (D)   Zoning Map Interpretations. Where any uncertainty exists about a
zoning boundary, the legal description governs. When there is no legal
description of the zoning district boundary, the Zoning Administrator is
authorized to make an interpretation of the zoning map using the following
rules of interpretation or refer the matter to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, in which case they must also use the following rules of
interpretation:
      1.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following lot
lines or section lines will be construed as following those lot lines or
section lines.
      2.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
street, alley or railroad line will be construed as following the centerline of
the street, alley or railroad right-of-way.
      3.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the
boundary of a municipality will be construed as following that boundary.
      4.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the
shoreline or centerline of a river, stream, lake or other water body will be
construed as following the actual shoreline or centerline of that water body.
If, subsequent to the establishment of the boundary, the shoreline or
centerline of the watercourse moves as a result of natural processes (flooding,
erosion, sedimentation, etc.), the boundary will be construed as moving with
the shoreline or centerline of the water body.
      5.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately parallel to, or
as an apparent extension of, a feature described above will be construed as
being actually parallel to, or an extension of, the feature.
   (E)   Split-zoned lots. The zoning map shall not be amended to classify a
single lot into two or more base zoning districts.
      1.   The split zoning of any newly created lot (into more than one base
zoning district classification) is prohibited.
      2.   When an existing lot is classified in two or more base zoning
classifications prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the more
restrictive provisions of the subject zoning districts, including but not
limited to, use, parking, signs, setbacks, height and other lot and building
regulations, shall be applied to the entire lot.
   (F)   Zoning of Public Ways and Rights-of-way. All streets, alleys, public
ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, will
be deemed to be in the same zoning district as the property in the most
restrictive classification immediately abutting the street, alley, public way
or railroad rights-of-way. If the centerline of a street, alley, public way or
railroad right-of-way serves as a zoning district boundary, the zoning of such
areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, will be deemed to be the same
as that of the abutting property up to the centerline.
      1.   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by
official action of the Village Board, the zoning district adjoining each side
of such street, alley or public way is automatically extended to the centerline
of such a vacation (or to the reversionary owner should such reversionary
rights be different than the centerline of the right-of-way).
   (G)   Zoning of Annexed Land. When land is annexed or otherwise brought into
the zoning jurisdiction of the Village, it is automatically classified in the
R-1 zoning district. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-12: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this section address the transition from the previous zoning
ordinance (the one in effect before the effective date of this Zoning
Ordinance).
   (A)   Applications, Permits and Approvals. Any building, development or
structure for which a building permit was issued or a complete permit
application had been accepted for processing before the effective date of this
Zoning Ordinance may be completed in conformance with the issued building
permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even if such building,
development or structure does not comply with provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance. If the building is not commenced within the time allowed under the
original building permit, the building, development or structure may be
constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of
this Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Applications for special uses, variations or other zoning approvals
that were submitted in complete form and are pending approval before the
effective date of this ordinance must be reviewed wholly under the terms of the
zoning ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date of this Zoning
Ordinance. Building permits for construction and development approved under
such zoning approvals may be issued even if such building, development or
structure does not fully comply with provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. If
building is not commenced within the time allowed under the building permit,
then the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and
occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   When a use classified as a special use under this Zoning Ordinance
exists as a permitted use on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, that
use will be considered a lawfully established special use under this Zoning
Ordinance.
   (D)   When an approved variance or special use has been lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, such variance or special
use shall be deemed valid subject to any conditions placed thereon at the time
of approval.
   (E)   When any amendment to this Zoning Ordinance changes the classification
of a permitted use to a special use, any use lawfully established before such
amendment will be considered a lawfully established special use after the
effective date of the amendment.
   (F)   A lawfully established existing use that is not allowed as a special
use or permitted use in the district in which the use is now located under this
Zoning Ordinance will be considered a nonconforming use and will be subject to
all applicable regulations of Chapter 10 of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (G)   Violations Continue. Any violation of the previous zoning ordinance
will continue to be a violation under this Zoning Ordinance and be subject to
enforcement under Chapter 19 of this Zoning Ordinance.
      1.   If the use, development, construction or other activity that was a
violation under the previous zoning ordinance complies with the express terms
of this Zoning Ordinance, enforcement action will cease, except to the extent
of collecting penalties for violations that occurred before the effective date
of this ordinance.
      2.   The adoption of this Zoning Ordinance does not affect any pending or
future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the previous zoning
ordinance that occurred before the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance.
      3.   Any nonconformity under the previous zoning ordinance will also be
nonconformity under this Zoning Ordinance, as long as the situation that
resulted in the nonconforming status under the previous regulation continues to
exist.
         (a)   If, however, a nonconforming situation under previous zoning
regulations becomes conforming because of the adoption of this Zoning
Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment to it, then the situation will no longer
be considered a nonconformity.
         (b)   A situation that did not constitute a (lawful) nonconforming
situation under the previously adopted zoning ordinance does not achieve
(lawful) nonconforming status under this Zoning Ordinance merely by repeal of
the previous zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-1-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this Zoning Ordinance is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion is to be
deemed severed from the zoning ordinance and in no way affects or diminishes
the validity of the remainder of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021)
CHAPTER 2
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-2-1: General
5-2-2: Purposes
5-2-3: Lot And Building Standards
5-2-4: Other Regulations
5-2-1: GENERAL:
The Village’s residential districts are listed below. When this Zoning
Ordinance refers to residential districts or “R” districts, it is referring to
these districts.
 
Zoning District                            Map Symbol
Single Family Residential District         R-1
Single Family Residential District         R-1A
Single Family Residential District         R-2
Single and Two Family Residential District R-3
Multi Family Residential District          R-4
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-2-2: PURPOSES:
   (A)   R-1 Single Family Residential District is intended to encourage the
establishment and preservation of residential neighborhoods characterized by
detached houses consisting of one dwelling unit. Nonresidential uses may be
determined to be beneficial or appropriate in accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   R-1A Single Family Residential District is intended to encourage the
establishment and preservation of residential neighborhoods characterized by
detached houses containing one dwelling unit. Nonresidential uses may be
determined to be beneficial or appropriate in accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   R-2 Single Family Residential District is intended to encourage the
establishment and preservation of residential neighborhoods characterized by
detached houses consisting of one dwelling unit. Nonresidential uses may be
determined to be beneficial or appropriate in accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   R-3 Single and Two Family Residential District is intended to
accommodate detached houses and attached dwellings consisting of duplexes and
townhouses. Nonresidential uses may be determined to be beneficial or
appropriate in accordance with Chapter 7 of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (E)   R-4 Multi Family Residential District is intended to accommodate multi
dwelling unit residential development consisting of apartment buildings and
condominium buildings. Nonresidential uses may be determined to be beneficial
or appropriate in accordance with Chapter 7 of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-2-3: LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS:
The following table establishes the lot and building standards for each
residential district. Building standards apply to both principal and accessory
buildings. Please refer to Chapter 20 of this Zoning Ordinance for rules of
measurements.
Lot and Building Standards R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4
Lot and Building Standards      R-1    R-1A   R-2    R-3    R-4
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)      20,000 15,000 10,000 10,000 15,000
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)     100    100    75     75     100
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)        34     34     34     40     50
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
   Front Street [4]          40     40     35     30     35
   Side Street [4]           20     20     15     15     17.5
   Side                      10     10     10[1]  10     10/30[2]
   Rear Principal            20     20     20     20     35
   Rear Accessory            10     10     10     10     10
   Building to Building[3]   None   None   None   20     30
Maximum Building Heights (feet)
   Principal Building        35     35     35     35     50
   Accessory Building        15     15     15     15     15
 
[1]   7 ft. for any lot or zoning lots of record having a lot frontage of 60
feet or less.
[2]   Minimum side setback is 10 feet for buildings up to 35 feet in height; 30
feet for buildings above 35 feet in height.
[3]   The building to building setback establishes principal building spacing
requirements in duplex, townhouse, and multi-unit building developments.
[4]   Accessory buildings are not permitted in front street yard and side
street yard.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-2-4: OTHER REGULATIONS:
Use and development in residential districts may be subject to additional
standards and regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021)
CHAPTER 3
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-3-1: General
5-3-2: Purposes
5-3-3: Lot And Building Standards
5-3-4: Other Regulations
5-3-1: GENERAL:
The Village’s business districts are listed below. When this Zoning Ordinance
refers to business districts or “B” districts, it is referring to these
districts.
 
Zoning District                     Map Symbol
Neighborhood Business District      B-1
Community Business District         B-2
Central Business District           B-3A
Central Perimeter Business District B-3B
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-3-2: PURPOSES:
   (A)   B-1 Neighborhood Business District is intended to accommodate business
services, offices, medical services and retail located in close proximity to
residential uses which are so arranged and designed as to be a functional and
harmonious part of a residential neighborhood.
   (B)   B-2 Community Business District is the Village’s primary business
zoning district and is the predominate zoning classification along the majority
of the Village’s primary thoroughfares. The B-2 Community Business District is
intended to accommodate a balance of mid to large-scale regional destination
retail, entertainment, eating, drinking, commercial and professional service
businesses.
   (C)   B-3A Central Business District is intended to accommodate pedestrian
oriented development, transit oriented development, and mixed use development
in the downtown.
   (D)   B-3B Central Perimeter Business District is intended to establish a
transitional zone between the pedestrian oriented Central Business District and
the auto oriented Community Business District. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-3-3: LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS:
The following table establishes the lot and building standards for each
business district. Building standards apply to both principal and accessory
buildings. Please refer to Chapter 20 of this Zoning Ordinance for rules of
measurements.
Lot and Building Standards B-1 B-2 B-3A B-3B
Lot and Building Standards     B-1  B-2  B-3A B-3B
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)     None None None None
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)    None None None None
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)       None None None None
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
   Front Street             10   10   None None
   Side Street              10   10   None None
   Side                     10   10   None 10
   Rear                     25   25   None 20
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35   45   50   40
Maximum Number of Stories                4    3[1]
 
[1]   No building adjacent to properties which allow single-family residential
uses shall exceed 2 stories unless approved in accordance with the special use
permit procedures in Chapter 17.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-3-4: OTHER REGULATIONS:
Use and development in business districts may be subject to additional
standards and regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021)
CHAPTER 4
OFFICE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-4-1: General
5-4-2: Purposes
5-4-3: Lot And Building Standards
5-4-4: Other Regulations
5-4-1: GENERAL:
The Village’s office districts are listed below. When this Zoning Ordinance
refers to office districts or “O” districts, it is referring to these
districts.
 
Zoning District          Map Symbol
Office District          O
Office Research District O-R
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-4-2: PURPOSES:
   (A)   O Office District is intended to accommodate office space and low-
impact business services. The uses permitted are characterized by a low volume
of traffic so as to protect the surrounding residential districts. This
district can serve as a buffer between residential and business areas.
   (B)   O-R Office Research District is intended to provide land for
attractively landscaped sites, often along major trafficways, permitting “show
place” buildings having large setbacks. The entire area is intended to create a
“park like” atmosphere conducive to the quality development of international
headquarters, large office buildings, research and educational activities, and
some specialized nonobjectionable industrial activities. The low intensity and
limiting restrictions provide for permitted uses compatible with adjacent
residential and commercial developments. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-4-3: LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS:
The following table establishes the lot and building standards for each office
district. Building standards apply to both principal and accessory buildings.
Please refer to Chapter 20 of this Zoning Ordinance for rules of measurements.
Lot and Building Standards O O-R
Lot and Building Standards     O      O-R
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)     20,000 174,240
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)    100    300
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)       None   None
Maximum Building Coverage (%)  50     30
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
   Front Street             10     100
   Side Street              10     100
   Side                     10     80 / 200 [1]
   Rear                     25     80 / 200 [1]
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35     80
Maximum Floor Area Ratio       NA     0.5 / 0.8 [2]
Minimum Open Space (%) [3]     NA     40
 
[1]   Setback shall be increased to 200 feet when adjacent to the R-1, R-1A,
and R-2 zoning districts.
[2]   Not to exceed .8 when over 90% of required parking is located underground
or within an enclosed building.
[3]   For this section, open space is land or water containing no buildings,
structures or impervious surfaces.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-4-4: OTHER REGULATIONS:
Use and development in office districts may be subject to additional standards
and regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 5
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-5-1: General
5-5-2: Purpose
5-5-3: Lot And Building Standards
5-5-4: Other Regulations
5-5-1: GENERAL:
The Village’s Industrial District is listed below. When this Zoning Ordinance
refers to the l Industrial District, or “I” district, it is referring to this
district.
 
Zoning District     Map Symbol
Industrial District I
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-5-2: PURPOSE:
I-1 Industrial District is intended for manufacturing, warehousing, storage,
and wholesaling areas that would be acceptable within the Village and will be
adequately buffered so as not to adversely affect adjacent businesses or
residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-5-3: LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS:
The following table establishes the lot and building standards for the
Industrial District. Building standards apply to both principal and accessory
buildings. Please refer to Chapter 20 of this Zoning Ordinance for rules of
measurements.
Lot and Building Standards I-1
Lot and Building Standards     I-1
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)     20,000
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)    100
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)       None
Maximum Building Coverage (%)  65
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
   Front Street             25
   Side Street              25
   Side                     10
   Rear                     10
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-5-4: OTHER REGULATIONS:
Use and development in the Industrial District may be subject to additional
standards and regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021)
CHAPTER 6
COLLEGE UNIVERSITY DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-6-1: General
5-6-2: Purpose
5-6-3: Lot And Building Standards
5-6-4: Other Regulations
5-6-1: GENERAL:
The Village’s College University District is listed below. When this Zoning
Ordinance refers to College University District or “C/U” district, it is
referring to this district.
 
Zoning District             Map Symbol
College University District C/U
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-6-2: PURPOSE:
C/U College University District is intended to promote higher education within
its boundaries. The college university district is intended to establish the
area in which a college or university may continue to operate in harmony with
the surrounding residential and business areas. It is also understood that
segregation of such facilities in a separate district is appropriate given the
unique characteristics of college and university areas, the variety of uses
needed to serve the college and university community, and the intensity of land
uses in such a community. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-6-3: LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS:
The following table establishes the lot and building standards for the College
University District. Building standards apply to both principal and accessory
buildings. Please refer to Chapter 20 of this Zoning Ordinance for rules of
measurements.
Lot and Building Standards C/U
Lot and Building Standards     C/U
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)     None
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)    None
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)       None
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
   Front Street             100
   Side Street              100
   Side                     100
   Rear                     100
Maximum Building Height (feet) 70
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-6-4: OTHER REGULATIONS:
Use and development in the College University District may be subject to
additional standards and regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931,
11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 7
ALLOWED USES
SECTION:
5-7-1: General
5-7-2: Understanding The Use Table
5-7-3: Use Classifications
5-7-4: Use Table
5-7-5: Residential Use Category
5-7-6: Public, Civic And Institutional Use Category
5-7-7: Business Use Category
5-7-8: Industrial Use Category
5-7-9: Other Use Category
5-7-1: GENERAL:
Principal uses are allowed in all zoning districts in accordance with the use
table established in Section
5-7-4. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-7-2: UNDERSTANDING THE USE TABLE:
   A.   For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, uses are classified into use
categories and subcategories. Some subcategories are further divided to
identify a specific use, business, or activity that is regulated differently
than the subcategory. Use categories, subcategories, and specific use types are
defined within this chapter.
   B.   Permitted uses. Uses identified with a “P” in the use table are
permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district. Permitted uses are
subject to compliance with any use-specific standards identified in the final
column of the table and with all other applicable regulations of this Zoning
Ordinance.
   C.   Special uses. Uses identified with an “S” in the use table may be
allowed if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special use permit
procedures in Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance. Special uses are subject to
compliance with any use-specific standards identified in the final column of
the table and with all other applicable regulations of this Zoning Ordinance.
   D.   Prohibited uses. Uses identified with an “-“ are expressly prohibited.
Uses that are not listed in the use table and that cannot reasonably be
interpreted to fall within a use category, subcategory, or specific use type
are also prohibited. See Section
5-7-3-4 for use interpretation rules.
   E.   Use supplemental regulations. The “supplemental regulations” column of
use table identifies use-specific standards that apply to some uses. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, compliance with such standards is required
regardless of whether the use is permitted as-of-right or requires special use
approval.
   F.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures are permitted in
conjunction with allowed principal uses, provided they comply with all
applicable regulations of Chapter 8 of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931,
11-15-2021)
5-7-3: USE CLASSIFICATIONS:
   A.   Use Categories. This Zoning Ordinance classifies principal uses into
the following five use categories:
      1.   Residential
      2.   Public, Civic, and Institutional
      3.   Business
      4.   Industrial
      5.   Other
   B.   Use Subcategories. Each use category is further divided into more
specific subcategories. Use subcategories classify principal uses and
activities based on common function, products, or physical characteristics.
Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, types of customers or
residents, and how goods are produced, sold, or delivered.
      1.   Use subcategories may include a list of items or examples preceded
by the phrase “typical uses include.” The listed items or examples are intended
to assist with classification only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive
lists of all possibilities.
   C.   Specific Use Types. Some use subcategories are further divided to
identify a specific use, business, or activity that are regulated differently
than the subcategory.
   D.   Determination of use category and subcategory
      1.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to classify uses on the basis
of use category and subcategory descriptions in this chapter.
      2.   When a use cannot be readily classified into a use category or
subcategory or appears to fit into multiple categories or subcategories, the
Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine the most similar, and most
appropriate use category/subcategory based on the actual or projected
characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use
category and subcategory descriptions provided in this Chapter. In making such
determinations, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to consider all of the
following:
         (a)   The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the
use;
         (b)   The types of equipment and processes to be used;
         (c)   The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or
employees;
         (e)   Parking demands associated with the use; and
         (e)   Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination.
      3.   If a use can be classified in multiple categories, subcategories or
specific use types, the Zoning Administrator must categorize the use in the
category, subcategory or specific use type that provides the narrowest and
restrictive match.
      4.   If the Zoning Administrator is unable to determine the appropriate
use category for a proposed use, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to deny
the permit request. This decision may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 17
of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-7-4: USE TABLE:
The following table identifies principal permitted uses, special uses, and
prohibited uses. Refer to Sections
5-7-2 and
5-7-3 for information on how to interpret the use table.
USE CATEGORY            Zoning Districts
Use Subcategory         R- R- R- R- R-         B- B-               Supplemental
   Specific Use type 1  1A 2  3  4  B-1 B-2 3A 3B O O-R I-1 C/U Regulations
                                                                   (Section)
RESIDENTIAL
USE CATEGORY                             Zoning Districts
Use Subcategory                          R- R- R- R- R- B- B- B- B-   O- I- C/ Supplemental
   Specific Use type                  1  1A 2  3  4  1  2  3A 3B O R  1  U  Regulations
                                                                               (Section)
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living
   Detached House                     P  P  P  P  P  –––S  �–––
   Duplex                             –––P  P  –––S  �–––
   Townhouse                          –––P  P  –––S  �–––
   Multi-Unit                         ––––P  ––S  S  �–––5-7-5-A-4
   Live-Work Unit                     –––––––S  S  �–––5-7-5-A-5
Group Living (except as follows)         S  S  S  S  S  ––––�–––
   Community Residence                P/ P/ P/ P/ P/ ––––�–––5-7-5-B-1
                                         S  S  S  S  S
   Student Housing                    –––––––––�––S
   Nursing Home                       ––––S  ––––�–––5-7-5-B-3
   Assisted Living Facility           ––––S  ––––�–––5-7-5-B-4
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL
Cemetery                                 S  –––S  ––––�––S  5-7-6-A
College or University                    –––––––––S S  –P
Community Center                         –––S  S  S  S  S  S  S S  S  S
Cultural Institution                     –––S  S  S  S  S  S  S S  S  S
Fraternal Organization (except as        –––––S  S  S  S  S –S  –
follows)
   Above or below ground floor        –––––S  S  P  P  S –S  –
Government Facility                      –––S  S  P  P  P  P  P P  P  P
Library                                  S  S  S  S  S  P  P  P  P  P P  S  P
Natural Resources Preservation           P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P P  P  P
Public Parks and Recreation (except as   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P P  P  P
follows)
   Public Swimming Pools              S  –––––S  ––�–S  S
   Aquatic Recreation Facilities      S  –––––S  ––�–S  S
   Public Golf Courses                S  ––––––––�––S
Religious Assembly                       S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S S  S  P
Safety Service                           S  S  S  S  S  P  P  S  S  P P  P  P
School                                   S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S S  S  S
Utilities and Public Service Facilities
   Minor                              P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P P  P  P
   Major                              S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S S  S  S
BUSINESS
Animal Services
   Boarding or Shelter                ––––––S  ––�–S  –5-7-7-A-1
   Grooming                           –––––S  S  –S  S –S  –5-7-7-A-2
   Pet Equipment or Supply Sales      –––––P  P  P  P  P –P  –
   Retail Sale of Animals             ––––––S  ––�–S  –
   Veterinary Care                    –––––S  S  –S  S –S  –5-7-7-A-5
Assembly and Entertainment               –––––S  P  P  P  �–S  –
Business Services
   Body Art Services                  ––––––S  ––�–S  –
   Business Support Services          –––––P  P  ––P –P  –
   Construction Services              –––––––––�–S  –
   Consumer Repair or Maintenance     –––––P  P  P  P  P –P  –
Services
   Fortune Telling And Psychic Service––––––S  ––�–S  –
   Laundry and Dry Cleaning Pick Up   –––––P  P  P  P  P –P  –
Services
   Personal Improvement Services      –––––P  P  P  P  P –S  –
   Small Engine Repair or Maintenance ––––––P  ––�–P  –
Services
Business or Vocational School            –––––S  S  ––S S  S  –
Day Care Services (except as follows)    –––––S  P  S  S  S –––
   Day Care Home                      P  P  P  P  P  ––––�–––
Drinking Establishment                   ––––––P  S  S  P –S  –
Eating Establishment (except as follows) –––––P  P  P  P  P P  S  –
   Carry-out Establishment            –––––P  P  S  P  �–S  –
Financial Services (except as follows)   –––––P  P  P  P  P P  ––
   Personal Credit Establishments     –––––S  S  ––S –––
Funeral or Mortuary Services (except as  –––––S  P  ––S –––
follows)
   Cremation Services                 –––––––––�–P  –
Lodging                                  ––––––P  S  S  �P  ––
Medical Services
   Medical Office (except as follows) –––––P  P  S  S  P P  S  –
      Above or below ground floor  –––––P  P  S  P  P P  S  –
   Hospital                           –––––––––�S  ––
   Alternative Healthcare Delivery    –––––S  S  ––S –––
Services
   Health Care Facility               ––––––S  ––S S  S  –
Motor Vehicle Sales or Services
   Fueling Station                    ––––––S  ––�–S  –5-7-7-L-1
   Heavy Motor Vehicle Sales          ––––––S  ––�–S  –
   Light Motor Vehicle Sales          ––––––P  –––  S  –
   Light Motor Vehicle Rental         ––––––S  ––�–S  –
   Light Motor Vehicle Repair         ––––––S  ––�–S  –
   Motor Vehicle Storage or Towing    –––––––––�–S  –
   Motor Vehicle Wash or Cleaning     ––––––S  ––�–S  –
Services
   Heavy Motor Vehicle Rental         –––––––––�–S  –
   Heavy Motor Vehicle Repair         –––––––––�–S
Office (except as follows)               –––––P  P  S  S  P P  P  –
   Above or Below Ground Floor        –––––P  P  P  P  P P  P  –
Research and Development Services        –––––P  P  ––P P  P  –
Retail (except as follows)               –––––P  P  P  P  �–P  –
   Building Supply Services           ––––––S  ––�–S  –
   Firearms Dealer                    ––––––S  ––�–S  –5-7-7-O-2
Sexually Oriented Business               –––––––––�–S  –5-7-7-P
Sports or Recreation (except as follows) ––––––S  ––�–S  P
   Driving Range                      S  ––––––––�–S  P
   Golf Entertainment Facility        –––––––––�–S  –
INDUSTRIAL
Artisan                                  –––––P  P  P  P  P –P  –
Data Center                              –––––––––�–P  –
Limited Industrial (except as follows)   –––––––––�–P  –
   Electronics Industries             –––––––––�P  P  –
   Brewing, Distilling, or Winemaking ––––––P  S  S  S –P  –
   Catering Services                  –––––P  P  S  S  P –P  –
Recyclable Material Drop-Off Facility    –––––––––�–S  –
Recyclable Material Processing Facility  –––––––––�–S  –
Self-Storage Facility                    ––––––S  ––�–S  –5-7-8-F
Wholesale, Distribution, and Warehousing
   Freight Terminal Facility          –––––––––�–S  –
   Warehousing                        –––––––––�–P  –
Wholesale Operations                     ––––––S  ––�–P  –
OTHER
   Aircraft Landing Area              ––––––S  ––�–S  S
   Community Garden                   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P P  P  P
   Medical Cannabis Dispensing        –––––––––�–S  –
   Open Space                         P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P P  P  P
   Parking Garage                     –––––S  S  S  S  S S  S  S
   Parking - Non Accessory            –––––S  S  S  S  S –S  –
   Parking - Public                   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P P  P  P
   Planned Unit Development [1][2]    S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S S  S  S  See Chapter
                                                                               18
   Public Transportation Facility     –––––S  S  S  S  S S  S  S
 
[1] A planned unit development shall be required for the establishment of any
new special use on a parcel 5 acres or greater in size.
[2] A planned unit development shall be required for the establishment of any
new permitted use or special use on a parcel 5 acres or greater in size in the
I-1 zoning district.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022; Ord. 2023-5028, 9-
18-2023)
5-7-5: RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORY:
   A.   Household Living
Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. When dwelling units
are rented, tenancy shall arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Uses
where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are not considered
residential; they are considered a form of lodging. The following are household
living specific use types:
      1.   Detached House
A detached house is a principal residential building occupied by a household
consisting of one dwelling unit located on a single lot with private yards on
all sides. Detached houses are not attached to and do not abut other dwelling
units. A detached house is not a manufactured home as defined by the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401, et seq.). Manufactured homes are expressly prohibited in the Village.
      2.   Duplex
A duplex is a principal residential building consisting of 2 attached dwelling
units. Each dwelling unit is occupied by a household. The dwelling units may be
located on separate floors or side-by-side. Each dwelling unit has its own
external entrance.
      3.   Townhouse
A townhouse is a principal residential building consisting of 3 or more
attached dwelling units. Each dwelling unit is occupied by a household. The
dwelling units may be located on separate floors or side-by-side. Each dwelling
unit has its own external entrance.
      4.   Multi-Unit
A multi-unit is a principal residential building consisting of 3 or more
attached dwelling units. Each dwelling unit is occupied by a household. The
dwelling units may be located on separate floors or side-by-side. Each dwelling
unit does not have its own external entrance. A live-work unit shall not be
considered a multi-unit dwelling unit. A multi-unit building in the B-3A zoning
district is subject to the following supplemental use regulations:
         (a)   The ground floor area of ground floor multi-unit dwellings shall
occupy not more than 12.5% of the lot area of the lot on which they are
located.
         (b)   Ground floor multi-unit dwellings are prohibited on lot frontage
of Main Street, Ogden Avenue, Burlington Avenue, Route 53, Garfield Avenue,
School Street, and Front Street.
         (c)   Ground floor multi-unit dwellings are prohibited on lots with a
lot area of less than 2.5 acres.
   5.   Live-Work Unit
A live-work unit is a single unit consisting of both a business use and a
dwelling that is occupied by the same resident. A live-work unit is distinct
from a multi-unit dwelling. Live-work units are subject to the following
supplemental regulations:
         (a)   In the B-3A zoning district, live-work units shall not occupy
more than 35% of the lot frontage of the lot on which they are located.
         (b)   The work component shall be located along the lot frontage.
         (c)   Live-work units are prohibited on lot frontage of Main Street,
Ogden Avenue, Burlington Avenue, Route 53, Garfield Avenue, School Street, and
Front Street.
         (d)   The external access for the work component shall be oriented to
the lot frontage and should have at least one external entrance/exit separate
from the live space. The entrance to the work component shall be located on the
ground level. Access to the work component of each live-work unit shall be
clearly separate from the common walkways or entrances to the other residential
units within the development, or other residential units in adjacent
developments.
         (e)   The live and work space must be occupied by the same tenant, and
no portion of the live-work unit may be rented or sold separately.
         (f)   The outdoor storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or
equipment related to the operation of a live-work unit, including vehicles
associated with the operation of a livery service operating from the live-work
unit, is prohibited.
         (g)   Prohibited Uses. The following uses, as defined in Chapter 7 of
this Zoning Ordinance, are expressly prohibited within live-work units:
            (1)   Group Living;
            (2)   Animal Services;
            (3)   Assembly and Entertainment;
            (4)   Body Art Services;
            (5)   Day care services, including daycare homes;
            (6)   Drinking establishments;
            (7)   Firearms dealer;
            (8)   Fortune Telling and Psychic Services;
            (9)   Personal Credit Establishments;
            (10)   Funeral or Mortuary Services;
            (11)   Sports or Recreation;
            (12)   Industrial Uses, except artisan;
            (13)   Laundry and Dry Cleaning Pick Up Services;
            (14)   Lodging;
            (15)   Medical Cannabis Dispensing;
            (16)   Medical services, except Medical Offices;
            (17)   Motor Vehicles Sales or Services;
            18)   Personal Credit Establishments;
            (19)   Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses;
            (20)   Sexually Oriented Businesses;
            (21)   Residential, within the floor area dedicated as the work
area;
            (22)   Small Engine Repair or Maintenance Services; and
            (23)   Sports and Recreation.
   B.   Group Living
Residential occupancy of a building or any portion of a building by a group
other than a household. Group living uses typically provide communal kitchen/
dining facilities. Examples of group living uses include group homes, convents,
monasteries, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, sheltered care
facilities, retirement centers, homeless centers, shelters and halfway houses.
The group living specific use types are as follows:
      1.   Community Residence Facility
A group home or specialized residential care home serving persons with
disabilities. A community residence does not include a residence that serves
persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense. Community
residence facilities are subject to the following supplemental use regulations:
         (a)   A community residence facility is a special use if located
within 660 linear feet of an existing or approved community residence facility,
as measured from lot line to lot line.
      2.   Student Housing
A dwelling for students that is owned or operated by a college or university.
      3.   Nursing Home
A “long-term care facility,” as defined by the Nursing Home Care Act (210 ILCS
45/), as amended.
      4.   Assisted Living Facility
As defined by the Assisted Living and Shared Housing Act (210 ILCS 9/), as
amended. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5028, 9-18-2023)
5-7-6: PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORY:
   A.   Cemetery
Land or structures used for burial or permanent storage of the dead or their
cremated remains. Typical uses include cemeteries and mausoleums. Also includes
pet cemeteries. Cemeteries are subject to the following supplemental use
regulations:
      1.   Cemeteries in the R-1 zoning district shall meet a minimum lot area
of 2 acres.
   B.   College or University
Institutions of higher learning that offer courses of general or specialized
study and are authorized to grant academic degrees. They are certified by the
state or by a recognized accrediting agency. This term includes nursing and
medical schools not accessory to a hospital, conservatories and seminaries.
Business and vocational schools are classified in the Business Use Category.
   C.   Community Center
The use of a building that is owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a unit
of local government or a civic, educational, religious or charitable
organization for purposes of meetings, gatherings or other functions or
activities carried on or performed by or under the supervision of a unit of
local government or a civic, educational, religious or charitable organization.
The authorization for a community center includes authorization for the
accessory sale or resale of food, merchandise or services in connection with
and in support of the principal activity or function being carried on. Also
includes food pantries.
   D.   Cultural Institution
Museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts
and sciences, gallery exhibitions of works of art and similar institutions.
   E.   Fraternal Organization
The use of a building or lot by a not-for-profit organization that restricts
access to its facility to bona fide, annual dues-paying members and their
occasional guests and where the primary activity is a service not carried on as
a business enterprise.
   F.   Government Facility
Administrative offices associated with local, state or federal government
services or functions. This term does not include safety service or other
public or quasi-public uses specifically identified as a use subcategory or
specific use type. The government facility specific use types are as follows:
   G.   Library
A place where literary, educational, artistic, and/or reference materials such
as books, periodicals, and digital content are kept for use or public lending
as defined by the Illinois Library System Act (75 ILCS 10/), as amended. This
term includes targeted services and programs with the mission of educating,
informing, and/or entertaining a variety of patrons/audiences. Libraries are
controlled by a unit of local government, academic institution, non-profit, or
may be privately controlled. The authorization for a library includes
permissions for the accessory sale of books, food, beverages, and relevant
library items such as devices to aid in utilization of library equipment
   H.   Natural Resources Preservation
Land used as visual open space or environmental purposes. Typical uses include
wildlife or nature preserves, arboretums and flood management projects. Also
includes historic preservation efforts promoting the conservation of buildings,
structures, and landscapes.
   I.   Public Parks and Recreation
Recreational, social or multi-purpose uses associated with public parks or open
spaces controlled by a unit of local government, including playgrounds,
playfields, play courts, public swimming pools, and aquatic recreation
facilities. This term also includes public golf courses. This use subcategory
is distinct from the Sports and Recreation use subcategory, which is a business
use. The following are public parks and recreation specific use types:
      1.   Public Swimming Pools
An artificial pool or receptacle for water having a depth of more than two feet
at any point that is intended for swimming or bathing.
      2.   Aquatic Recreation Facilities
A facility that is designed for free-form aquatic play and recreation. The
facilities may include, but are not limited to, wave or surf action pools,
leisure rivers, sand bottom pools, vortex pools, activity pools, inner tube
rides, body slides, and interactive play attractions.
      3.   Public Golf Courses
An area of land laid out for golf with a series of 9 or 18 holes each including
tee, fairway and putting green with natural or artificial hazards.
   J.   Religious Assembly
Religious services involving public assembly that customarily occur in
churches, synagogues, temples, mosques and other facilities used for religious
worship.
   K.   Safety Service
Facilities provided by the local, state or federal government that provide
fire, police or life protection, together with the incidental storage and
maintenance of necessary vehicles, materials, and equipment. Typical uses
include fire stations, police stations, and public works facilities.
   L.   School
Schools at the primary, elementary, junior high or high school level that
provide basic, compulsory state-mandated education. The term school includes
both public and private schools.
   M.   Utilities and Public Service Facilities
      1.   Minor
Infrastructure services that need to be located in or close to the area where
the service is provided. Minor utilities and public service facilities
generally do not have regular employees at the site and typically have few if
any impacts on surrounding areas. Typical uses include water and sewer pump
stations; gas regulating stations; underground electric distribution
substations; electric transformers; water conveyance systems; stormwater
facilities and conveyance systems; telephone switching equipment and emergency
communication warning/broadcast facilities.
      2.   Major
Infrastructure services that typically have substantial visual or operational
impacts on nearby areas. Typical uses include but are not limited to water and
wastewater treatment facilities, high-voltage electric substations, utility-
scale power generation facilities (including wind, solar and other renewable
and nonrenewable energy sources), sanitary landfills and utility-scale water
storage facilities, such as water towers and reservoirs. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-
15-2021)
5-7-7: BUSINESS USE CATEGORY:
   A.   Animal Services
Uses that provide goods and services for care of companion animals. The
following are animal services specific use types:
      1.   Boarding or Shelter
Animal shelters, care services and kennel services for dogs, cats and companion
animals, including boarding kennels, pet resorts/hotels, pet day care pet
adoption centers, dog training centers and animal rescue shelters. For purposes
of this ordinance, the keeping of more than four dogs or cats, or any
combination thereof, over the age of four months in an R-district shall be
deemed a boarding or shelter-related animal service use and is allowed only in
those zoning districts that allow such principal uses. Boarding and shelter
uses are subject to the following supplemental use regulations:
         (a)   Outdoor runs and exercise areas must be enclosed by a fence or
wall that is a minimum of five feet in height.
         (b)   Animals must be kept within an enclosed building between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      2.   Grooming
Grooming of dogs, cats and similar companion animals, including dog bathing and
clipping salons and pet grooming shops.
         (a)   Outdoor runs and exercise areas must be enclosed by a fence or
wall that is a minimum of five feet in height.
         (b)   Animals must be kept within an enclosed building between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      3.   Pet Equipment and Supply Sales
Business involved in the sale of new products or merchandise to consumers for
the care of pets, including the sale of pet food.
      4.   Retail Sale of Animals
To display, sell, deliver, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for sale of,
barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of an animal. The retail sale
of dogs and cats is prohibited in accordance with Title 3 of the Lisle Village
Code.
      5.   Veterinary Care
The practice of veterinary medicine by a veterinarian, licensed by the State of
Illinois. Meaning to diagnose, prognose, treat, correct, change, alleviate, or
prevent animal disease, illness, pain, deformity, defect, injury, or other
physical, dental, or mental conditions by any method or mode as defined by the
Illinois Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act. Typical uses include
veterinary clinics and animal hospitals. The authorization for veterinary care
includes the authorization for accessory retail sale of animals, boarding of
animals, grooming, and pet equipment and supply sales.
         (a)   Outdoor runs and exercise areas must be enclosed by a fence or
wall that is a minimum of five feet in height.
         (b)   Animals must be kept within an enclosed building between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   B.   Assembly and Entertainment
Uses that provide indoor gathering places for recreation, entertainment or
other assembly activities. Assembly and entertainment uses may provide
accessory food or beverage service. Typical uses include billiard centers,
video game arcades, auditoriums, bowling centers, cinemas, theaters, indoor or
outdoor banquet halls, and instructional recreation. Instructional recreation
includes, but is not limited to, cooking classes, painting classes, and other
instructional classes offered for the purpose of social gathering and
entertainment.
   C.   Business Services
      1.   Body Art Services
Tattoo and body piercing establishments as defined by 410 ILCS 54/.
      2.   Business Support Services
Uses that provide personnel services, printing, copying, photographic services,
or communication services to businesses or consumers. Typical uses include
employment agencies, copy and print shops, telephone answering services and
photo developing labs.
      3.   Construction Services
Uses that provide contractor services in the construction trades that include
outdoor storage. Construction services includes landscape installation and
maintenance contractors. Uses that involve office or administrative functions
only, with no outdoor storage are classified as offices.
      4.   Consumer Repair or Maintenance Services
Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning and repair services for consumer goods
on a site where customers bring goods to the site of the repair/maintenance
business. Typical consumer repair and maintenance service uses include ,
tailors, taxidermists, dressmakers, shoe repair, picture framing shops,
locksmiths, vacuum repair shops, electronics repair shops and similar
establishments. Business that offer repair and maintenance service technicians
who visit customers’ homes or places of business are classified as a
construction service or office.
      5.   Fortune Telling and Psychic Services
Any method of prognostication, telling the future, foretelling impending or
future events, whether or not such services are by means of card reading, tarot
cards, palm reading, metaphysics, crystals, crystal balls or other means, or if
compensation is received for such services.
      6.   Laundry and Dry Cleaning Pick Up Services
Uses that provide laundry cleaning or dry cleaning pick-up services on a site
where consumers bring goods to the site and pick up goods after such services
has been rendered by the business. Laundry and dry cleaning pick up services do
not include commercial laundry facilities. Commercial laundry facilities are
classified as a limited industrial use.
      7.   Personal Improvement Services
Uses that provide a variety of services associated with personal grooming,
instruction and maintenance of fitness, health and well-being. Typical uses
include barbers; hair and nail salons; day spas; health clubs; yoga and fitness
studios; martial arts studios; music, dance, drama, fine arts, language and
similar instruction; photography studios and similar establishments.
      8.   Small Engine Repair or Maintenance Services
Uses that provide maintenance and repair of low-power internal combustion
engines (gasoline/petrol) or electric engines. Typical equipment includes chain
saws, string trimmers, leaf blowers, snow blowers, lawn mowers, wood chippers,
and go-karts.
   D.   Business or Vocational School
Uses in an enclosed building that focus on teaching the skills needed to
perform a particular job. Examples include schools of cosmetology, modeling
academies, computer training facilities, trade schools, administrative business
training facilities, career based instruction and similar uses. Truck driving
schools are classified in the Wholesale, Distribution, and Warehousing use
subcategory.
   E.   Day Care Services
Uses providing care, protection and supervision for children or adults on a
regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day.
Examples include state-licensed day care centers, preschools, nursery schools,
head start programs, after-school programs and adult day care facilities. Day
care expressly includes state-accredited adult day care facilities and
facilities for childcare, as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act. The
following are day care services specific use types:
      1.   Day Care Home
A dwelling unit in which day care services are provided and licensed by the
State of Illinois.
   F.   Drinking Establishment
A building or portion thereof where liquor, beer, wine, or other alcoholic
beverages are sold to be consumed on the premises, but not including eating
establishments where the principal use is serving food. Drinking establishments
are subject to the Village’s Liquor Control Regulations.
   G.   Eating Establishment
A building or portion thereof within which food is prepared and offered for
sale to be consumed on the premises. The authorization of an eating
establishment includes authorization for liquor, beer, wine, or other alcoholic
beverages to be consumed on the premises. An establishment where liquor, beer,
wine, or other alcoholic beverages are sold to be consumed on premise that only
offers prepackaged food items or the availability of food produced offsite
shall be classified as a drinking establishment. Eating establishments are
subject to the Village’s Liquor Control Regulations. The following are eating
establishment specific use types:
      1.   Carry-out Establishment
A building or portion thereof within which food is prepared and offered for
sale to be consumed off premise. A carry-out establishment does not offer
seating for on premise consumption.
   H.   Financial Services
Uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing or safe-keeping of money.
Automatic teller machines, kiosks or similar facilities that do not have on-
site employees are not classified as financial service uses if they meet the
criteria for classification as an accessory use in accordance with Chapter 9 of
this ordinance. Typical uses include banks or credit unions. The following are
financial services specific use types:
      1.   Personal Credit Establishments
The personal credit establishment specific use type is defined as follows:
         (a)   Pawnshops or pawn brokers (as defined in 205 ILCS 510/);
         (b)   Establishments that provide (vehicle) title-secured loans or
payday loans (as defined in 815 ILCS 122/) and similar services;
         (c)   Establishments primarily engaged in buying jewelry or other
items made of sterling silver or gold, or silver coins, or bullion to or from
the public within the village from a fixed and regular place of business.
         (d)   Currency exchanges or check-cashing facilities that are
primarily engaged in the business of cashing checks, drafts, money orders or
traveler’s checks, exchanging currency, notarizing documents, selling vehicles
license tags or transmitting money within the United States or overseas by any
means for a fee.
   I.   Funeral or Mortuary Services
Uses that provide services related to the death of a human, including funeral
homes, mortuaries, or similar uses. The authorization for funeral or mortuary
services includes authorization for cremation services as an accessory use.
Funeral or mortuary services specific use types are as follows:
      1.   Cremation Services
The technical process, using heat and flame, or alkaline hydrolysis that
reduces human remains to bone fragments. The reduction takes place through heat
and evaporation or through hydrolysis. Cremation shall include the processing,
and may include the pulverization, of the bone fragments. The cremation
services specific use type includes companion animal crematoriums. Uses
consisting of cremation services as a principal use shall be defined as
cremation services.
   J.   Lodging
Uses that provide temporary lodging for less than 30 days where rents are
charged by the day or by the week. Lodging uses may provide food, beverage, or
entertainment offered primarily to registered guests. Authorization for lodging
includes authorization for accessory banquet facilities for use by non-
registered guests.
   K.   Medical Services
      1.   Medical Office
Uses related to diagnosis and treatment of human patients’ illnesses, injuries
and physical maladies that can be performed in a primary care office setting.
This includes rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses
and other health personnel and medical testing and analysis services. Typical
uses include medical and dental offices, including chiropractic offices,
physical therapy and massage establishment offices, psychologist and
psychiatrist offices.
      2.   Hospital
As defined by the Hospital Licensing Act (210 ILCS 85/), as amended.
      3.   Alternative Healthcare Delivery Services
Uses providing inpatient (patient may be admitted for more than a 24 hour
period) care. Typical uses include birthing centers, postsurgical recovery
care, subacute care centers, transitional care or residential rehabilitation
centers.
      4.   Health Care Facility
Uses providing inpatient care (admitted for more than a 24 hour period) or
outpatient care (admitted for less than a 24 hour period). Typical uses include
ambulatory surgical treatment facilities, urgent and immediate care centers, or
specialized services such as, kidney disease treatment centers, cancer
treatment centers, and cardiac centers.
   L.   Motor Vehicle Sales or Services
Uses that provide for the sale, rental, maintenance or repair of new or used
motor vehicles or vehicular equipment. The motor vehicle sales or services
subcategory includes the following specific use types:
      1.   Fueling Station
Uses engaged in retail sales of conventional or alternative vehicle fuels,
including electric vehicle charging stations. Authorization for a fueling
station includes authorization for accessory retail, eating establishments, or
vehicle wash or cleaning services. Fueling station uses are subject to the
following supplemental use regulations:
         (a)   Fueling stations shall provide no more than one designated
diesel pump island.
         (b)   Fueling stations shall provide no more two diesel pumps.
      2.   Heavy Motor Vehicle Sales
The sale or lease of motor vehicles weighing more than 8,000 pounds.
      3.   Light Motor Vehicle Sales
The sale or lease of motor vehicles weighing 8,000 pounds or less.
      4.   Light Motor Vehicle Rental
Uses primarily engaged in the rental of motor vehicles weighing 8,000 pounds or
less.
      5.   Light Motor Vehicle Repair
The maintenance or engine/system repair services to motor vehicles, including
lubrication and/or checking, changing, or additions of those fluids and filters
necessary to the maintenance of a vehicle weighing 8,000 pounds or less. Also
includes vehicle repair establishments that provide replacement of vehicle
parts or repairs, body work or painting, or removal of the engine head or pan,
or engine transmission or differential services.
      6.   Motor Vehicle Storage or Towing
Storage of operating motor vehicles or vehicle towing services. Typical uses
include towing services, tow lots, impound yards, commercial vehicle storage
yards, or vehicle storage yards for transportation services (buses, passenger
vans, or similar motor vehicles).
      7.   Motor Vehicle Wash or Cleaning Services
A building or site containing facilities for washing motor vehicles. It may use
automatic production line methods-a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning
device, or other mechanical device-or it may provide space, water or equipment
for hand washing, cleaning or detailing of motor vehicles, whether by the
customer or the operator.
      8.   Heavy Motor Vehicle Rental
Uses primarily engaged in the rental of motor vehicles weighing more than 8,000
pounds.
      9.   Heavy Motor Vehicle Repair
The maintenance or engine/system repair services to motor vehicles, including
lubrication and/or checking, changing, or additions of those fluids and filters
necessary to the maintenance of a vehicle weighing more than 8,000 pounds. Also
includes vehicle repair establishments that provide replacement of vehicle
parts or repairs, body work or painting, or removal of the engine head or pan,
or engine transmission or differential services.
   M.   Office
Uses in an enclosed building that focus on providing executive, management,
administrative, or professional services. Typical uses include nongovernmental
corporate offices, law offices, architectural firms, insurance companies,
executive management or administrative offices for businesses or corporations,
or professional testing centers.
   N.   Research and Development Services
Uses engaged in scientific research or testing services leading to the
development of new products or processes. Such uses resemble office buildings
and do not involve the mass production, distribution or sale of products.
Research services do not produce odors, dust, noise, vibration or other
external impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of the subject
property. Research and development services includes medical laboratories that
do not have onsite patient services.
   O.   Retail
Uses involving the sale, lease or rental of new or used goods directly to the
consumer. Retail includes all new or used goods unless such goods are
identified elsewhere in this ordinance. Retail specific use types are as
follows:
      1.   Building Supply Services
Retail sales uses that sell or otherwise provide goods to repair, maintain or
visually enhance a structure or premises. Typical uses include lumber yards,
home improvement centers, or garden supply stores. Building Supply Services
that do not include outdoor storage are classified as retail.
      2.   Firearms Dealer
Any retail activity requiring a dealer or broker type Federal Firearms License.
         (a)   Firearms dealers or brokers must install and maintain an
electronic security system that emits an audible alarm at the firearms dealer’s
place of business when triggered. The security system must also transmit a
silent alarm directly to a public safety agency. If the public safety agency
with jurisdiction over the firearms dealer property does not allow for direct
transmission of alarm signals, the security system must transmit an alarm
signal to a UL-approved monitoring station that must, within two minutes,
provide notification to a public safety agency with jurisdiction over the
firearms dealer property.
   P.   Sexually Oriented Business
      1.   Any of the following when done in a place where the public is
invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial purpose including sale or
rental, regardless of who pays or receives the consideration therefor, and
regardless of the form of consideration:
         (a)   Exhibition or display of a natural person or people in the state
of nudity or seminudity, or engaged in specified sexual activities or excretory
functions;
         (b)   Premises with a sexually oriented amusement device;
         (c)   Rental or leasing of a hotel room, motel room or similar room
for a period not exceeding ten (10) hours, but not including dining rooms,
banquet rooms, ballrooms, conference rooms or similar facilities unless they
are used or to be used for specified sexual activities or excretory functions;
         (d)   Offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or
tumbling between natural persons of the opposite sex, when one or more of the
persons is nude or seminude, and also the offering of physical contact which
constitutes specified sexual activities regardless of the sex of the person
performing or receiving the contact;
         (e)   Offering of products, services or activities by or with a
natural person or people when one or more of the people, whether a patron,
agent, employee or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         (f)   Displaying or offering to others any recorded depiction of a
natural person, or created image or character, as in cartoons or animation, by
any medium, including, without limitation, film, videotape, closed circuit
television, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy
disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software,
which is:
            (1)   Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions,
or specified anatomical areas; or
            (2)   Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical
areas, including, without limitation, the use of the term “adult” and the use
of the designation of one or more “X” such as, but not limited to, “XXX”;
         (g)   The display or offering to others of novelties, instruments,
devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any
of the specified anatomical areas.
      2.   Sexually oriented businesses must comply with the following setback
requirements:
         (a)   No sexually oriented business shall be located within 450 feet
of any other sexually oriented business, measured lot line to lot line, and any
school, daycare center, cemetery, public park including any linear recreational
area like a bike path, public housing, place of religious worship, lot zoned
for residential purposes, and lot used for residential purposes; and
         (b)   Within 500 feet of the centerline of Ogden Avenue, which 500
feet shall be measured from the nearest point of the building, or portion of
the building in which the sexually oriented business is located to the nearest
point of the centerline of Ogden Avenue; and
         (c)   On a lot which physically touches Ogden Avenue
   Q.   Sports or Recreation
Provision of sports or recreation uses by an entity that is not a unit of local
government. Sports and recreation provided by a school, college, or university
that is not a local unit of government is classified as an accessory use if
located on the same lot as the principal use. Typical uses include driving
ranges, go-cart or motorbike tracks, ice arenas, miniature golf courses, indoor
shooting ranges, batting cages, gymnastic facilities, aquatic recreation
facilities, sports complexes, private golf courses, and country clubs. This use
subcategory is distinct from the Public Parks or Recreation use subcategory
within the Public, Civic and Institutional use category. Sports or recreation
specific use types are as follows:
      1.   Driving Range
An outdoor facility where golfers can practice. Driving ranges may include
outdoor tees, chipping and putting practice greens. Driving ranges improved
with buildings that provide covered hitting bays, event facilities, eating or
drinking, or entertainment are classified as golf entertainment facilities.
      2.   Golf Entertainment Facility
A facility offering golf activities for practice or entertainment purposes.
Golf entertainment facilities include one or more of the following: covered
hitting bays, outdoor music, flood lighting, event facilities, or eating and
drinking. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022; Ord.
2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-7-8: INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORY:
   A.   Artisan
On-site production of goods by hand manufacturing, involving the use of hand
tools or small-scale, light mechanical equipment in a completely enclosed
building with no outdoor operations or storage. Typical uses include
woodworking and cabinet shops, ceramic studios, jewelry manufacturing or
similar types of arts and crafts or very small-scale manufacturing uses that
have no negative external impacts on surrounding properties. Artisan may
include accessory workshops, classes, and other instructional services.
   B.   Data Center
A repository that houses computing facilities like servers, routers, switches
or firewalls, as well as supporting components like backup equipment, fire
suppression facilities or air conditioning.
   C.   Limited Industrial
Manufacturing or industrial uses that prepare, process, fabricate, assemble,
treat or package finished parts or products without the use of explosive or
petroleum materials. Uses in this subcategory do not involve the assembly of
large equipment or machinery and have very limited external impacts in terms of
noise, vibration, odor, hours of operation and truck or commercial vehicle
traffic. Limited industrial specific use types are as follows:
      1.   Electronics Industries
Manufacturing or industrial uses that prepare, process, fabricate, assemble,
treat or package electronics.
      2.   Brewing, Distilling, or Winemaking
The on-site production of liquor, beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages.
      3.   Catering Services
Preparation of food or meals on the premises, and where such food or meals are
delivered to another location for consumption. The preparation of packaged food
for wholesale purposes shall be classified in the limited industrial use
subcategory.
   D.   Recyclable Material Drop-Off Facility
An establishment that accepts consumer recyclable commodities directly from the
consuming party or stores them temporarily before transferring them to
recyclable material processing facilities. Recyclable commodities shall be
limited to non-hazardous, nonspecial, homogeneous, nonputresable materials such
as dry paper, glass, cans or plastic. The term “recyclable material drop-off
facility” as used in this Zoning Ordinance shall not include general
construction or demolition debris facilities, as defined in 415 ILCS 5/3.160,
and/or transfer stations, as defined by 415 ILCS 5/3.500, facilities located
within a structure principally devoted to another use, facilities temporarily
located on a zoning lot under authority of a temporary use, and facilities for
collecting used motor oil which are necessary to a motor vehicle service
station. Establishments that process recyclable material are classified as
“recyclable material processing facilities.”
   E.   Recyclable Material Processing Facility
Establishments that receives and processes consumer recyclable commodities for
subsequent use in the secondary market.
   F.   Self-Storage Facility
The rental or leasing of indoor storage spaces for individuals to store
personal effects. Self-storage facility uses are subject to the following
supplemental use regulations:
      1.   A self-storage facility with drive-up spaces shall be enclosed by a
fence or wall.
      2.   No door openings for a drive-up style self-storage unit shall face
any R-zoned property or public street.
      3.   No business activity shall be conducted within a self-storage
facility (other than the rental of storage spaces).
      4.   Servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers,
or any similar equipment is prohibited.
      5.   The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive
materials, or hazardous chemicals is prohibited.
   G.    Wholesale, Distribution, and Warehousing
Uses that provide and distribute goods for retail sales, commercial services or
industrial establishments. The long-term and short-term storage of supplies,
equipment, commercial goods and personal items is included. Storage yards in
which outdoor storage occurs on a parcel that is not improved with a principal
building are prohibited. The wholesale, distribution & warehousing specific use
types are as follows:
      1.   Freight Terminal Facility
A freight terminal facility is a connecting facility where shipments are
transferred, trucks are switched, and where the primary activity is the receipt
of, sorting of, routing of, and thereafter distribution of commercial goods for
local, intrastate, or interstate distribution. The freight terminal facility
includes uses engaged in the dispatching and long-term or short-term storage of
trucks, buses and other vehicles, parcel delivery services, and cross-docking
activities
    2.   Warehousing
The long-term and short-term storage of supplies, equipment, commercial goods,
and personal items within an enclosed building. Uses that meet the definition
of a self-service storage facility, freight terminal facility, or wholesale
operations, shall not be classified as a warehousing specific use type.
      3.   Wholesale Operations
Uses engaged in the wholesale sales, bulk storage and distribution of goods
principally to retail sales, commercial services, or industrial establishments.
In the B-2 zoning district, classification as a wholesale operations specific
use type requires that a retail showroom and on-site retail sales occur. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022; Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-
2023)
5-7-9: OTHER USE CATEGORY:
   A.   Aircraft Landing Area
Areas used or made available for the landing or takeoff of aircraft, including
areas classified as a restricted landing areas by the Illinois Department of
Transportation Division of Aeronautics, and including any areas that are used
or suitable for use for structures or facilities incidental to aircraft
services.
   B.   Community Garden
An area managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest
food crops or nonfood crops (e.g., flowers) for personal or group consumption,
for donation or for sale that is occasional and incidental to the growing and
harvesting of food crops. A community garden area may be divided into separate
garden plots or orchard areas for cultivation by one or more individuals or may
be farmed collectively by members of the group. A community garden may include
common areas (e.g., hand tool storage sheds) maintained and used by the group.
Community gardens may be principal or accessory uses and may be located at
grade (outdoors), on a roof or within a building. Community gardens do not
include the raising or keeping of farm animals.
   C.   Medical Cannabis Dispensing
As defined in 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
   D.   Open Space
Undeveloped (containing no buildings or structures) land or water area. Open
space may or may not be accessible to the public.
   E.   Parking Garage
A building, with or without a roof, which contains off street parking spaces.
   F.   Parking - Non Accessory
Privately owned parking that is not provided to comply with minimum off-street
parking requirements and that is not provided exclusively to serve occupants of
or visitors to a particular use, but rather is available to the public at
large. A facility that provides both accessory parking and non-accessory
parking is classified as non-accessory parking.
   G.   Parking - Public
Parking owned or operated by a local unit of government that is not provided to
comply with minimum off-street parking requirements and that is not provided
exclusively to serve occupants of or visitors to a particular use, but rather
is available to the public at large.
   H.   Planned Unit Development
Planned unit developments must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the
planned unit development procedures of Chapter 18 of this Ordinance.
   I.   Public Transportation Facility
Facilities intended to accommodate public transportation by rail or bus.
Typical uses include train stations and bus stations. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021)
CHAPTER 8
ACCESSORY USES
SECTION:
5-8-1: General
5-8-2: Supplemental Accessory Use Regulations
5-8-1: GENERAL:
The regulations of this Chapter apply to all accessory uses and structures
unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (A)   Accessory Uses and Structures Allowed. Accessory uses and structures
are permitted in connection with lawfully established principal uses unless
otherwise expressly stated.
   (B)   Incidental and Subordinate in Nature. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to determine when a use, building, or structure meets the criteria
of an accessory use or accessory structure. In making this determination, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine that the use or structure:
      1.   Is subordinate to the principal building or principal use in terms
of area and function;
      2.   Is customarily found in association with the principal use or
principal building.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to deny or prohibit the
establishment of an accessory use or structure if the Zoning Administrator
determines that the accessory use or structure does not meet the accessory use
criteria set forth in this Chapter. This decision may be appealed in accordance
with the appeal procedures in Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Time of construction and establishment
      1.   Accessory uses shall be established only after the principal use of
the property is established.
      2.   Accessory structures shall be established in conjunction with or
after the principal building. They shall not be established before the
principal building is in place.
   (E)   Location. Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same
lot as the principal use or building to which they are accessory, except as
otherwise expressly stated.
   (F)   Applicable regulations and standards
      1.   Unless otherwise expressly stated, accessory uses and structures are
subject to the lot and building standards of the underlying zoning district.
      2.   Accessory uses and structures are not subject to minimum lot area or
minimum lot frontage requirements.
      3.   Accessory uses and structures shall comply with all applicable
regulations of this Zoning Ordinance, except as otherwise expressly stated.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-8-2: SUPPLEMENTAL ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS:
Accessory uses or structures that are restricted to specific principal uses,
zoning districts, or subject to supplemental regulations are as follows:
   (A)   Accessory Dwelling Units
An accessory dwelling unit is an independent residential dwelling unit that is
accessory to an existing household living use.
      1.   General. Accessory dwelling units are allowed as an accessory use to
a detached house, duplex, or townhouse.
      2.   Number Allowed. Only one accessory dwelling unit is permitted per
detached house, duplex, or townhouse.
      3.   Method of Creation. An accessory dwelling unit shall be created
through any of the following methods:
         (a)   Within the existing floor area of a detached house, duplex, or
townhouse.
         (b)   As an addition to detached house, duplex, or townhouse. The
addition may be constructed at the time of construction of the detached house,
duplex, or townhouse, or added at a future date. The addition must be attached
to the existing dwelling unit, not an attached garage.
      4.   Occupant Regulations
         (a)   Only persons related to the occupants of the primary unit shall
occupy the accessory dwelling unit. Further, at least one (1) of the units-the
principal dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit-must be occupied by a person
either 55 years of age or older or by a person with a physical or developmental
disability that renders joint occupancy medically necessary, beneficial, or
desirable.
         (b)   The total number of residents to reside within an accessory
dwelling unit and the principal dwelling unit shall not exceed the number
permitted for a household.
         (c)   The principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit must
be occupied by the legal or beneficial owner of the subject lot.
      5.   Design Requirements. A separate exterior entrance may be added to
serve an accessory dwelling unit, provided that the door does not face the
street.
   (B)   Animals
Refer to Sections Title 9 of the Village Code.
   (C)   Basketball Goals
A basketball goal includes the pole, backboard, and rim. A backboard and rim
attached to a building shall also be defined as a basketball goal. A basketball
court shall be defined as a patio.
      1.   General. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine which
principal uses basketball goals are accessory to in accordance with Section
5-8-1 of this Chapter.
      2.   Location. Basketball goals are allowed as a permitted encroachment
in the required front street, side street, rear and side setback.
      3.   Basketball goals shall not be positioned to allow for use within the
public right-of-way.
   (D)   Beekeeping
Refer to Section
9-3-13 of the Village Code.
   (E)   Convenience Services
Convenience services are accessory uses which customarily accompany and are
incidental to the principal use, and which provide ease of access to services
and amenities which are primarily intended for use by the employees, clients,
customers, or residents of the principal use. Convenience services includes
neighborhood association club houses.
      1.   General
         (a)   Convenience services are a permitted accessory use to lodging,
offices, nursing homes, medical services, colleges or universities, and multi-
unit uses.
         (b)   Neighborhood association club houses are a permitted accessory
use to a household living use.
      2.   Convenience Service Uses
         (a)   Personal improvement services including barbershops, hair and
nail salons, spas, health clubs, yoga and fitness studios;
         (b)   Consumer repair and maintenance services including laundry, dry
cleaning pickup shops;
         (c)   Retail consisting of florists, gift shops, pharmacies, medical
equipment of a type not customarily retailed to the general public, and
newsstands;
         (d)   Daycare services;
         (e)   Eating establishments; and
         (f)   Similar convenience services determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be an accessory use in accordance with Section
5-8-1 of this Chapter.
   (F)   Decks
      1.   General. Decks are a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts
to all principal uses.
      2.   Location
         (a)   Decks shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any rear lot
line.
   (G)   Dog Houses or Dog Runs
      1.   General
         (a)   Dog houses or dog runs are a permitted accessory use to a
detached house, duplex, or townhouse.
         (b)   Dog runs are a permitted accessory use to an animal services
principal use.
      2.   Number Allowed. One dog house or dog run is permitted per lot.
      3.   Location Allowed. A dog house or dog run is prohibited in front
street yard, side street yard, and side yard.
   (H)   Donation or Collection Drop Boxes
A receptacle provided for general public to drop-off recyclable paper, cans,
glass and plastics as well as charitable donations such as clothing, shoes,
books, and toys.
      1.   General
         (a)   Donation or Collection Drop Boxes are allowed as an accessory
use in the B-2 and I-1 zoning districts.
      2.   Number Allowed. One donation or collection drop box is permitted per
lot.
      3.   Size Restriction. A donation or collection drop box shall not exceed
6.5 feet in height or 32 square feet in area.
      4.   Location. A donation or collection drop box is subject to the
building setback regulations of the underlying zoning district.
      5.   Prohibited Locations. A donation or collection drop box is
prohibited in the following locations:
         (a)   In any front street yard or side street yard;
         (b)   In any parking space, drive aisle, or fire lane;
      6.   A donation or collection drop box shall not:
         (a)   Obstruct vehicular, pedestrian or bicycle traffic;
         (b)   Reduce any sidewalk or paved surface spaces designed for the
passage of pedestrians
      7.   The name of the company or organization that owns and/or controls
the drop box must be prominently displayed on the drop box, along with contact
information, including a phone number and email address. The drop box must also
include a legible notice prohibiting the placement of items outside of the drop
box and identifying the drop box owner/operator. Items that are not enclosed
within a drop box are deemed a nuisance and are subject to removal by the
Village at the subject property owner’s expense.
   (I)   Dumpster or Refuse Enclosures
Refer to Chapter 15 of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (J)   Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Stations
      1.   General
         (a)   Private (restricted-access) EV charging stations are permitted
as accessory use in all zoning districts.
         (b)   Public EV charging stations are a permitted accessory use to all
nonresidential principal uses in all zoning districts.
      2.   Parking
         (a)   EV charging stations may be counted toward satisfying minimum
off-street parking space requirements.
         (b)   Public EV charging stations must be reserved for parking and
charging electric vehicles.
      3.   Equipment. Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located
so as to not impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety
hazards on sidewalks.
      4.   Signage. Public electric vehicle charging stations must be posted
with signage indicating that the space is reserved for electric vehicle
charging purposes only. For purposes of this provision, “charging” means that
an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is
connected to the battery charging station equipment.
      5.   Maintenance. Electric vehicle charging stations must be maintained
in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone number or
other contact information must be provided on the equipment for reporting when
it is not functioning or other problems are encountered.
   (K)   Fence or Wall
Refer to Chapter 15 of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (L)   Flagpole
      1.   General. Flagpoles are a permitted accessory use to all principal
uses in all zoning districts.
      2.   Maximum Height. Flagpoles shall not exceed the maximum building
height (principal building) of the underlying zoning district.
      3.   Location. Flagpoles must be set back from lot lines a minimum
distance equal to the height of the pole and sited so the flag will not extend
beyond any lot line.
   (M)   Garage Sales
      1.   General. Garage sales are a permitted accessory use to detached
houses, duplexes, and townhouses.
      2.   Frequency and Duration. Garage sales shall be conducted not more
than two times in any calendar year and for not more than three consecutive
days.
   (N)   Home occupations
      1.   General. Home occupations are a permitted accessory use to an
allowed household living use.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to deny or prohibit the
establishment of a home occupation if the Zoning Administrator determines that
the home occupation does not meet the applicable regulations of this chapter.
This decision may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 17 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
      3.   Operator
         (a)   The operator(s) of the home occupation shall make the dwelling
unit within which the home occupation is conducted his/her legal and primary
place of residence.
         (b)   One person at a time who is not a resident of the dwelling may
be permitted to assist in any and all home occupations.
         (c)   Day care homes are not regulated as home occupations and are
exempt from the home occupation regulations of this chapter. Day care homes are
allowed as indicated in Chapter 7 of this Zoning Ordinance.
      4.   Operation and Appearance
         (a)   The home occupation will be considered to be subordinate and
incidental if it occupies thirty five percent (35%) or less of the gross square
footage of all floors of the house, including the basement and any garage
located upon the same lot.
         (b)   The home occupation may be conducted anywhere within the house,
including the basement, and within a garage located upon the same lot as a
residence from which a home occupation is conducted in any accessory building
upon the property.
         (c)   Outdoor storage related to the operation of a home occupation,
including vehicles associated with the operation of a livery service operating
from the residence, is prohibited.
         (d)   The home occupation shall not require internal or external
alterations or construction features not customary in residential areas.
         (e)   No home occupation shall be operated in such a manner as to
cause a nuisance or be in violation of any applicable statute, ordinance or
regulation.
         (f)   The home occupation shall be conducted in a manner which would
not cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by use
of colors, materials, lighting or the emission of sounds, noises, vibrations,
smoke, dust, odors, heat, or electrical interference.
         (g)   Vehicle Traffic and Parking
            (1)   Deliveries or pick-ups of supplies or products associated
with home occupations are allowed only between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Vehicles
used for delivery and pick-up are limited to U.S. postal carrier, parcel
service or passenger vehicle. Deliveries by semi tractor-trailers are
prohibited.
            (2)   No home occupation shall cause an increase in traffic or
parking congestion in excess of those which normally occur in that residential
neighborhood.
         (h)   Any home occupation required to be licensed by the State or any
other governmental body shall not be permitted until and unless a current
license from such body is obtained.
         (i)   If there is more than one home occupation within the dwelling,
the regulations of this section apply to the sum total of the activity related
to such home occupations.
         (j)   Prohibited Uses. The following uses, as defined in Chapter 7 of
this Zoning Ordinance, are expressly prohibited as home occupations:
            (1)   Animal Services;
            (2)   Assembly and Entertainment;
            (3)   Body Art Services;
            (4)   Drinking establishments;
            (5)   Eating establishments;
            (6)   Fortune Telling and Psychic Services;
            (7)   Funeral or Mortuary Services;
            (8)   Industrial Uses, except artisan;
            (9)   Lodging;
            (10)   Medical services;
            (11)   Motor Vehicles Sales or Services;
            (12)   Personal Credit Establishments;
            (13)   Personal Improvement Services, except barbers, hair and nail
salons with not more than one station;
            (14)   Public, Civic, and Institutional Uses;
            (15)   Retail, except for items produced on premises;
            (16)   Sexually Oriented Businesses;
            (17)   Small Engine Repair or Maintenance Services; and
            (18)   Sports and Recreation;
   (O)   Mobile Storage Containers
Mobile storage containers are expressly prohibited within the Village unless
approved in accordance with the temporary use procedures located in Chapter 9
of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (P)   Ornamental Objects
This term specifically includes, but is not limited to, fountains, sculptures,
landscape planters, and street lamp posts. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to determine what constitutes an ornamental object in accordance
with Section
5-8-1 of this Chapter.
      1.   General. Ornamental objects are a permitted accessory use to all
principal uses in all zoning districts.
      2.   Location. Ornamental objects are a permitted encroachment in all
required setbacks.
   (Q)   Outdoor Retail Display
Outdoor retail display regulations apply to items that are displayed outside of
an enclosed building when the items are accessible to the general public for
incidental retail purposes.
      1.   General. Outdoor retail display is a permitted accessory use to all
principal retail uses in the B-1, B-2, B-3A, B-3B, and I zoning district,
unless otherwise specified in Chapter 7.  
      2.   Location. Outdoor retail display is a permitted encroachment in the
required front street setback and side street setback.
      3.   Outdoor retail display within the public right-of-way is subject to
compliance with the right-of-way encroachment provisions of the Lisle Village
Code.
      4.   Prohibited Locations
         (a)   In any parking space, drive aisle, or fire lane. Light Motor
Vehicle Sales may display vehicles in parking spaces if the display vehicles do
not reduce the number of parking spaces required by the schedule of off street
parking requirements.
   5.   Size Restriction
      (a)   Area. The outdoor retail display area shall not exceed 15% of the
principal use floor area, except for Light Motor Vehicle sales display.
         (b)   Height. Items attached to a building wall surface or stacked
shall not exceed eight feet in height.
   (R)   Outdoor Seating
      1.   General. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine which
principal uses outdoor seating is accessory to in accordance with Section
5-8-1 of this Chapter.
      2.   Location
         (a)   Tables, chairs, and umbrellas are a permitted encroachment in
all required setbacks. All other buildings or structures that facilitate the
outdoor seating use shall comply with the applicable regulations of the zoning
ordinance.
         (b)   Outdoor seating within the public right-of-way is subject to
compliance with the right-of-way encroachment provisions of the Lisle Village
Code.
         (c)   Seasonal outdoor seating that will reduce available parking is
subject to the temporary use permit requirements in Chapter 9 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
   (S)   Outdoor Storage
Outdoor storage regulations apply to items stored outside of an enclosed
building when the items are not accessible to the general public for retail
purposes. Vehicles weighing 8,000 pounds or less that are operable and licensed
are not are classified as outdoor storage.
      1.   General. Outdoor storage may be allowed only in the I-1 zoning
district if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special use permit
procedures in Chapter 17.
         (a)   A special use permit for accessory outdoor storage is not
required if the principal use that the outdoor storage is accessory to is a
special use.
      2.   Prohibited Locations
         (a)   In any front street yard, side street yard, or side yard;
         (b)   In any parking space, drive aisle, or fire lane;
      3.   Permitted Encroachment. Outdoor storage is permitted to encroach in
the rear yard setback if not abutting a residential use.
      4.   Screening. Outdoor storage shall be screened by a solid wall or
fence in accordance with Chapter 15 of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (T)   Patios
      1.   General. Patios are a permitted accessory use in all zoning
districts to all principal uses.
      2.   Location
         (a)   Patios shall be setback a minimum of five feet from all lot
lines.
   (U)   Playground Equipment and Play Houses
      1.   General. Playground equipment and play houses are a permitted
accessory use to household living uses and other uses approved by the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with Section
5-8-1 of this Chapter.
      2.   Location
         (a)   Playground equipment and play houses are prohibited in the front
street and side street yard.
         (b)   Playground equipment and play houses are a permitted
encroachment in required side and rear setbacks.
   (V)   Public Book Exchanges
Public book exchange improve access to books, spark creativity and foster a
sense of community.
      1.   General. Public book exchanges are a permitted accessory use in all
zoning districts and to all principal uses.
      2.   Location. Public book exchange are allowed as a permitted
encroachment in the required front street and side street setbacks in all
zoning districts.
      3.   Number Allowed. Only one public book exchange is permitted per lot.
      4.   Size Restriction. A public book exchange shall not exceed 5 feet in
height or 4 square feet.
      5.   Location Restriction. A public book exchange is prohibited in the
following locations:
         (a)   In any parking space, parking lot, or drive aisle;
      6.   A public book exchange shall not:
         (a)   Obstruct vehicular, pedestrian or bicycle traffic;
         (b)   Reduce any sidewalk or paved surface spaces designed for the
passage of pedestrians.
   (W)   Rain Barrels
      1.   General. Rain barrels are a permitted accessory use to all principal
uses in all zoning districts.
      2.   Location. Rain barrels are a permitted encroachment in all setbacks.
      3.   Design Requirements
         (a)   Rain barrels shall be designed to discharge in accordance with
Title 12 of the Lisle Village Code.
         (b)   Rain barrels shall not obstruct the natural flow of water from
adjacent lots or alter the natural flow of water onto adjacent lots.
         (c)   The barrel must have a lid and a sturdy fine mesh covering all
openings to prevent mosquitoes.
   (X)   Rain Gardens
      1.   General. Rain gardens are a permitted accessory use to all principal
uses in all zoning districts.
      2.   Location. Rain gardens are a permitted encroachment in all setbacks.
   (Y)   Retail Sales Kiosks, Vending Machines, and Automatic Teller Machines
      1.   General. Retail sales kiosks, vending machines, and automatic teller
machines are allowed only if located entirely within an enclosed building or
underneath a weather-protected canopy connected to the principal building.
      2.   Location. Retail sales kiosks, vending machines, and automatic
teller machines are a permitted encroachment in all setbacks.
   (Z)   Satellite Dishes
      1.   General
         (a)   Satellite dish antennas up to 40 inches in diameter are a
permitted accessory use to all principal uses in all zoning districts.
         (b)   Satellite dish antennas over 40 inches in diameter are a
permitted accessory use to all principal uses in all nonresidential zoning
districts.
   (AA)   Small Wind Energy Systems
      1.   General
         (a)   A small wind energy systems with a nameplate capacity of less
than 100 kilowatts are a permitted accessory use in any nonresidential zoning
district.
         (b)   A rooftop mounted small wind energy systems with a nameplate
capacity of less than 50 kilowatts are a permitted special use in any
residential zoning district.
            (1)   Ground mounted small wind energy systems are prohibited in
residential zoning districts.
      2.   Regulations. All small wind energy systems are subject to the
following regulations:
         (a)   No more than one small wind energy system is permitted per lot.
         (b)   All freestanding small wind energy systems must be set back from
all property lines a distance equivalent to at least 110% of the total system
height.
         (c)   The blade tip of any rotor must, at its lowest point, have
ground clearance of at least 15 feet.
         (d)   All climbing apparatus must be located at least 15 feet above
the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first
15 feet from the top of foundation.
         (e)   Tower structure lighting is prohibited unless required by the
Federal Aviation Administration or appropriate authority.
         (f)   Noise levels must comply with the Illinois Pollution Control
Board regulations. Proof of compliance must be submitted as part of the
application process.
         (g)   Any small wind energy system that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months or more will be considered abandoned, and the
owners of such system must remove all structures within 90 days of receiving
notice from the Village. If such facility is not removed within 90 days, the
Village may remove all structures at the owner’s expense.
   (BB)   Solar Energy Systems
      1.   Building-Mounted Solar Energy Systems
         (a)   Building-mounted solar energy systems are a permitted accessory
use in all zoning districts.
         (b)   Building-mounted solar energy systems may be mounted on
principal or accessory buildings.
         (c)   Only building-integrated or flush-mounted solar energy systems
may be installed on street-facing building elevations.
         (d)   Solar energy systems shall not extend more than 3 feet above the
maximum building height of the underlying zoning district or more than 5 feet
above the highest point of the roofline, whichever is less.
      2.   Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems
         (a)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems are a permitted accessory
use in all nonresidential zoning districts.
         (b)   In nonresidential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall not be located the front street and side street yard.
   (CC)   Swimming Pools and Spas
      1.   General. Accessory swimming pools and spas are allowed as an
accessory use to household living uses and other uses approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
      2.   Location.
         (a)   Swimming pools and spas are prohibited in the front street and
side street yard in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 zoning districts.
         (b)   Swimming pools and spas shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet
from all lot lines.
            (1)   Exception. Rooftop accessory swimming pools and spas.
   (DD)   Wheel Chair Lifts or Ramps
      1.   General. Wheel chair lifts or ramps are a permitted accessory use in
all zoning districts and to all principal uses.
      2.   Location. Wheel chair lifts or ramps are exempt from all lot and
building standards of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd.
Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022; Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 9
TEMPORARY USES
SECTION:
5-9-1: General
5-9-2: Understanding The Temporary Use Table
5-9-3: Temporary Use Table
5-9-4: Temporary Use Specific Standards
5-9-1: GENERAL:
A temporary use is a use of private property that does not require Village
authorization through another means of permitting (i.e. special event permit,
block party permit, business licensing, etc.) and is not a permitted principal
or accessory use of the underlying zoning district.
   (A)   Temporary Uses Allowed
      1.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve temporary uses in
accordance with the temporary use table established in Section
5-9-3 of this Chapter.
         (a)   Temporary uses that are not identified in the temporary use
table established in Section
5-9-3 of this Chapter must be considered by the Village Board.
      2.   Temporary uses that do not comply with the specific standards of
Section
5-9-4 must be considered by the Village Board.
      3.   Exemptions
         (a)   The regulations of this Chapter do not apply to private, non-
commercial events on the host’s property such as homeowners’ association
picnics at the subdivision park, corporate picnics on the corporate campus,
graduation celebrations and weddings at a private residence or subdivision
clubhouse.
         (b)   The regulations of this Chapter do not apply to temporary
activities and structures needed as the result of a natural disaster or other
health and safety emergencies are allowed for the duration of the emergency.
Temporary activities include food, water, and equipment distribution centers,
warming or cooling shelters, and triage stations.
         (c)   This Zoning Ordinance shall not be interpreted to prohibit
activities that are otherwise authorized by other regulations of the Village
Code.
   (B)   Temporary Use Duration. Temporary uses are authorized for a limited
duration of 180 days or as specified herein.
   (C)   Lot and Building Standards. Due to their temporary nature, temporary
uses are exempt from the lot and building standards of the underlying zoning
district.
   (D)   Temporary Use Permit Required. Unless otherwise specified herein, no
temporary use shall be established unless a temporary use permit or temporary
building permit is issued evidencing the use’s compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances of the Village.
   (E)   Zoning Administrator Additional Authorities
      1.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to impose conditions on
temporary use permits.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to suspend, revoke, or modify
a temporary use permit immediately upon determination that the conditions and
requirements set forth in the permit have been violated. Written notice of the
Zoning Administrator’s determination to suspend, revoke, or modify the permit
must be promptly provided to the applicant. If the non-compliance is not cured
within three calendar days after receipt of this determination, the
determination under this section is final and conclusive.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to deny temporary use permits
to any person who owns property on which an uncorrected violation is present or
who applied for or otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of
this Zoning Ordinance or who has demonstrated a willful history of violations,
including any condition attached to a permit or approval previously granted by
the Village. This provision applies regardless of whether the property for
which the permit or other approval is sought is the property in violation.
      4.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to deny temporary use permits
on any land or structure or improvements thereon upon which there is an
uncorrected violation of a provision of this Zoning Ordinance, including any
condition attached to a permit or approval previously granted by the Village.
This enforcement provision applies regardless of whether the current owner or
applicant is responsible for the violation in question. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-9-2: UNDERSTANDING THE TEMPORARY USE TABLE:
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve temporary uses in accordance
with the following table:
   (A)   Permitted Temporary Uses. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
approve temporary uses identified with a “P” in the temporary use table.
Temporary uses are subject to compliance with all temporary use specific
standards identified in Section
5-9-4 and with all other applicable regulations of the Village.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator is not authorized to approve temporary uses
identified with a “-” in the temporary use table. Temporary uses identified
with a “-” in the temporary use table must be considered by the Village Board.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-9-3: TEMPORARY USE TABLE:
TEMPORARY USE Zoning Districts
              R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 B-2 B-3A B-3B O O-R I-1 C/U
TEMPORARY USE                Zoning Districts
                             R-1  R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 B-2 B-3A B-3B O O-R I-1 C/U
Mobile Storage Containers    P    P    P   P   P   P   –  –  P P   P   P
Real Estate Sales Offices or P    P    P   P   P   P   P    P    P P   P   P
Construction Trailers
Searchlights                 –  –  – – – P   P    P    P P   P   P
Seasonal Outdoor Sale of     P[1] –  – – – P   P    P    P P   P   P
Holiday Items
Seasonal Outdoor Seating     –  –  – – – P   P    P    P P   P   P
Temporary Parking            –  –  – – – P   P    P    P P   P   P
 
[1] When associated with an authorized nonresidential use.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022)
5-9-4: TEMPORARY USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
   (A)   Mobile Storage Containers
Mobile storage containers are authorized as a temporary use in accordance with
the following:
      1.   Temporary household storage. One mobile storage container may be
used for temporary storage of household goods, wares or materials when used in
connection with moving or relocation, or interior improvements that do not
require a building permit.
         (a)   The time period for which a mobile storage container may be used
for this purpose is limited to a maximum of 30 consecutive days per calendar
year. This initial 30-day period shall not require a temporary use permit. One
additional 30-day extension may be granted by the Zoning Administrator, through
the issuance of a temporary use permit
      2.   Temporary construction storage. One mobile storage container may be
used for temporary storage in conjunction with construction allowed through an
active building permit.
         (a)   When utilized for temporary construction storage, the mobile
storage container is permitted for the duration of the construction project.
         (b)   The mobile storage container must be removed within 14 days of
completion of the construction project or upon expiration of the building
permit, whichever occurs first.
      3.   Temporary emergency storage. One mobile storage container may be
used for temporary storage in cases where a principal or accessory building
becomes unfit for human occupancy due to acts that are not within the control
of the property owner.
         (a)   The time period for which a mobile storage container may be used
for this purpose is limited to a maximum of 60 consecutive days per calendar
year. This initial 60-day period shall not require a temporary use permit. One
additional 60-day extension may be granted by the Zoning Administrator, through
the issuance of a temporary use permit.
      4.   Non-residential general storage. One mobile storage container may be
used for temporary storage on a property not containing a residential use.
         (a)   The time period for which a mobile storage container may be used
for this purpose is limited to a maximum of 30 consecutive days per calendar
year. One additional 30-day extension may be granted by the Zoning
Administrator through the issuance of a temporary use permit.
      5.   Standards
Mobile storage containers shall comply with the following standards:
         (a)   Stacking of mobile storage containers is prohibited.
         (b)   Mobile storage containers must be accessory to a principal
building.
         (c)   Mobile storage containers must be placed on a driveway or other
hard surface.
         (d)   Mobile storage containers shall not be placed in a location that
obstructs pedestrian or vehicular movement or intersection visibility.
         (e)   Mobile storage containers shall not include any signage other
than the name, address and telephone number of the person or firm engaged in
the business of renting or otherwise placing the mobile storage container on
the subject property.
         (f)   Mobile storage containers must be maintained in a good state of
repair, free from rust, peeling paint and other forms of visible deterioration.
   (B)   Real Estate Sales Office or Construction Trailers
      1.   Real estate sales offices or construction trailers are allowed in
any zoning district for any new development.
      2.   Real estate sales offices include model homes.
      3.   Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Zoning Administrator, the
real estate sales office or construction trailer must be located on the site of
the new development that it is associated with.
      4.   The maximum duration of a temporary real estate sales office is 180
days. Permits may be renewed throughout the sales period of the development.
      5.   The maximum duration of a temporary construction trailer is for the
duration of the associated building permit. All construction trailers shall be
removed from the site prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (C)   Searchlights
      1.   A searchlight shall not be operated for more than five consecutive
days and 15 days per calendar year.
      2.   A searchlight shall not be operated between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m. or more than 30 minutes before or 30 minutes after operations on
the property.
      3.   A searchlight shall not:
         (a)   Project a beam at a street right-of-way or adjoining property.
         (b)   Impair the vision of a driver of a vehicle.
      4.   A searchlight located within 25 feet of street right-of-way or a
property that is zoned residential shall not project beams at an angle of less
than 30 degrees above grade or less than the height of the tallest neighboring
building, whichever is greater.
   (D)   Seasonal Outdoor Sales of Holiday Items
      1.   Outdoor sales of holiday items shall not exceed 60 days per calendar
year.
      2.   On-site parking shall be provided on a paved surface. Such on-site
parking and the temporary use activity shall not reduce the minimum number of
required parking for the principal use(s) located on the property that the
seasonal outdoor sales is conducted on.
      3.   Use of a public address system or loud speaker is expressly
prohibited.
   (E)   Seasonal Outdoor Seating
      1.   General. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve seasonal
outdoor seating that will reduce available parking.
      2.   Location
         (a)   Tables, chairs, and umbrellas are a permitted encroachment in
all required setbacks.
      3.   Outdoor seating within the public right-of-way is subject to
compliance with the right-of-way encroachment provisions of the Lisle Village
Code.
   (F)   Temporary Parking
      1.   Temporary parking shall be associated with an event and shall not
exceed 5 days.
      2.   Temporary parking shall be provided on a paved surface.
      3.   Temporary parking shall not reduce the minimum number of required
parking for the principal uses(s) located on the property. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-
15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
5-10-1: General
5-10-2: Purposes
5-10-3: Authority To Continue
5-10-4: Determination Of Nonconforming Status
5-10-5: Repairs And Maintenance
5-10-6: Replacement Values
5-10-7: Effect Of Public Acquisition
5-10-8: Nonconforming Lots
5-10-9: Nonconforming Uses
5-10-10: Nonconforming Structures
5-10-11: Nonconforming Development Features
5-10-1: GENERAL:
The regulations of this Chapter govern nonconformities, which are lots, uses
and structures that were lawfully established but-because of the adoption of
new or amended regulations-no longer comply with one or more requirements of
this Zoning Ordinance.
   (A)   Nonconforming status runs with the land and is not affected by changes
of tenancy, ownership, or management. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-2: PURPOSES:
The regulations of this Chapter are intended to:
   (A)   Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their
property for uses and activities that were lawfully established;
   (B)   Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing buildings;
and
   (C)   Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential to
adversely affect surrounding properties. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-3: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE:
Any nonconformity that existed on the effective date specified in Chapter 1 of
this Zoning Ordinance or any situation that becomes nonconforming upon adoption
of any amendment to this Zoning Ordinance may be continued in accordance with
the regulations of this Chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated. (Ord. 2021-
4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-4: DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS:
The burden of proving that a nonconformity exists rests entirely with the
property owner.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine whether adequate
proof of nonconforming status has been provided by the property owner. In
making this determination, the following forms shall constitute conclusive
evidence:
      1.   Certificates of occupancy or completion, lawfully recorded plats,
aerial photography and other records that indicate lawful establishment of the
use, lot or structure.
   (B)   If such forms of conclusive evidence are not available, the Zoning
Administrator is authorized to consider whether other forms of evidence
provided by the property owner are reliable and adequate to document
nonconforming status. Common examples of evidence that may be determined to be
reliable and adequate include:
      1.   Professional registrations or business licenses;
      2.   Utility billing records;
      3.   Rent records;
      4.   Advertisements in dated publications; and
      5.   Listings in telephone or business directories.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator’s determination of nonconforming status must
be supported by written findings.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator’s determination of nonconforming status may
be appealed in accordance with Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-
4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-5: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Nonconformities must be maintained to be safe and in good repair.
   (B)   Repairs and normal maintenance necessary to keep a nonconformity in
sound condition are permitted unless the work increases the extent of the
nonconformity or is otherwise expressly prohibited by this Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing in this Chapter is intended to prevent nonconformities from
being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance
with an order from a duly authorized order of a public official. (Ord. 2021-
4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-6: REPLACEMENT VALUES:
   (A)   Replacement value for all structures is deemed to be three times the
equalized assessed valuation of the improvement (based upon information
obtained from the DuPage County Supervisor of Assessments or Township Assessor)
for the tax year in which the loss occurred.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to accept an appraisal
prepared by an Illinois licensed Appraiser for the purpose of determining
replacement value.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to accept a construction
quote that includes materials and labor for the purpose of determining
replacement value for an accessory structure. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-7: EFFECT OF PUBLIC ACQUISITION:
If a lot, use, or structure is rendered nonconforming by acquisition by a
public agency, the lot, use, or structure is deemed to be conforming. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-8: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
   (A)   General
A nonconforming lot is a lot that was lawfully created in accordance with lot
area and lot frontage regulations in effect at the time of the lot’s
establishment but that does not comply with currently applicable lot area or
lot frontage regulations.
      1.   Use of and building on nonconforming lots. Development on all
nonconforming lots must comply with the lot and building standards of the
subject zoning district.
         (a)   Exception. Building permits may be issued for any principal or
accessory uses and structures allowed in the subject zoning district without
bringing the nonconforming lot into compliance with the current lot area or lot
frontage standards of the subject zoning district.
   (B)   Nonconforming lots shall not be adjusted in size or shape to increase
the extent of nonconformity for lot area, lot frontage, setback or other
applicable lot and building standards. Lot area or shape adjustments that
decrease the extent of nonconformity are allowed. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
   (A)   General
A nonconforming use is a land use that was lawfully established in accordance
with applicable zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment
but that is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the zoning district in
which the use is now located.
   (B)   Change of use. A nonconforming use may be changed to any other use
that is allowed in the subject zoning district. Once changed to a conforming
use, a nonconforming use shall not be re-established.
   (C)   Expansion Prohibited
      1.   A nonconforming use shall not be expanded into another part of the
same building.
      2.   Nonconforming open-air uses shall not be expanded beyond the area
occupied by the use at the time it became nonconforming.
      3.   Expansion for the sole purpose of complying with off-street parking
standards of this Zoning Ordinance is not considered expansion of a
nonconforming use.
   (D)   Remodeling and improvements. When a building containing a
nonconforming use is remodeled, intentionally damaged, or destroyed by causes
within the control of the owner and the extent of remodeling, damage, or
destruction is more than 50% of the replacement value of the structure, the use
shall not be reestablished except in compliance with all regulations applicable
to the zoning district in which it is located.
   (E)   Moving. A nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation does not
increase the extent of the nonconformity. A nonconforming use may be moved to
another lot only if the use is allowed under the zoning regulations that apply
to that (relocation) lot.
   (F)   Loss of Nonconforming Status
      1.   Abandonment
         (a)   Once a nonconforming use is abandoned, its nonconforming status
is lost and any new, replacement use must comply with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
         (b)   A nonconforming use is presumed abandoned when the use is
discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of one year or more.
         (c)   The presumption of abandonment may be rebutted upon showing, to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator, that during such period the owner
of the land or structure has been:
            (1)   Maintaining the land and structure in accordance with all
applicable Village requirements and did not intend to discontinue the use;
            (2)   Actively and continuously marketing the land or structure for
sale or lease for that particular nonconforming use; or
            (3)   Engaged in other activities that affirmatively prove there
was not intent to abandon.
      2.   Abandonment Exceptions
         (a)   Any period of discontinued use caused by government action,
unintended fire, or natural disaster will not be counted in calculating the
length of discontinuance.
   (G)   Change to Conforming Use. If a nonconforming use is changed to a
conforming use, no matter how short the period of time, all nonconforming use
rights are lost and re-establishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited.
   (H)   Accidental damage or destruction. When a building containing a
nonconforming use is accidentally destroyed or damaged by causes that are not
within the control of the property owner or tenant, the building may be
restored or repaired, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that
the existing extent of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to
reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure must be obtained within 12 months
of the date of occurrence of such damage.
   (I)   Accessory uses. No use that is accessory to a principal nonconforming
use may continue after the principal nonconforming use has ceased.
   (J)   Conversion to special use. A nonconforming use may be converted to a
special use by the granting of a special use permit, in accordance with the
special use permit procedures of Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance. This
conversion may occur only when it is shown that the nonconforming use is
providing a particular service to the residents of the Village and that the use
is not detrimental to the Village as a whole or to surrounding properties.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-10: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   (A)   General
A nonconforming structure is any building or structure that was lawfully
established but no longer complies with the lot and building standards of the
zoning district in which it is located.
      1.   Nonconforming signs are subject to the nonconforming sign
regulations established in Chapter 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   Structures that comply with building or setback lines indicated on a
final subdivision plat, recorded after June 3, 1958, rather than the minimum
setbacks of the subject zoning district are considered conforming structures.
Permits may be issued for new buildings and building additions that comply with
building or setback lines indicated on recorded final subdivision plats,
recorded after June 3, 1958, subject to compliance with all other applicable
regulations of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Use of Nonconforming Structures. A nonconforming structure may be used
for any use that is permitted by right in the zoning district in which the
structure is located without obtaining variations. A nonconforming structure
may be used for any use classified as a special use if such use is approved in
accordance with the special use procedures of Chapter 17 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
   (C)   Alterations and expansions. Alterations, including enlargements and
expansions, are permitted if the proposed alteration or expansion complies with
all applicable lot and building standards and does not increase the extent of
the nonconformity. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence:
      1.   Front street, side street and rear yard vertical extensions: Any
portion of a nonconforming structure that is nonconforming with respect to a
required front street, side street, or rear yard setback may be extended
vertically within its existing perimeter walls but shall not be extended
horizontally; and
      2.   Side yard vertical extensions: Any portion of a nonconforming
structure that is nonconforming with respect to a required side yard setback
may be extended vertically within its existing perimeter walls; and
      3.   Roof elevation extensions: Any portion of a nonconforming structure
that is nonconforming with respect to the permitted maximum building height may
be extended horizontally at an elevation in excess of said permitted maximum
elevation; provided, however, that the top of the roof of such extension shall
not exceed the top of the precode structure.
      4.   Roof height extensions: Any portion of a nonconforming structure
located on a conforming lot in a single-family residential district that is
nonconforming with respect to the permitted maximum height and that is a
precode structure solely due to the nonconforming height of the structure may
be extended: a) horizontally at a height in excess of said permitted maximum
height but not in excess of the roofline of the existing structure or b)
horizontally and vertically at a height in excess of the permitted maximum
height but not in excess of the height of the structure as of the date of
initial occupancy of the original structure, provided, however, that such
extension shall not be permitted where the height of the structure as of the
date of initial occupancy of the original structure exceeded the maximum height
authorized by law; and, in either case, such extension shall not extend more
than twenty four inches (24") beyond the exterior face of the exterior walls of
said existing structure.
   (D)   Moving. A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part to
another location only if the movement or relocation does not increase the
extent of the nonconformity. This provision is not intended to prohibit
elevation of a nonconforming structure for the purpose of flood proofing or
repair.
   (E)   Loss of Nonconforming Status
      1.   Accidental damage or destruction. When a nonconforming structure is
accidentally destroyed or damaged by causes that are not within the control of
the owner, the structure may be restored or repaired, provided that no new
nonconformities are created and that the existing extent of nonconformity is
not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged
structure must be obtained within 12 months of the date of occurrence of such
damage.
      2.   Remodeling and improvements. When a nonconforming structure is
remodeled, intentionally damaged, or destroyed by causes within the control of
the owner and the extent of the remodeling, damage or destruction is more than
50% of the replacement value of the structure, the structure shall not be
reestablished except in compliance with all regulations applicable to the
zoning district in which it is located.
   (F)   Conversion to special use. A nonconforming structure may be converted
to a special use by the granting of a special use permit, in accordance with
the special use permit procedures of Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance. This
conversion may occur only when it is shown that the nonconforming structure is
providing a particular service to the residents of Village and that the use is
not detrimental to the Village as a whole or to surrounding properties. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-10-11: NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT FEATURES:
   (A)   General
A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a development-other than a
nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming structure, or nonconforming
sign that was lawfully established, in accordance with zoning regulations in
effect at the time of its establishment but that no longer complies with one or
more standards of this Zoning Ordinance. Common examples of nonconforming
development features are off-street parking or loading areas that contain fewer
spaces than required by current standards or otherwise do not comply with
applicable regulations, and sites that do not comply with current landscaping
and screening requirements.
   (B)   Nonconforming development features may remain except as otherwise
expressly stated in this Zoning Ordinance, but the nature and extent of
nonconforming site features shall not be increased except as otherwise
expressly stated in this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 11
SIGNS
SECTION:
5-11-1: General
5-11-2: Purposes
5-11-3: Prohibited Signs
5-11-4: Signs On Residential Property
5-11-5: Signs On Nonresidential Property
5-11-6: B-3A; Central Business District And B-3B; Central Perimeter Business
District
5-11-7: Rules Of Measurement
5-11-8: Illumination
5-11-9: Changeable Copy Signs
5-11-10: Nonconforming Signs
5-11-11: Substitution Clause
5-11-12: Definitions
5-11-1: GENERAL:
The Village’s regulations relating to signage are listed below. When this
ordinance refers to Signs or sign regulations, it is referring to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-11-2: PURPOSES:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish balanced regulations of signage by
promoting the optimum conditions for communication between people and their
environment, as follows:
   (A)   To preserve and promote the public health, safety, and welfare through
the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of all signs.
   (B)   To preserve property values within the Village by regulating and
controlling the design, location, construction, and maintenance of all signs.
   (C)   To protect the physical appearance of the Village by recognizing and
advocating a sense of aesthetic appreciation for the visual environment and
compatibility with the surroundings.
   (D)   To advance the economy of the Village by recognizing the need for
adequate site identification through promoting the reasonable and objective
display of signage, and to encourage effective communication between signs and
the public.
   (E)   To protect the general public, pedestrians, and motorists within the
Village by assuring the design, location, construction, and maintenance of
signs presents safe navigation through discernable identification, and does not
create distractions, obstructions, and hazards.
   (F)   To acknowledge that signs may cause harm to the public by creating
obstructions, providing distractions to motorists, displacing alternative land
uses, decreasing property values and aesthetics, and endangering the safety of
person and property.
   (G)   To establish the Village’s substantial and compelling interest in
regulating signs in a manner as to reduce the effects and impacts signs have on
the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (H)   To enhance the physical appearance of site identification to be in
harmony with the visual character of the associated street corridor and to be
an integral part of the aesthetic of the site and architectural style of
associated buildings.
   (I)   To encourage signs that further advance adopted Village guidelines and
plans. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-11-3: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
Any sign not expressly permitted in this Chapter is prohibited. No person or
entity shall display any of the following signs within the Village of Lisle:
   (A)   Signs which by color, location, or design resemble or conflict with
traffic control signs or signals.
   (B)   Portable signs, excluding sidewalk signs as defined within this
Chapter.
   (C)   Commercial signs on a vehicle where said vehicle is parked adjacent to
or near the right-of-way for the purposes of identifying or calling attention
to the business, such as utilizing directional signage, and is not used for
daily operations or during the regular course of business, or is not licensed,
insured, or operational.
   (D)   Outdoor advertising sign (“Billboards”).
   (E)   Signs containing exposed gas tubing, exterior to the building,
including argon and neon.
   (F)   Flashing signs.
   (G)   Any signs or attention getting devices, that rotate, revolve, or have
any visible moving parts or that gives the appearance of movement, including,
but are not limited to, searchlights, spinners, streamers, balloons, and other
similar devices, or ornamentation designed for purposes of attracting
attention, promotion or advertising, unless otherwise provided for in this
Chapter.
   (H)   Off-premise signs displaying commercial speech.
   (I)   Any sign or structure, which constitutes a hazard to public health or
safety, including dangerous construction or sight obstructions.
   (J)   Any sign located in the public right-of-way, unless otherwise provided
for in this Chapter.
   (K)   Roof signs as defined within this Chapter.
   (L)   “V” shaped signs, except as a temporary sign in accordance with this
Chapter.
   (M)   Cabinet box signs as defined within this Chapter.
   (N)   Pole signs as defined within this Chapter.
   (O)   Changeable Copy signs, as defined in this Chapter, in the B-3A;
Central Business District.
   (P)   Illuminated window signs.
   (Q)   Signs advertising a business no longer conducted on the premises.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022; Ord. 2023-5042, 12-
18-2023)
5-11-4: SIGNS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
Signs on properties being used for residential purposes, regardless of zoning
classification.
   (A)   Exempt Signs: The following signs are exempt from the regulations of
this Chapter, subject to compliance with the following requirements:
      1.   Address numbers, non-illuminated or directly illuminated, located on
the property to which the sign is apparent.
      2.   Governmental signs incidental thereto for identification,
information, directional, or public safety purposes erected or required by
governmental bodies, or authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or
ordinance, such as traffic control signs and legal notices, including those
located in the right-of-way.
      3.   Flags and handheld signs displaying only non-commercial speech,
images or messages.
      4.   Historical Marker signs: Maximum of six (6) square feet in area.
      5.   Signs on Property for Sale or Lease: One yard sign per frontage not
to exceed six (6) square feet and a maximum height of five (5) feet, including
any support structure, and shall not extend outside the property line. Such
sign shall be removed upon closing of the sale or initiation of the lease.
      6.   Construction Signs: One yard sign is permitted for construction
sites not to exceed six (6) square feet and a maximum height of five (5) feet,
including any support structure, and shall not extend outside the property
line. The sign shall be confined to the site of the construction, and shall be
removed within three (3) days after the construction is complete.
      7.   Development Project Signs: One forty-eight (48) square foot sign
with a maximum height of ten (10) feet shall be allowed for each frontage for a
residential development including at least five (5) contiguous lots under the
control of a single entity. Such signs shall be removed upon the completion of
the development project.
      8.   Temporary non-commercial, non-illuminated wall and ground mounted
signs subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   Sign area per individual sign shall be a maximum of six (6)
square feet.
         (b)   Sign height shall be a maximum of five (5) feet, including any
support structure.
      9.   Signs on private property designed or installed to not be viewed
from a frontage as defined in this Ordinance. These signs do require issuance
of a building permit.
   (B)   Permanent Signs: Permanent signs shall be installed for an indefinite
period of time, subject to all maintenance requirements as required by this
Chapter. These provisions shall not apply to legal nonconforming uses.
      1.   Neighborhood or Subdivision Identification Signs:
         (a)   Two (2) ground signs per each entrance.
         (b)   Sign area per individual sign shall be a maximum of thirty-two
(32) square feet.
         (c)   Sign height per individual sign shall be a maximum of six (6)
feet, except that said sign height may be increased to nine (9) feet if
installed along Maple Avenue, Ogden Avenue, Warrenville Road, and Illinois
Route 53.
         (d)   Sign shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any
property line.
      2.   Home occupation Signs: Properties with a permitted home occupation
shall be limited to:
         (a)   Wall Sign: One wall sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in
area; or
         (b)   Home occupation signs shall not be illuminated. (Ord. 2021-4931,
11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022)
5-11-5: SIGNS ON NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
Signs that identify, advertise, or direct attention to non-residential
structures or services, including but not limited to business, industrial,
office, public, civic, or institutional uses. Mixed use structures are
classified as non-residential property for purposes of this Chapter. Signage
allowances are based on actual land use, not zoning classifications. Signage
shall only be displayed upon the property to which the sign pertains.
   (A)   Exempt Signs: The following signs are exempt from the regulations of
this Chapter, subject to compliance with the following requirements:
      1.   Governmental signs incidental thereto for identification,
information, directional, or public safety purposes erected or required by
governmental bodies, or authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or
ordinance, such as traffic control signs and legal notices, including those
located in the right-of-way.
      2.   Directional signs up to a maximum six (6) square feet in sign area
and four (4) feet in height installed on private property.
      3.   Address Numbers: Non-illuminated or directly illuminated, located on
the lot to which the sign is apparent.
      4.   Flags displaying only non-commercial speech, images or messages. One
flag displaying commercial speech on parcels one acre or larger in size.
      5.   Historical Marker signs up to a maximum of six (6) square feet in
area.
      6.   Sidewalk Sign: One sidewalk sign not to exceed six (6) square feet
in area and five (5) feet in height placed within five (5) feet of the building
entrance during the hours of the operation of the building to which it
corresponds. Sidewalk signs shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way,
unless otherwise noted in this Ordinance.
      7.   Nonilluminated Window Signs: Shall occupy a maximum of twenty-five
percent (25%) of a single window pane and no more than fifty (50%) of the total
window surface area per storefront elevation.
      8.   Handheld Signs or People in Costume: Shall be located on the
sidewalk immediately adjacent to the building within which the tenant to which
they are advertising is located.
      9.   Signs on Property for Sale or Lease: One ground or wall sign, up to
forty-eight (48) square feet in size is permitted per frontage (lot or
building). Such signs shall be removed upon the closing of the sale or
initiation of the lease.
         (a)   The maximum height for ground signs is 10 feet.
      10.   Construction Sign: On a property to which an active building permit
has been issued, one yard sign no more than forty-eight (48) square feet with a
maximum height of ten (10) feet shall be permitted. Such signs shall be removed
upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Village.
      11.   Pedestrian wall signs, up to a maximum of six (6) square feet in
area.
      12.   Temporary non-commercial site signage subject to the following
requirements:
         (a)   Sign area per individual sign shall be a maximum of twelve (12)
square feet.
         (b)   Sign height shall be a maximum of five (5) feet, including any
support structure (e.g., fence, sign, frame, building).
         (c)   Sign location shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from the
paved portion of any street or back of curb where no sidewalk is present.
      13.   Like for like replacement of individual tenant panels on a multi-
tenant sign except in those cases when the revision of the tenant panels is due
to a change of the business tenant.
   (B)   Permanent Signs: Allowances provided are maximums. The general
requirements of each sign type in this subsection shall apply:
      1.   Wall, Awning, And Canopy Signs:
         (a)   Area:
            (1)   For facades with street frontage (public or private) and
facades that directly face sidewalks, alleys, courtyards, and parking lots,
where customer access is also available, wall, awning, and canopy signage (in
any combination) shall be permitted up to a maximum sign area of one (1) square
foot for each linear foot of qualifying facade, and shall not exceed a maximum
of three hundred (300) square feet. See illustration in Section
5-11-7 of this Chapter.
            (2)   For facades on properties separated from the adjacent street
frontage by another lot that is not designed to have a building located upon it
(e.g. reserved exclusively for parking, stormwater management, etc.), permits
for wall, canopy and awning signage may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the limits provided in this subsection.
            (3)   For Multi-Story Multi-Tenant buildings: Excluding the first
floor facade, the maximum combined area of ½ (.5) square foot per each linear
foot of qualifying facade for all tenants located above and below the first
floor on facades facing a public right-of-way. First floor signage shall be
permitted in accordance with Section
5-11-5(B)1.a.
            (4)   For facades adjacent to sidewalks, alleys, courtyards, or
parking lots where customer access is not available, the total sign area shall
not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the maximum sign area permitted as provided
in this subsection.
            (5)   Regardless of the qualifying facade measurement, the minimum
wall sign square footage allowance is 16 square feet.
         (b)   Placement: Signs shall not extend above the roofline or parapet
of a building. Wall signs may be painted on, or attached in a place
substantially parallel to the building exterior wall, and must not interrupt
architectural details. Awnings and canopies shall be installed so that a
clearance from grade to the bottom of the awning or canopy of no less than
eight (8) feet is maintained. See illustration in Section
5-11-7 of this Chapter.
         (c)   Color and Patterns: If a raceway is visible it shall match the
color of the exterior of the building. Awnings and canopies shall be limited to
two (2) colors, except for logos, which are exempt from this provision.
         (d)   Incentive: Wall signs which are constructed of pin-mounted
channel letters, backlit illumination channel letters without exposed raceway,
which utilize distinctive materials or designs, or signage which is otherwise
determined by the Zoning Administrator to substantially further the purposes
outlined in this Chapter, shall be eligible for one hundred twenty-five percent
(125%) of the maximum sign area as otherwise provided in this subsection.
      2.   Ground Signs:
         (a)   All permanent ground signs must be of a monument type.
         (b)   Number: Each property with a minimum of seventy five (75) feet
of lot frontage is allowed one monument sign, oriented perpendicular to the
eligible lot frontage. The eligible frontage is the frontage that measures a
minimum of 75 feet. Each property with a minimum of five hundred (500) linear
feet of lot frontage may have two (2) monument signs placed no closer together
than two hundred (200) feet and must meet the area and setback requirements as
indicated in this Chapter. Exceptions are provided in Section
5-11-6.
         (c)   Sign Area and Height:
            (1)   Area: Each side of the freestanding sign shall not exceed
fifty (50) square feet. Properties with frontage along Ogden Avenue, Route 53,
Maple Avenue or Warrenville Road that have at least a street frontage of one
hundred fifty feet (150') shall be allowed each side of the freestanding sign
not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
            (2)   Height: Ten feet (10), as measured from grade, and may be
increased an additional two (2) feet for architectural features for monument
signs. See illustration in Section
5-11-7 of this Chapter.
         (d)   Setbacks:
            (1)   When fronting roadways: Five (5) feet from the front street
lot line and side street lot line.
            (2)   From side lot line: Twenty-five (25) feet, except as provided
for in Section
5-11-7, or unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator if reduced
setbacks are needed to limit impact on required parking, reasonably accommodate
locations with limited open space, and avoid obstructions to existing signage.
Signs shall not be placed in a manner that creates a danger to the public,
either as a result of dangerous construction, sight obstruction or other cause.
         (e)   Landscape Requirement: A landscaped area located around the base
of the ground sign equal to one and one-half (1.5) square feet for each one
square foot of monument sign area is required for all monument signs. The
landscaped area shall contain well maintained material including living
landscape materials, architectural stones, water features or other
beautification measures placed throughout the required landscape area. See
illustration in Section
5-11-7 of this Chapter.
         (f)   Address Identification: Address number must be incorporated into
a ground sign. Street address numbers will not be counted against the maximum
sign area.
         (g)   Tollway Property Allowance: For properties that adjoin the I-88
tollway corridor, the following additional regulations shall apply, unless
otherwise noted:
            (1)   Number: One ground sign located along the I-88 tollway
corridor frontage shall be permitted for properties with a minimum of five
hundred (500) feet of frontage along the tollway corridor. If multiple lots are
located within a single campus or shared development, all lot frontages may be
totaled to determine compliance with the five hundred (500) foot minimum
frontage requirement.
            (2)   Sign Area: Maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
            (3)   Height: Maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet, as measured
from grade.
            (4)   Landscaping: Shall be provided at the base of the sign unless
waived by Zoning Administrator due to limited visibility or maintenance
concerns. The landscape area shall be equal to one and one-half (1.5) square
feet for each one square foot of ground sign area. The landscaped area shall
contain well maintained material including living landscape materials,
architectural stones, water features or other beautification measures placed
throughout the required landscape area. See illustration in Section
5-11-7 of this Chapter.
      3.   Blade Signs:
         (a)   Sign Area: Eight (8) square feet per side.
         (b)   Number: One blade sign per each establishment per each facade
with street frontage (public or private) or adjacent to an off-street parking
area where customer access is also available.
         (c)   Location: A minimum clearance of eight (8) feet measured from
the bottom of the sign to the sidewalk above which the sign extends, and shall
extend from the building facade a maximum of three (3) feet. See illustration
in Section
5-11-7 of this Chapter.
   (C)   Signs Not Visible from Frontage. Signs which are located on private
property and are designed or installed so as not to be viewed from a lot
frontage as defined in this Chapter are exempt from the requirements of this
Section. These signs do require issuance of a building permit.
   (D)   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs containing a commercial message are
permitted subject to the following provisions of this Section:
      1.   Time Period: No more than four (4) one-week (seven-day) periods
during any calendar year. A temporary sign displayed for less than seven (7)
days constitutes a one-week period. The signs must be removed immediately
following the time period approved on the building permit.
      2.   Sign Area: A maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet per sign.
      3.   Height:
         (a)   Inflatable: Twenty-five (25) feet as measured from grade.
         (b)   All other ground mounted: Ten (10) feet as measured from grade.
      4.   Placement:
         (a)   Wall Mounted: Shall not extend above the roofline or parapet of
a building.
         (b)   Ground Mounted: Must be placed on private property and shall not
be placed in a manner that creates a danger to the public, either as a result
of dangerous construction, sight obstruction or any other cause. Signs must be
placed to comply with the visibility requirements contained in this Chapter.
See illustration for measurement in Section
5-11-7 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022; Ord. 2023-5042, 12-
18-2023; Ord. 2024-5079, 6-3-2024)
5-11-6: B-3A; CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT AND B-3B; CENTRAL PERIMETER BUSINESS
DISTRICT:
Given the unique property environment (e.g., pedestrian areas, mixed use areas,
transit corridors), speed limits, parcel size considerations, and special
aesthetic considerations, special additional signage requirements are necessary
for properties located in the B-3A (Central Business District) or B-3B (Central
Perimeter Business District) to meet the purpose and intent of this Chapter.
   (A)   Permanent Signs: Allowances provided are maximums. The general
requirements of each sign type in this subsection shall apply:
      1.   Wall, Awning, And Canopy Signs
         (a)   Sign Area. The sum of the area of all wall, awning and canopy
signage (in any combination) facing a qualifying facade shall not exceed an
area equal to one (1) square foot for each linear foot of qualifying facade per
side. Qualifying facades include public and private streets, sidewalks, alleys,
courtyards, and parking lots.
            (1)   For Multi-Story Multi-Tenant Buildings: Excluding the first
floor facade, a maximum combined area of ½ (.5) square foot per each linear
foot of qualifying facade for all tenants located above and below the first
floor on facades facing a public right-of-way. First floor signage shall be
permitted in accordance with Section
5-11-6(A)1.a. above.
         (b)   Sign Location
            (1)   For Single-Tenant buildings: Signs shall be located on the
portion of a building that the business occupies.
            (2)   For Multi-Tenant buildings: Signs for tenants located above
and below the first floor shall be evenly distributed over the building facade,
complement the architectural integrity of the building, be located in the
general proximity of the tenant spaces, and shall not be clustered on one
portion of the building facade. Locations are subject to review and approval by
the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   Height: Wall signs shall not extend above the roofline of the
structure to which it is affixed.
         (d)   Illumination:
            (1)   External illumination, internally illuminated individual
channel letter signage, and bare bulb signage is permitted.
      2.   Ground Signs: Permanent ground signs are only permitted along
property frontage that abuts Ogden Avenue or Illinois Route 53.
      3.   Sidewalk Signs
         (a)   Sidewalk Signs are exempt from permit and are subject to the
following regulations:
            (1)   Sign Area: Maximum of six (6) square feet per business.
            (2)   Height: Maximum of five (5) feet.
            (3)   Location: Shall be placed such that a minimum of six (6) foot
clear passable walking space exists on the sidewalk to prevent obstructions to
pedestrian movement. Said signs shall be placed on the sidewalk within the area
defined by the building footprint limits wherein the tenant space is occupied.
            (4)   Illumination: Prohibited.
            (5)   Removal Requirements: Sidewalk signs must be removed at the
end of the related business’ hours of operation and during severe weather,
including high winds or heavy snowfall. Sidewalk signs must also be removed
during Village snow removal operations.
      4.   Blade Signs
         (a)   Sign Area: Maximum of eight (8) square feet per side.
         (b)   Number: One blade sign for each tenant establishment per each
frontage along a qualifying facade (as defined by Section 5-11-13) or
alternative frontage which offers customer access to tenant space within a
building.
         (c)   Location:
            (1)   A minimum clearance of eight (8) feet measured from the
bottom of the sign to the sidewalk above which the sign extends. Blade signs
shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the vertical plane of the facade
and must be six (6) inches from the facade, provided that no blade sign shall
extend beyond the limits of the sidewalk below the sign.
            (2)   Upper and lower level business tenant blade signs must be
located over or within two (2) feet of a door access to the business.
            (3)   Ground floor (first floor) business tenant blade signs may be
located anywhere along the facade occupied by the business.
         (c)   Illumination:
            (1)   External illumination, internally illuminated individual
channel letter signage, and bare bulb signage is permitted.
      5.   Development Identification Signage: Shall be permitted for
developments containing ten (10) or more units, applies to both commercial and
residential developments, and further subject to the following:
         (a)   For properties zoned B3-A: One wall sign, a maximum of thirty-
two (32) square feet in sign area, and shall be placed to compliment the
architectural character of the building as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (b)   For properties zoned B3-B: One development sign per development,
a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. Such sign may be
attached to the wall or mounted to a decorative feature/seating wall. Signage
attached to a decorative feature/seating wall shall have a maximum sign height
of three (3) feet. No setback is required.
      6.   Pedestrian Wall Sign
         (a)   Pedestrian Wall Signs are exempt from permit.
         (b)   Must be enclosed in a glass frame.
   (B)   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs containing a commercial message are
permitted subject to the following provisions of this Section:
      1.   Time Period: No more than four (4) one-week (seven-day) periods
during any calendar year. A temporary sign displayed for less than seven (7)
days constitutes a one-week period. The signs must be removed immediately
following the time period approved on the building permit.
      2.   Sign Area: A maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet per sign.
      3.   Height:
         (a)   Ground mounted: Ten (10) feet as measured from grade.
      4.   Placement:
         (a)   Wall Mounted: Shall not extend above the roofline or
         (b)   Ground Mounted: Must be placed on private property and shall not
be placed in a manner that creates a danger to the public, either as a result
of dangerous construction, sight obstruction or any other cause. Signs must be
placed to comply with the visibility requirements contained in this Chapter.
See illustration for measurement in Section
5-11-7 of this Chapter. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-
2022)
5-11-7: RULES OF MEASUREMENT:
The following criteria shall be used in measuring a sign or building facade in
order to determine compliance with this Chapter. The illustrations provided in
this Section are provided to offer clarification, not replace the written
requirements of this Chapter. These illustrations do not reflect every sign
type.
   (A)   Sign Area, Ground Sign
      1.   The sign area shall be the extreme outer dimension of the ground
structure, excluding the support structure and architectural features. For
ground signs that contain multiple cabinets on one structure, the modules
together are counted as one sign face in order to compute the sign area.
   (B)   Sign Height, Ground Sign
      1.   The overall height of a ground sign or sign structure is measured
from the average finished grade at the base of the sign to the highest point of
the sign structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2893.png]
   (C)   Sign Setback, Ground Sign
      1.   The minimum setback of a ground sign shall be the distance from the
extreme outer dimension of the structure to the applicable property line. This
extreme outer dimension shall include, but not be limited to, the sign face,
support structures, and architectural features.
   (D)   Ground Sign, Landscape Requirement
      1.     Ground Sign (Landscape Requirement): The landscape requirement is
determined by calculating the area of the landscaped area located around the
base of the ground sign. Examples of a rectangular and circular area are
provided below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2896.png]
   (E)   Sign Area, Wall Sign (Single Element)
      1.   The sign area is determined by calculating the measurement of the
outer dimensions of the frame surrounding the sign. See Illustration below.
   (F)   Sign Area, Wall Sign (Multiple Elements)
      1.   When signs are constructed of individual letters and / or elements,
the area will be measured as one sign when the distance between the elements is
less than the largest dimension of the largest sign letter or element. The sign
area is determined by calculating the combined area of an imaginary rectangle,
circle, triangle, or parallelogram drawn around the sign elements. See
Illustrations below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2898.png]
 
   (G)    Sign Area, Awning And Canopy
      1.    When signs are incorporated into the awning or canopy, the sign
area is determined by calculating the combined area of an imaginary rectangle,
circle, triangle, or parallelogram drawn around the sign elements. See
Illustration below.
   (H)   Measurement of Qualifying Façade
      1.   Qualifying facades include facades that directly face public or
private streets, sidewalks, alleys, courtyards, and parking lots.
      2.   For the purposes of determining maximum wall sign area:
         (a)   The linear width of first floor tenant spaces shall be
calculated as the width of the exterior building wall (or walls) that directly
abut the tenant’s interior floor space. Exterior wall dimensions shall be
measured at the base of the ground floor, excluding screened walls, fences,
etc. Alcoves, entryways and extruding portions shall be measured through as
though along a flat wall of a building.
         (b)    All tenant spaces located above or below the first floor of a
building shall be eligible for a combined / cumulative pool of wall sign square
footage equal to one-half (1/2) the width of the overall qualifying facade on
which these wall signs are located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2900.png]
   (I)   Clearance, Awning / Canopy And Blade Sign
      1.    Awnings and canopies shall be installed with a minimum clear ance
of eight (8) feet measured from grade to the bottom of awning or canopy. Blade
signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet measured from grade to
the bottom of the sign and shall extend a maximum of three (3) feet from the
building facade to which it is attached.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2902.png]
   (J)   Sign Area, Window Signs
      1.    Shall occupy a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) percent of a
single window pane and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total window
surface area per storefront elevation. The area of a window includes only the
glass or glazed elements of the window. Frames, mullions and similar features
shall not be counted as part of the window area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2904.png]
   (K)   Measurement Of Non-Planar Signs
      1.   The area in square feet of a non-planar sign is measured as 50% of
the sum of the areas using only the 4 vertical sides of the smallest 4-sided
polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2906.png]
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-11-8: ILLUMINATION:
Internally or externally illuminated signs and bare bulb signs shall be
permitted, per the regulations of this Chapter, provided they meet the
following requirements:
   (A)   Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded or
shaded light sources directed solely at the sign or internal to it so that the
light intensity or brightness does not create either a nuisance to adjacent
property or a traffic hazard for motorists or pedestrians.
   (B)   Individual letters or logos shall be internally illuminated. All other
portions of the sign shall be opaque.
   (C)   No exposed reflective type bulb and no strobe light shall be used.
   (D)   Illuminated signs shall produce no more than thirty (30) foot-candles
of illumination, four (4) feet from the sign.
   (E)   Whenever external illumination is used to illuminate a sign, the
source of light shall be located, shielded, and directed in such a manner that
the light source is not visible from a public street or private residence.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-11-9: CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS:
   (A)   Sign Area: Changeable copy signage shall not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the permitted maximum sign area of a ground sign or Tollway ground
sign.
   (B)   General Regulations:
      1.   Dwell Time
         (a)   The images and messages displayed on a changeable copy display
must have a minimum dwell time of at least ten (10) seconds and shall not
contain any movement, animation, audio, video, pyrotechnics or other special
effects.
         (b)   The transition or change from one message to another must occur
in one (1) second or less and involve no animation or special effects.
         (c)   The images and messages displayed must be complete in and of
themselves within the required dwell time.
      2.   Changeable copy displays must be equipped with a default mechanism
that freezes the display in one position or presents a static or blank display
if a malfunction occurs.
      3.   Changeable copy displays shall not have a brightness of such
intensity or brilliance that they impair the vision or endanger the safety and
welfare of any pedestrian, cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle.
      4.   Changeable copy displays must be equipped with a light detector /
photocell that automatically adjusts the display’s brightness according to
natural ambient light conditions.
      5.   Brightness
         (a)   The maximum brightness level of a changeable copy display shall
not exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or 250
nits between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise, as those
times are determined by the National Weather Service (Actual Time).
         (b)   Brightness must be measured from the brightest element of the
sign’s face. Before the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant must provide
written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has
been factory pre-set so that it will not exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square
meter).
         (c)   For the purpose of verifying compliance with maximum brightness
level requirements, the Zoning Administrator will measure brightness levels
with the changeable copy display sign set to run full white copy with a
luminance meter positioned at a location perpendicular to the sign face center.
When taking the luminance reading, the sign face must be the only subject
visible in the viewfinder. If the measurement is more than the maximum allowed,
the brightness level is in violation of this Section and must be adjusted
downward. Failure to make such adjustments may result in other available
enforcement actions to be taken by the Village.
         (d)   Light trespass from any changeable copy display shall not cause
the light level along a property line adjoining any residentially zoned
property, as measured at a height of 60 inches above grade in a in a plane at
any angle of inclination, to exceed 0.1 foot-candles above ambient light levels
at the property line adjoining the residentially zoned property. (Ord. 2021-
4931, 11-15-2021)
5-11-10: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Any nonconforming sign lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of
this Chapter or any subsequent amendment hereto may be continued in accordance
with the provisions of this Section. Nonconforming signs may continue to exist
provided the signs are in conformity with the provisions of this Section.
   (A)   Ordinary repairs and maintenance, including removing and replacing of
the outer tenant panels shall be permitted (except in those cases when the
revision of the display of commercial speech is due to a change of the business
tenant). No structural alterations, or other similar work shall appreciably
extend the normal life of the sign.
   (B)   No repair, alteration, or replacement which increases the size of the
sign shall be permitted.
   (C)   No sign shall be moved in whole or part to any other location on the
same or any other lot unless every portion of such sign is made to conform to
all regulations of this Chapter and other applicable regulations of the
Village.
   (D)   A nonconforming sign which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other
casualty or act of nature to the extent that the cost of restoration to the
condition in which it was before the occurrence shall exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the cost of the replacement of the entire sign, shall not be restored
unless said sign shall conform to all of the regulations of this Chapter and
other applicable regulations of the Village of Lisle.
   (E)   In the event such damage or destruction is less than fifty percent
(50%) of the cost of restoration of the sign to the condition in which it was
before the occurrence of damage or destruction, restoration must be completed
within ninety (90) days from the date of such damage or destruction, and
diligently pursued to completion, or the sign shall be removed.
   (F)   If a nonconforming sign is discontinued for a continuous period of one
ninety (90) days, it shall be removed, and any subsequent sign shall conform to
all of the requirements of this Chapter and other applicable regulations of the
Village of Lisle.
   (G)   No substitution, through repair or alteration, of any element of a
sign, which causes such sign to be classified as nonconforming, for another
such element, shall be permitted.
   (H)   Any nonconforming sign which violates any provision of this Section
shall be considered a nuisance and removed within thirty (30) days. Failure to
remove within thirty (30) days shall subject the sign to abatement by the
Village. The owner of the nonconforming sign shall be responsible for
reimbursement to the Village of Lisle for all costs relating to the abatement
of the nuisance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-11-11: SUBSTITUTION CLAUSE:
Non-commercial signage may be substituted in any location where commercial
signage is allowed under this Chapter. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-11-12: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions may include references to other terms defined herein,
and are identified by Italicized text:
ABANDONED      A sign or Support Structure remaining on a site absent of a display permitted
SIGN:          within this Chapter for ninety (90) days or longer.
               A sign permanently mounted, painted, or attached to an awning, canopy, or
AWNING/CANOPY  marquee.
SIGN:           [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2908.png]
               A method of internal illumination by which the sign is lit from within and
BACKLIT        light is projected back onto the supporting surface to create a halo effect
ILLUMINATION:  around the sign copy. Also commonly known as “halo illumination”.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2910.png]
               A sign constructed of lightweight flexible material.
BANNER:        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2912.png]
               Exposed or uncovered lighting elements used for illumination of a sign,
BARE BULB      including but not limited to exposed light bulbs.
ILLUMINATION:  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2914.png]
BLADE SIGN     A sign which extends out from a building face or wall, often in a
(PROJECTING    perpendicular manner; also called a Projecting Sign.
SIGN):         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2916.png]
               A sign which includes a frame or box-like external structure which encloses
               the functional elements of the sign, including internal illumination, where
CABINET (BOX)  the sign content is affixed on a face/panel. Also called a Box Sign. This
SIGN:          definition of a cabinet (box) sign does not include push-through letter
               cabinet signs.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2918.png]
               A component of a sign that features changeable text, characters, and/or
               illustrations that allows the sign’s display to be amended, updated or
CHANGEABLE     otherwise modified. Electronic message boards are a type of changeable copy
COPY SIGN:     sign.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2920.png]
CHANNEL LETTER A sign comprising internally illuminated individual letters, numbers, or
SIGN:          symbols that are independently mounted to a wall or raceway.
               A sign which functions to identify or announce an upcoming construction
CONSTRUCTION   project, which may include renderings or the purpose for which the building
SIGN:          is intended.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2922.png]
               A sign which identifies a commercial planned unit development, existing
               commercial center, or an overall commercial development. Development
DEVELOPMENT    Identification Signage is used to accommodate those locations where the
IDENTIFICATION collection of business (either based on symmetry of use, site design, or
SIGN:          aesthetics) is considered a destination for which an identification sign is
               helpful as a location navigation reference.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2924.png]
               A sign which includes physical characteristics used to identify the location
DIRECTIONAL    or direction of an activity, service, use, point of access or similar
SIGN:          feature.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2926.png]
DWELL TIME:    The time that a single message on a Changeable Copy display is held static or
               constant, without any change in the message or image displayed.
               A piece of cloth or similar material typically attached by one edge to a pole
FLAG:          or rope used as a symbol or as a signal.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2928.png]
FRONTAGE:      A strip or extension of land abutting a public or private roadway (excluding
               drive aisles), unless otherwise defined within this Chapter.
               A sign which is permanently attached to the ground and may be completely or
               principally supported by one or more posts or other Support Structure, which
GROUND SIGN:   is not attached to the principal building on the property. Ground sign types
               include monument, pole, etc.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2930.png]
HAND HELD      Signs that are not self-supporting and are carried, supported or under the
SIGN:          immediate control of a human being.
HISTORICAL     A sign that displays or identifies historical interest.
MARKER:        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2932.png]
INFLATABLE:    An object or device that can be filled with air or gas.
               A sign designed and located to be viewed exclusively by pedestrians when
INFORMATIONAL  navigating a campus, district, or within the confines of a building.
SIGN:          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2934.png]
INSTITUTIONAL  Schools, religious and not-for-profit land uses as defined within this
USES:          Ordinance.
               A type of Ground Sign which is permanently attached to the ground and
               anchored by a Support Structure a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the
MONUMENT SIGN: width of the sign.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2936.png]
NITS:          A unit of luminance equal to one candela per square meter.
NON-PLANAR     Spherical, free-form, sculptural or similar signs.
SIGNS:
OFF PREMISES   A sign which directs attention to a product and/or service sold, offered,
SIGN:          created, furnished, or conducted at a location not directly associated with
               the property or site at which the sign is located.
               A sign providing display space for general commercial advertising not related
OUTDOOR        to the premises on site at which the sign is located; commonly referred to as
ADVERTISING    “billboards”.
SIGN:          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2938.png]
OUT LOT/       A secondary lot or structure not physically connected to the principal use of
OUTBUILDING:   the development or property.
               A type of Wall Sign designed and installed specifically for pedestrian
PEDESTRIAN     viewing, often enclosed in a glass frame, including but not limited to menus,
WALL SIGN:     events, services, schedules, etc.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2940.png]
               A type of Ground Sign which is supported by a pole structure extended from
POLE SIGN:     the ground.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2942.png]
               A category of signs designed to be easily moved from place to place and often
PORTABLE SIGN: containing a Changeable Copy Sign element.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2944.png]
               A type of Ground Sign mounted on a single or multiple support posts, as
               differentiated from a Pole Sign based on the supports serving as an essential
POST SIGN:     design/decorative element of the sign.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2946.png]
QUALIFYING     Qualifying facades include facades that directly face public and private
FAÇADE:       streets, sidewalks, alleys, courtyards, and parking lots
RACEWAY:       The structural support of a Wall Sign.
ROOF SIGN:     A sign located on or attached to the roof of a structure.
SHOPPING       A series of retail establishments with individual entrances, sharing a common
CENTER:        wall and common off street parking.
               A Portable Sign that is easily movable and displayed during operating hours
SIDEWALK SIGN: of entity advertised; also called a Sandwich Board sign.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2948.png]
               Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, which is used to
               advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention by any means
SIGN:          including words, printed text, letters, figures, designs, symbols, pictures,
               fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images for the purpose of
               delivering a message.
SIGN           The area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure which encloses the
AREA,GROUND:   sign display.
SIGN AREA,     The combined area of an imaginary rectangle, circle, triangle, or
WALL:          parallelogram drawn around the sign elements. The area of a Wall Sign shall
               include the frame or cabinet structure.
SIGN,          Display of speech on behalf of a company or individual for the intent of
COMMERCIAL:    making a profit. Commercial speech is economic in nature intended to
               identify, advertise, or direct attention to a business service or product.
               Custom-made signs that use only external lighting and do not include a
               raceway or visible electrical housing and that are constructed primarily of
               the following materials or methods:
SIGN,          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
DISTINCTIVE    IMAGES/0-0-0-2950.png]
MATERIALS /    1.   Ceramic tile-painted or sandblasted.
DESIGN:        2.   Wood-carved or sandblasted.
               3.   Metal-formed, etched, cast, or engraved;
               4.   Brick or stone with recessed or raised lettering.
               5.   Other similar high-quality, exterior-grade materials approved by the
               Zoning Administrator.
SIGN, NON-     Display which is devoid of any commercial signage.
COMMERCIAL:
               A wall sign mounted directly on the face of a building wall as individual
               letters, numbers, or symbols without a raceway or background other than the
               background provided by the building to which the sign is affixed. In order to
SIGN, PIN-     qualify for the sign area ratios established for pin-mounted channel letter
MOUNTED        signs, pin-mounted channel letter signs must not be illuminated or be
CHANNEL        illuminated only by external lighting. Pin-mounted channel letter signs with
LETTER:        other forms of illumination are subject to raceway-mounted channel letter
               sign area ratios.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2952.png]
STRUCTURAL     Any change in the supporting members of a structure such as bearing walls or
ALTERATION     partitions, columns, beams, or girders, excepting such alterations as may be
               required for the safety of the structure.
SUPPORT        Any structure or material which supports or is capable of supporting or
STRUCTURE:     keeping a sign in a stationary position, including foundation.
               A sign constructed and intended for a temporary period of display and is
TEMPORARY      neither permanently installed in the ground nor permanently affixed to a
SIGN:          building, structure, wall or perimeter fencing.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2954.png]
               A sign attached or erected against a wall of a building or structure with the
               exposed face of the sign parallel to the plane of the wall designed to be
WALL SIGN:     visible from the property frontage.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2956.png]
WALL SIGN,     A wall sign to be used for a secondary commercial business located inside a
SECONDARY      primary business establishment.
BUSINESS:
               A sign installed inside, painted upon, or placed against a window for
               purposes of viewing from outside the premises, excluding merchandise located
WINDOW SIGN:   in a window display.
               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2958.png]
               A type of Temporary Sign placed upon or inserted into the ground
               independently of any other structure, but not including any Sidewalk Sign.
YARD SIGN:     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
               IMAGES/0-0-0-2960.png]
               (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022; Ord. 2023-5042,
               12-18-2023)
 
CHAPTER 12
LANDSCAPING AND TREE PRESERVATION
SECTION:
5-12-1: General
5-12-2: Purposes
5-12-3: Applicability
5-12-4: Parkway Landscaping Requirements
5-12-5: Building Foundation Landscaping Requirements
5-12-6: Perimeter / Buffer Yard Landscaping Requirements
5-12-7: Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements
5-12-8: Internal Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements
5-12-9: Stormwater Management Basin Landscaping Requirements
5-12-10: B-3A And B-3B Zoning Districts
5-12-11: Alternative Compliance
5-12-12: General Landscaping Requirements
5-12-13: Landscape Plan Requirements
5-12-14: Tree Preservation Regulations
5-12-1: GENERAL:
Regulations relating to landscaping and tree preservation are listed below.
When this ordinance refers to landscaping or tree preservation, it is referring
to this Chapter. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-12-2: PURPOSES:
This purpose of this Chapter is to establish uniform landscaping and tree
preservation standards for development of property in the Village in order to
ensure that the Village remains attractive, safe and comfortable:
   (A)   To promote, protect and preserve the general health and safety of the
people of the community and, as part of the general welfare, ensure aesthetic
compatibility among land uses within the community;
   (B)   To conserve soil and reduce soil erosion, reduce stormwater runoff, to
provide oxygen regeneration to enhance air quality, and to reduce the effects
of urban heat islands;
   (C)   To minimize the harmful or nuisance effects resulting from noise,
dust, debris, motor exhaust, headlight glare, artificial light intrusions,
objectionable sight or activities, or similar incompatible impacts conducted or
created by adjoining or nearby land use;
   (D)   To safeguard the environmental quality and aesthetic character of the
community by limiting the removal and ensuring replacement of trees upon
private property within the Village;
   (E)   To preserve, insofar as practical, existing vegetation and
topographical features by limiting unnecessary clearing and modification of
land, encouraging the retention of existing mature trees, requiring the
replacement of indigenous trees with approved species; and
   (F)   To encourage the energy efficient operation of land uses in the public
interest. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-12-3: APPLICABILITY:
The landscaping requirements of this Chapter apply as set forth in the
individual sections. The landscaping requirements apply to new development and
expansion of existing developments, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 2021-
4931, 11-15-2021)
5-12-4: PARKWAY LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability
The parkway landscaping standards of this section apply when any of the
following occurs:
      1.   When a new principal building is constructed on the site;
      2.   When the gross floor area, number of dwelling units, or impervious
surface on an existing development is expanded by more than 25%; or
      3.   When the development is associated with a plat of subdivision or re-
subdivision.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   Parkway Turf
         (a)   All parkways shall be fine graded with a minimum of six inches
(6") of topsoil and sodded. Sod shall be a Kentucky bluegrass blend and grown
on a mineral soil base.
         (b)   In situations where establishment watering is not possible,
seeding with a straw blanket cover will be permitted.
      2.   Parkway Trees
         (a)   Minimum parkway width. Parkway trees shall be planted in all
parkways having a width of five feet or more. The Village shall have the right
to require trees to be planted outside of the right of way if the parkway is
less than five feet wide, or in the case of utility conflicts.
         (b)   Number of trees required. One parkway tree shall be provided for
every 40 feet of road frontage. For road frontages of less than 40, a minimum
of one parkway tree is required. When measurement for the number of parkway
trees required results in a fractional number, any fraction of less than one-
half (0.5) is rounded down to the next whole number, and any fraction of one-
half (0.5) or more is rounded up to the next whole number.
         (c)   Required spacing of trees. Parkway trees may be clustered or
irregularly spaced, but the maximum spacing of parkway trees shall not exceed
60 feet.
         (d)   Parkway trees shall comply with the following separation
requirements:
 
Driveways              10 feet
Fire Hydrants          8 feet
Streetlights           15 feet
Above Ground Utilities 5 feet
 
         (e)   Recommended Primary Species. The following deciduous tree
species and varieties are recommended for parkway trees. This list may be
periodically reviewed and revised by the Zoning Administrator in consultation
with the Village Arborist. All other tree species proposed must be approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
Botanical Name Common Name Mature Width
Botanical Name                   Common Name                 Mature Width
LARGE TREES ( > 60 FT)
Aesculus flava                   Yellow Buckeye              25-35'
Carya cordiformis                Bitternut Hickory           40-50'
Carya illinoinensis              Pecan                       40-75'
Celtis occidentalis              Hackberry                   40-50'
Corylus colurna                  Turkish Filbert             15-35'
Gymnocladus dioicus              Kentucky Coffee Tree        40-50'
Catalpa speciosa                 Northern catalpa            20-40'
Liriodendron tulipifera          Tulip Tree                  35-50'
Liquidambar styraciflua          Sweetgum                    40-75'
Metasequoia glyptostroboides     Dawn Redwood                25'
Platanus x acerifolia            London Plane Tree           65-80'
Quercus alba                     White Oak                   100'
Quercus bicolor                  Swamp White Oak             50-60'
Quercus ellipsoidalis            Hill’s Oak                40-75'
Quercus imbricaria               Shingle Oak                 50-60'
Quercus macrocarpa               Bur Oak                     70-80'
Quercus muehlenbergii            Chinkapin Oak               50-70'
Quercus rubra                    Northern Red Oak            60-75'
Quercus shumardii                Shumard Oak                 40-60'
Taxodium distichum               Bald Cypress                20-30'
Tilia americana                  American Linden             30-60'
Tilia cordata                    Littleleaf Linden           30-40'
MEDIUM TREES (30-60 FT)
Acer miyabei ‘State Street’  State Street Maple          30-35'
Acer saccharum ‘Crescendo’   Crescendo Sugar Maple       30-35'
Carpinus betulus                 European Hornbeam           30-40'
Cercidiphyllum japonicum         Katsura Tree                20-30'
Diospyros virginiana             Persimmon                   20-35'
Eucommia ulmoides                Hardy Rubber Tree           30-50'
Ginkgo biloba (male only)        Ginkgo                      25-30'
Nyssa sylvatica                  Black Tupelo                20-30'
Ostrya virginiana                Ironwood                    15-25'
Populus tremuloides              Quaking Aspen               20-30'
Ulmus ‘Morton’               Accolade Elm                35-45'
Ulmus ‘Morton Glossy’        Triumph Elm                 35-40
SMALL TREES ( < 30 FT)
Acer truncatum                   Shantung maple              15-25'
Amelanchier spp.                 Serviceberry                20-25'
Carpinus caroliniana             American Hornbeam           20-30'
Cercis canadensis                Eastern Redbud              25-35'
Chionanthus virginicus           Fringetree                  12-20'
Cornus kousa                     Kousa Dogwood               15-25'
Cornus mas                       Cornelian-cherry Dogwood    15-20'
Crataegus crusgalli var. inermis Thornless cockspur hawthorn 20-35
Magnolia stellata                Star Magnolia               15-30'
Malus spp.                       Crabapple                   10-25'
Syringa pekinensis               Peking Lilac                10-15'
Syringa reticulata               Japanese Tree Lilac         15-25'
 
         (f)   Recommended Alternative Species. The following tree species are
recommended for use in restricted height areas such as under overhead wires.
This list may be periodically reviewed and revised by the Zoning Administrator
in consultation with the Village Arborist. All other tree species proposed must
be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
Botanical Name Common Name Mature Width
Botanical Name                   Common Name                 Mature Width
SMALL TREES ( < 30 FT) FT)
Acer truncatum                   Shantung maple              15-25'
Amelanchier spp.                 Serviceberry                20-25'
Carpinus caroliniana             American Hornbeam           20-30'
Cercis canadensis                Eastern Redbud              25-35'
Chionanthus virginicus           Fringetree                  12-20'
Cornus kousa                     Kousa Dogwood               15-25'
Cornus mas                       Cornelian-cherry Dogwood    15-20'
Crataegus crusgalli var. inermis Thornless cockspur hawthorn 20-35
Magnolia stellata                Star Magnolia               15-30'
Malus spp.                       Crabapple                   10-25'
Syringa pekinensis               Peking Lilac                10-15'
Syringa reticulata               Japanese Tree Lilac         15-25'
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022)
5-12-5: BUILDING FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability
      1.   The building foundation landscaping standards of this section apply
when any of the following occurs:
         (a)   When a new multi-unit or nonresidential principal building is
constructed on the site; or
         (b)   When the gross floor area of an existing building is increased,
in which case the requirements of this section would apply to any ground level
building addition.
      2.   Exemption. Detached houses, duplexes, and townhouses.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   Minimum width. Building foundation landscape areas shall be a
minimum of five (5) feet around the entire perimeter of the foundation,
excluding pedestrian and vehicle access points.
      2.   This landscape area shall be one hundred percent 100% planted along
the street facing building elevation, 50% planted along each side yard facing
building elevation, and twenty five percent 25% planted along the rear yard
facing building elevation. Plantings shall be a combination of trees, shrubs,
perennials and ground covers. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-12-6: PERIMETER / BUFFER YARD LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability
The perimeter / buffer yard landscaping standards of this section apply when
any of the following occurs:
      1.   When a new multi-unit or nonresidential principal building is
constructed on the site;
      2.   When a change in the principal use of a lot that abuts a residential
zoning district or lot used for residential purposes occurs; or
      3.   When the gross floor area, number of dwelling units, or impervious
surface on an existing development is expanded.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   Nonresidential Property or Multi-Unit Abutting Residential Property
Where nonresidential or multi-unit property abuts property in a residential
district, one of the following options shall be implemented to satisfy the
perimeter / buffer yard landscaping requirement:
         (a)   A landscape area with the following plantings:
            (1)   One shade tree shall be provided for every 30 feet of the
common lot line(s);
            (2)   One evergreen tree shall be provided every 30 feet of the
common lot line(s);
            (3)   One shrub every 5 feet of the common lot line(s).
         (b)   A landscape area with a solid fence a minimum of 6 feet in
height with the following plantings:
            (1)   One shade tree shall be provided for every 30 feet of the
common lot line(s);
            (2)   One evergreen tree shall be provided every 30 feet of the
common lot line(s).
         (c)   A berm with a minimum height of 3 feet with the following
plantings located on the berm:
            (1)   One shade tree shall be provided for every 30 feet of the
common lot line(s);
            (2)   One evergreen tree shall be provided every 30 feet of the
common lot line(s).
         (d)   Required plant spacing. Shade trees, shrubs, and evergreens may
be clustered or irregularly spaced.
      2.   Nonresidential or Multi-Unit Property Abutting Nonresidential
Property
Where nonresidential or multi-unit property abuts nonresidential property,
landscaping shall be provided on the common property line(s) as follows:
         (a)   One shade tree shall be provided for every 50 feet of the common
lot line(s).
         (b)   One evergreen tree shall be provided for every 50 feet of common
lot line(s).
         (c)   One shrub shall be provided for every 10 feet of common lot line
(s).
         (d)   Required plant spacing. Shade trees, shrubs, and evergreens may
be clustered or irregularly spaced. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord.
2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-12-7: PERIMETER PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability
The perimeter parking lot landscaping standards of this section apply when any
of the following occurs:
      1.   The construction of any new surface parking lot; or
      2.   The expansion of any existing surface parking lot if the expansion
would result in 6 or more total parking spaces, in which case the requirements
of this section apply only to the expanded area.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   Front Street and Side Street Yards
         (a)   Minimum landscaping width. The perimeter parking lot landscaping
area shall be a minimum of five feet in width.
         (b)   Minimum plant height. The minimum mature plant height for
perimeter parking lot landscaping is three feet.
         (c)   Adjacent to a residential zoning district. When a parking lot is
adjacent to a residential zoning district, continuous landscaping consisting of
berms, shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreens, or shrubs shall be provided
across 100% of the parking lot perimeter opposite the residential zoning
district.
            (1)   50% of plantings provided shall be evergreens.
         (d)   Adjacent to nonresidential zoning district. When a parking lot
is adjacent to a nonresidential zoning district, continuous landscaping
consisting of berms, shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreens, or shrubs shall
be provided across 60% of the parking lot perimeter opposite the nonresidential
zoning district.
      2.   Rear and Side Yards
         (a)   Adjoining to residential zoning district. When a parking lot is
adjoining to a residential zoning district, continuous landscaping consisting
of a fence or wall, berm, shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreens, or shrubs
shall be provided along 100% of the parking lot perimeter adjoining to the
residential zoning district.
            (1)   Minimum height. The minimum fence or wall, berm, shade tree,
ornamental tree, evergreen, or shrub height for perimeter parking lot
landscaping in the rear and side yard is six feet.
            (2)   Number of shade trees required. One shade tree shall be
provided for every 30 feet of the parking lot perimeter adjoining to the
residential zoning district.
            (3)   Required spacing of shade trees. Shade trees may be clustered
or irregularly spaced.
         (b)   Adjoining to nonresidential zoning district. When a parking lot
is adjoining to a nonresidential zoning district, continuous landscaping
consisting of a fence or wall, berm, shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreens,
or shrubs shall be provided along 50% of the parking lot perimeter adjacent to
the nonresidential zoning district.
            (1)   Minimum height. The minimum fence or wall, berm, shade tree,
ornamental tree, evergreen, or shrub height for perimeter parking lot
landscaping in the rear and side yard is three feet. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021)
5-12-8: INTERNAL PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability
The internal parking lot landscaping standards of this section apply when any
of the following occurs:
      1.   The construction of any new surface parking lot; or
      2.   The expansion of any existing surface parking lot if the expansion
would result in 10 or more total parking spaces, in which case the requirements
of this section apply only to the expanded area.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   Landscape islands required. Parking lots must contain a minimum of
one landscape island for every 10 parking spaces.
      2.   Landscape Island Required Locations
         (a)   At the end of every row of parking; and
         (b)   A landscape island shall be provided every 15 parking spaces.
      3.   Landscape Island Minimum Dimensions. Landscape islands shall be a
minimum of 144 square feet.
      4.   Landscape Island Required Plantings
         (a)   Landscape islands shall contain one shade tree for single row
islands and two (2) shade trees for double islands.
         (b)   In addition to required shade trees, all islands must be fully
sodded, seeded (with erosion blanket) or planted with low shrubs, perennials or
ground cover and maintained at a maximum height of thirty inches (30"). (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-12-9: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability
The stormwater management basin landscaping standards of this section apply
when any of the following occurs:
      1.   The construction of any new stormwater management basin; or
      2.   The expansion of any existing stormwater management basin, in which
case the requirements of this section apply only to the expanded area.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   Number of shade trees required. A minimum of two shade trees for
every 100 feet of the basin perimeter.
      2.   Number of ornamental tree required. A minimum of one ornamental tree
for every 100 feet of the basin perimeter.
      3.   Number of evergreen trees required. A minimum of one evergreen tree
for every 100 feet of the basin perimeter.
      4.   Required spacing of shade, ornamental, and evergreen trees. Shade,
ornamental, and evergreen trees may be clustered or irregularly spaced.
      5.   High water level considerations. Only trees adapted to temporary
flooding may be planted below the high water level.
      6.   Basin turf requirements. Turf selection and establishment around
detention/retention basins should also tolerate temporary flooding. A turf type
tall fescue grass seed mix, drill seeded at a rate of five pounds per acre and
covered with a straw erosion blanket is recommended. For wet basins the area
from 18 inches below normal water level to five feet above normal level shall
be reinforced to prevent erosion from wave action. A five year coconut erosion
blanket, or equivalent, is recommended.
   (C)   Alternative Native Basin Landscaping
As an alternative to traditional basins, wetland bottom storm water basins with
native vegetation slopes are encouraged to slow water runoff, increase
infiltration, improve water quality and reduce goose populations. These basins
must be properly designed and graded utilizing best management practices.
Vegetation shall be established using a combination of seeding and plugs. For
alternative wetland basins, the ornamental and evergreen tree requirement shall
be waived in lieu of an equal dollar value of wetland plug plantings. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-12-10: B-3A AND B-3B ZONING DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Applicability
New buildings and development in the B-3A; Central Business District and B-3B;
Central Perimeter Business District shall improve adjacent sidewalk areas from
the street curb to the face of the building. This requirement shall also apply
to building additions or renovations as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      1.   Exemption. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to waive the
requirements of this Section if it is determined that the Village’s adopted
plans do not recommend construction of the Village’s streetscape at the site of
the proposed development.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   The types of streetscape improvements required shall include
decorative sidewalk paving, plant material, and ornamental lighting and
streetscape accessories.
      2.   Plans for streetscape improvements shall be incorporated into
project plans submitted for building permit applications.
      3.   Streetscape shall conform to the adopted plans or specifications of
the Village. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-12-11: ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE:
   (A)   In order to encourage creativity in landscape and screening design and
to allow for flexibility in addressing atypical, site-specific development/
redevelopment challenges, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve
alternative compliance landscape plans when the Zoning Administrator determines
that one or more of the following conditions are present:
      1.   The site has space limitations or an unusual shape that makes strict
compliance impossible or impractical;
      2.   Conditions on or adjacent to the site such as topography, soils,
vegetation or existing structures or utilities are such that strict compliance
is impossible, impractical or of no value in terms of advancing the general
purposes of this Chapter;
      3.   Safety considerations such as intersection visibility, utility
locations, etc., make alternative compliance necessary; or
      4.   Creative, alternative landscape plans will provide an equal or
better means of meeting the intent of the landscaping and screening regulations
of this article. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-12-12: GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Existing Plants
      1.   Existing trees and shrubs count toward satisfying the landscaping
regulations of this Chapter if they are located within the subject area (e.g.,
existing trees within the parkway landscape area may be used to meet the
parkway landscaping requirements) and they comply with the plant height and
size requirements of this Chapter.
      2.   Preserved trees up to 6 inches in diameter at breast height will be
credited on a 1:1 basis. In order to encourage the preservation of existing
mature trees, existing trees larger than 6 inches in diameter at breast height,
up to 12 inches in diameter at breast height will be credited at a ratio of 2:
1. Trees that are more than 12 inches in diameter at breast height will be
credited at a ratio of 3:1.
   (B)   Minimum Plant Size
Unless otherwise expressly stated, plants must comply with the following
minimum size requirements at the time of installation:
Parkway Trees                   3 inch caliper, minimum clear stem 5 ft.
Shade Trees, deciduous          3 inch caliper
Evergreen Trees                 6 feet in height
Ornamental Trees, deciduous     2 ½ inch caliper or 8 feet in height
Evergreen Shrubs                24 inches in height
Dwarf Shrubs, deciduous         18 inches in height
Shrubs, deciduous               36 inches in height
Perennials / Ornamental Grasses 1 gallon
 
   (C)   Plant Selection
      1.   Plant materials installed pursuant to this Chapter shall be of good
quality and of species normally grown in northeastern Illinois and shall be
capable of withstanding the extremes of the individual site microclimates. The
size and density of selected plant materials at the time of planting, and at
maturity, are additional criteria which shall be considered in preparing the
landscape plan.
      2.   All plant material installed must be either balled and burlapped
(B&B) or containerized. The use of bare root material is prohibited.
   (D)   Prohibited Trees
Tree species that detract from the Village’s appearance due to their tendency
to produce numerous “weed seedlings” or which produce dead wood due to their
soft wood nature or short span of life shall be prohibited. Specifically,
prohibited tree species for new planting shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Black locust
      2.   Box elder
      3.   Buckthorn
      4.   Elm (except new hybrids)
      5.   Mountain ash
      6.   Osage orange
      7.   Poplar (all species)
      8.   Red mulberry
      9.   Russian olive
      10.   Silver maples (except new hybrids)
      11.   Tree of heaven
      12.   Weeping willow (except in large, wet areas)
      13.   White birch.
      14.   The Zoning Administrator shall have the right to prohibit plant
materials other than those listed above based on current agricultural
practices, regional diseases/insect infestations and recommendations of the
American Association of Nurserymen.
   (E)   Plant Installation. All plant material shall be installed in
accordance with the planting procedures established by the American Standards
for Nursery Stock (ASNS).
   (F)   Plant Diversity
      1.   If more than 8 trees are required, no more than 40% shall be of a
single species. If more than 25 trees are required, no more than 25% shall be
of a single species. This requirement applies to trees being planted, but not
to existing trees.
      2.   If more than 50 shrubs will be used, a mixture of three or more
shrub species must be used.
   (G)   Planting Beds. All planting beds shall be mulched in their entirety
with shredded hardwood bark mulch or other similar organic material, three
inches deep. Color dyed mulch, lava rock or large diameter bark chips (“chunk
bark”) are not acceptable. Gravel and stone mulches are not permitted. Mulch
beds at time of planting shall extend a minimum of two feet beyond the center
of all shrubs and have a four inch deep spaded edge around the perimeter.
   (H)   Maintenance
The property owner, occupant, tenant and respective agent of each, if any, are
jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection of all
required landscaping, in accordance with all of the following regulations:
      1.   Necessary irrigation,
      2.   Integrated pest management,
      3.   Tree care and pruning,
      4.   Replacement of lost vegetation, and
      5.   Weed management. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042,
12-18-2023)
5-12-13: LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Landscape Architect: All landscape plans must be prepared by a State
of Illinois registered landscape architect. Under special circumstances, a
request to waive this requirement may be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
for his consideration.
   (B)   Landscape Plan Content
      1.   Location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings and
structures within the development site and within one hundred feet (100') of
the development site.
      2.   The locations and dimensions of all existing and/or proposed parking
lots, drives, roadways, loading areas, and rights of way, sidewalks,
freestanding signs, refuse disposal areas, bicycle parking areas, freestanding
electrical equipment, building mounted signs, heating, ventilation and air
circulation equipment, and all fences.
      3.   The location of all existing and proposed utilities and easements.
      4.   The location, quantity, size, root ball condition and type,
scientific and common names of all proposed plant materials. All trees used to
satisfy a tree replacement requirement must be clearly identified.
      5.   If berms are proposed to satisfy the landscaping requirements, berms
must be depicted with one foot contours.
      6.   Specification of the type, boundaries, size and spacing of all
proposed ground cover, turf and method of installation including grass seed
mixes.
      7.   The location, size, and common name of all existing plant material
intended to be preserved on the site and within twenty five feet (25') of the
site.
      8.   A tree survey and tree preservation plan as set forth in this
Chapter.
      9.   Section details of all fences, bridges, retaining walls, or other
similar elements proposed to be located on the site.
      10.   Section details of typical planting methods.
      11.   Final opinion of probable landscape construction costs.
      12.   Areas designated for snow storage. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021;
amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-12-14: TREE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Parkway Trees
No person, unless permitted by the Village, shall:
      1.   Plant, treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any parkway tree
except that normal watering and fertilizing will be permitted.
      2.   Place on Village property any planters or plant containers.
      3.   Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any parkway tree.
      4.   Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or other manmade object to
any parkway tree.
   (B)   Tree Preservation and Removal Applicability
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause the removal
of any tree without having first obtained approval from the Village of a tree
preservation and removal plan as described herein. Tree preservation and
replacement requirements do not apply to the following exemptions:
         (a)   Removal of a tree having a diameter at breast height of less
than six inches.
         (b)   Detached houses, duplexes, and townhouses, provided that the
tree(s) are not part of an adopted or approved landscape plan.
         (c)   Removal of the tree is necessary due to a safety hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threatens to cause disruption of public
safety.
         (d)   Removal of the tree is necessary to remove a tree, which poses a
safety hazard to structures.
         (e)   Removal of the tree is necessary due to death or disease of the
tree has been weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury.
         (f)   Removal of the tree is necessary to observe good forestry
practice; i.e., the number of healthy trees a given parcel of land will
support.
         (g)   New subdivisions consisting of two or less lots to be improved
with detached houses, duplexes, or townhouses.
         (h)   Removal of the following species:
            (1)   Black locust (Robinia psueodoacacia)
            (2)   Box elder (Acer negundo)
            (3)   Buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica)
            (4)   Cottonwood (Populus deltroides)
            (5)   Mulberry (Morus sp.)
            (6)   Osage orange (Maclura pomifera)
            (7)   Russian olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia)
            (8)   Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila)
            (9)   Tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima)
            (10)   White willow (Salix alba)
   (C)   Tree preservation and removal plan required. A tree preservation and
removal plan shall be required for any parcel of land involving the
construction of any new principal building(s) or structure(s) or other site
improvements or the removal of any parkway tree, or a tree having a diameter at
breast height of six inches or greater.
   (D)   Tree Preservation and Removal Plan Requirements
      1.   A tree location survey, prepared by a licensed Illinois arborist,
landscape architect, or other qualified professional is required for all areas
to be developed.
         (a)   The tree location survey shall show all trees six inches
diameter at breast height (DBH) and larger, and all parkway trees. All trees
over twelve inches in DBH must be identified by size and species. In addition,
all key trees (i.e., a tree classified by the arborist as significant, or those
trees which are exceptionally good examples of their species) shall be
identified on the tree survey. Each tree surveyed must be identified with a
number on the drawing and tagged in the field. The survey must be accompanied
by a listing of each tree including the tag number, species, DBH, condition,
and if the tree will be removed or saved.
      (b)   Exemption. New subdivisions consisting of two or less lots to be
improved with detached houses, duplexes, or townhouses.
      2.   The location of those trees to be removed, those to be preserved,
and the methods which are to be used to preserve such trees during site
development.
      3.   A written statement indicating the reason for removal of the tree
(s). A report from a licensed Illinois arborist or landscape architect may be
requested by the Zoning Administrator if deemed appropriate.
      4.   Details, specifications and/or technical information of procedures
to be used to preserve and protect trees.
   (E)   General Tree Preservation And Removal Standards
      1.   Grading and construction equipment shall be forbidden from
encroaching within the drip line of a tree. The drip line area is the ground
area under a tree canopy from the trunk to the outermost branches.
      2.   Crushed limestone and other material detrimental to trees shall not
be placed within the drip line of any tree nor at any higher location where
drainage toward the tree could conceivably affect the health of the tree.
      3.   Snow fencing shall be temporarily installed at the periphery of the
tree’s drip line and maintained throughout the entire project. The ground area
inside of this fencing shall be protected and storage of any material in this
area is prohibited.
      4.   Tree trunks and branches shall be protected when construction must
occur within tree drip line areas.
      5.   No grade changes shall be allowed under the drip line of any trees
designated for preservation.
      6.   To improve the survival rate of trees, root pruning and/or thinning
shall be performed in accordance with industry standards and practices.
      7.   In the event that underground utility lines are proposed within ten
feet of the trunk of a tree, auguring of the utility line should be considered
and may be required by the Village.
   (F)   Tree Replacement for Non-Designated Trees
Any tree intended to be removed, or unintentionally removed or damaged during
construction shall be replaced with new trees in accordance with the following
schedule:
 
DBH (inches)  Required Replacement Trees
6 - 12        4
13-29         5
30 or greater 6
 
   (G)   Tree Replacement for Designated Trees
In the event that a tree designated for preservation is destroyed, damaged, or
removed during the construction process, such tree shall be replaced with new
trees in accordance with the following schedule:
 
DBH (inches)  Required Replacement Trees
6 - 12        6
13-29         8
30 or greater 10
 
   (H)   Tree replacement alternative. If it is impractical to plant the
required number of replacement trees on the same zoning lot due to space
limitations or the density of existing trees, the Village shall require the
property owner to plant said tree(s) at the Village’s discretion on other
public property or require a cash donation to be used for Village tree
maintenance activities.
   (I)   Tree Replacement Standards
      1.   All replacement trees shall have a minimum caliper size of three
inches.
      2.   Replacement trees shall not be tree species identified as Prohibited
Trees as provided in this Chapter.
   3.   The landscape plan shall identify each replacement tree as a
replacement tree and indicate its location, species, and size. No replacement
trees shall be used to satisfy the requirements for tree planting in public
rights of way, parking lots, or buffer areas. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd.
Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 13
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
5-13-1: General
5-13-2: Purposes
5-13-3: Scope And Applicability
5-13-4: Calculation Of Required Parking
5-13-5: Schedule Of Off Street Parking Requirements
5-13-6: Parking Exemptions And Credits
5-13-7: Bicycle Parking
5-13-8: Off Street Parking Facilities
5-13-9: Off Street Loading
5-13-10: Limit On Number Of Motor Vehicles Parked In Residential Districts
5-13-1: GENERAL:
The Village’s regulations relating to off street parking are listed below. When
this Ordinance refers to Off Street Parking, it is referring to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-13-2: PURPOSES:
   (A)   The regulations of this Chapter are intended to:
      1.   Ensure provision of off-street motor vehicle parking facilities,
bicycle parking and other transportation circulation facilities in rough
proportion to the generalized demands of different land uses.
      2.   Avoid the negative impacts associated with spillover parking into
adjacent areas.
      3.   Avoid the negative environmental and visual impacts that can result
from unnecessarily large parking and vehicular use areas.
      4.   Protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      5.   Enhance safety and convenience for non-motorized travel.
      6.   Providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation and
access demands of various land uses in different areas of the Village. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-13-3: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply as follows.
   (A)   General. Unless otherwise stated, the regulations of this Chapter
apply to all zoning districts and all uses.
   (B)   Scope of Regulations:
      1.   The regulations of this Chapter apply to all buildings and
structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of
this Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   Increase in Intensity of Use: When the intensity of use of any
building, structure, or parcel of land is increased by the addition of dwelling
units, gross floor area, design capacity, employees, or other units of
measurement specified herein for required off street parking facilities, off
street parking shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. In the
case of increase in intensity of use, additional spaces are required only to
serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use. In other
words, there is no requirement to address lawfully existing parking space
deficits.
      3.   Decrease in Intensity of Use: When the intensity of use of any
building, structure, or parcel of land is decreased by the reduction of
dwelling units, gross floor area, design capacity, employees, or other units of
measurement specified herein for required off street parking facilities, and
further, when the decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total off
street parking spaces, off street parking facilities may be reduced
accordingly, provided that existing off street parking facilities shall be so
decreased only when the facilities remaining will at least equal or exceed the
off street parking requirements resulting from application of the standards of
this Chapter to the use of the entire building, structure, or parcel of land as
modified.
      4.   Change of Use: Whenever the existing use of a building, structure,
or parcel of land is hereafter changed to a new use, off street parking
facilities as required herein shall be provided for such new use.
   (C)   Time of Construction of Off Street Parking Facilities:
      1.   Off street parking facilities, as required by this Chapter, shall be
constructed at the time of erection, establishment, alteration, or enlargement
of the building, structure, or use of land they are required to serve.
Occupancy or use shall not be established until the required parking facilities
have been installed. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-13-4: CALCULATION OF REQUIRED PARKING:
The following rules apply when calculating the required number of off-street
parking spaces:
   (A)   Multiple Uses:
      1.   Unless otherwise expressly allowed in accordance with the shared
parking regulations of this Chapter, lots containing more than one use must
provide parking in an amount equal to the sum total of the requirements for all
uses that occupy the lot.
   (B)   Fractions
      1.   When measurements of the number of required spaces result in a
fractional number, any fraction of less than one-half (0.5) is rounded down to
the next whole number, and any fraction of one-half (0.5) or more is rounded up
to the next whole number.
   (C)   Area Measurements
      1.   Unless otherwise expressly stated, all area-based (square footage)
parking standards must be computed based on the sum of the gross floor area of
a building devoted to a use requiring off-street parking.
      2.   The following areas shall not be included in the sum of gross floor
area for the purpose of calculating off-street parking requirements:
         (a)   Floor space devoted primarily to the housing of mechanical or
electrical equipment.
         (b)   Elevator shafts and stairwells,
         (c)   Commercial kitchen areas, ramps, aisles, and maneuvering space
devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities.
         (d)   Basement floor space used exclusively for storage activities.
         (e)   Storage areas, or areas used for incidental repair, processing
or packaging of merchandise.
         (f)   Show windows.
         (g)   Toilet or rest room areas.
         (h)    Dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms.
   (D)   Occupancy Based Standards
      1.   For the purpose of computing off-street parking requirements based
on occupancy, calculations must be based on the occupant load factor
established by the Village’s adopted building codes.
   (E)   Seating Based Standards
      1.   A seat is the space intended for a single individual. In places
where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating
arrangements, each 20 linear inches of such seating is counted as one seat. In
places without fixed seating, each 8 square feet of seating floor area is
counted as one seat.
   (F).   Employees
      1.   For the purpose of computing requirements based on number of
employees, calculations shall be based on the average number of persons working
on any single shift.
   (G)   Unlisted Uses
      1.   Upon receiving an application for a use not specifically listed in
the off-street parking schedule, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to
apply the off-street parking ratio specified for the listed use that is deemed
most similar to the proposed use or to establish a minimum off-street parking
requirement for the proposed use in accordance this Chapter.
   (H)   Establishment of Other Parking Ratios
      1.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to establish required minimum
off street parking ratios in those instances where authority to establish a
requirement is expressly granted. Such ratios may be established on the basis
of a similar use/parking determination, on parking data provided by the
applicant, or information otherwise available to the Zoning Administrator.
         (a)   Parking data and studies must include estimates of parking
demand based on reliable data collected from comparable uses or on external
data from credible research organizations (e.g., Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) or American Planning Association (APA)).
      2.   Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type
of activity and location. Parking studies must document the source of all data
used to develop recommended requirements.
   (I)   Accessible Parking for People With Disabilities:
      1.   Parking provided in accordance with Illinois Accessibility Code
shall count towards the total number of parking spaces required. (Ord. 2021-
4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-13-5: SCHEDULE OF OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: Except as otherwise expressly stated, off-street
parking spaces must be provided in accordance with the following table:
RESIDENTIAL
                                        2 parking spaces per each dwelling
                                        unit; plus .25 guest parking spaces per
Detached House                          each dwelling unit within a duplex,
                                        townhouse, or multi-unit building
                                        located within a development.
                                        Reductions to the required off-street
                                        guest parking spaces shall be
Duplex                                  considered on a case-by-case basis, The
                                        Zoning Administrator is authorized to
                                        administratively grant a 25% reduction,
                                        if warranted by the following:
                                        a. Provision of off-street parking per
Townhouse                               unit which exceeds the 2 spaces per
                                        unit required by Code; or
                                        b. Other unique characteristics of the
Multi-Unit                              development which warrant a reduced
                                        level of guest parking.
Group Living                            0.5 parking spaces per bed
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL
Cemetery                                4 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
                                        Per Zoning Administrator in accordance
College or University                   with Section
                                        5-13-4-(H)
                                        Per Zoning Administrator in accordance
Community Center                        with Section
                                        5-13-4-(H)
Cultural Institution                    2.5 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
Fraternal Organization                  3 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
                                        Per Zoning Administrator in accordance
Government Facility                     with Section
                                        5-13-4-(H)
                                        Established by the Corporate
Correctional Facility                   Authorities via the special use permit
                                        required for the principal use.
Library                                 2.5 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
                                        Per Zoning Administrator in accordance
Public Parks and Recreation             with Section
                                        5-13-4-(H)
Religious Assembly                      0.25 parking spaces per seat
                                        Per Zoning Administrator in accordance
Safety Service                          with Section
                                        5-13-4-(H)
                                        Established by the Corporate
School                                  Authorities via the special use permit
                                        required for the principal use.
                                        Per Zoning Administrator in accordance
Utilities and Public Service Facilities with Section
                                        5-13-4-(H)
BUSINESS
Boarding or Shelter                     1 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
Grooming                                3 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
Pet Equipment or Supply Sales           4.5 parking spaces per each 1,000
Retail Sale of Animals                  square feet of floor area

Veterinary Care                         5 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
Assembly and Entertainment              0.25 parking spaces per person, based
                                        on maximum occupancy
Business Services
Body Art Services
Business Support
Services
Construction Services
Consumer Repair or Maintenance          4 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
Services                                feet of floor area
Fortune Telling and
Psychic Services
Personal Improvement
Services
Small Engine Repair or Maintenance
Services
                                        1 parking space per each employee plus
Business or Vocational School           1 parking space per each 3 students
                                        based on maximum occupancy.
Day Care Services                       4 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
Day Care Home                           No parking required
Drinking Establishment                  10 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
Eating Establishment                    feet of floor area

Financial Services                      4 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
Funeral or Mortuary Services            feet of floor area

Lodging                                 1 parking space per each guest room
Medical Services                        5 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
                                        1 parking space per each bed, plus
Hospital                                parking as required for associated
                                        medical services
Alternative Healthcare Delivery         5 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
Services                                feet of floor area
Motor Vehicle Sales or Services         2.5 parking spaces per 1,000 square
                                        feet
                                        2 parking spaces per pump
                                        Fueling stations offering retail goods
                                        for sale, in enclosed space accessible
                                        by the customer, shall also comply with
                                        the parking requirements for retail
                                        facilities.
                                        Fueling stations providing vehicle
Fueling Station                         repair or maintenance services shall
                                        also comply with the parking
                                        requirements for motor vehicle repair
                                        facilities.
                                        Fueling stations having accessory
                                        vehicle wash facilities shall also
                                        comply with the parking requirements
                                        for motor vehicle wash or cleaning
                                        services.
Heavy Motor Vehicle Sales               2.5 parking spaces per 1,000 square
Light Motor Vehicle Sales               feet
Motor Vehicle Rental
Motor Vehicle Repair                    2 parking spaces per service bay
Motor Vehicle Wash or Cleaning Services See Chapter 15 (Drive-Through
                                        Facilities)
Office                                  3.3 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
Research and Development Services       3.3 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
Retail                                  4.5 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
Sexually Oriented Business              5 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
Sports or Recreation                    4.5 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
INDUSTRIAL
Artisan                                 3.5 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
                                        Per Zoning Administrator in accordance
Data Center                             with Section
                                        5-13-4-(H)
Limited Industrial                      1.5 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
Electronics Industries                  3.3 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
Brewing, Distilling, or Winemaking      10 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
Recyclable Material Drop-Off Facility   No parking required
Recyclable Material Processing Facility 0.5 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
Self-Storage Facility                   0.2 parking spaces per each 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area
Warehousing and Freight Terminal        1 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
Wholesale Operations                    feet of floor area

OTHER
                                        Established by the Corporate
Aircraft Landing Area                   Authorities via the special use permit
                                        required for the principal use.
Community Garden                        No parking required
Medical Cannabis Dispensing             4 parking spaces per each 1,000 square
                                        feet of floor area
                                        Per Zoning Administrator in accordance
Public Transportation Facility          with Section
                                        5-13-4-(H)
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-13-6: PARKING EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS:
   (A)   On-Street Parking
      1.   In the B-3A zoning district, nonresidential uses may count on-street
parking spaces on public street rights-of-way abutting the subject property
towards satisfying off-street parking requirements. One off-street parking
space credit may be taken for each on-street parking space which is directly
contiguous to and which lies wholly within the frontage of the lot lines of the
use. In calculating credit for on-street parking, all fractional spaces are
rounded down.
   (B)   B-3A (Central Retail Core) District
      1.   Minimum off-street parking requirements do not apply in the B-3A
zoning district, except as follows:
         (a)   All household living uses and medical offices are required to
comply with the minimum off-street parking requirements as regulated by this
Chapter.
         (b)   Any nonresidential uses requiring a special use permit may be
required to provide off-street parking as a condition of approval.
   (C)   Shared Parking
      1.   General
         (a)   Shared parking refers to the practice of 2 or more users who
have need for parking at different times voluntarily agreeing to make use of
the same motor vehicle parking spaces.
      2.   Approval
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve shared parking
arrangements among property owners who propose shared parking.
      3.   Eligibility
         (a)   Shared parking may be approved for nonresidential uses that have
different periods of parking demand.
         (b)   Required residential parking and accessible parking spaces may
not be shared, provided that this provision is not intended to prohibit shared
driveways serving such uses.
      4.   Agreement
         (a)   An agreement providing for the shared use of parking areas,
executed by the parties involved, must be filed with the Zoning Administrator
in a form approved by the Village Attorney and recorded with the DuPage County
Recorder of Deeds.
         (b)   Shared parking agreements are binding upon applicants, their
successors and assigns. Amendments to parking agreements require Zoning
Administrator approval, based on whether the proposed amendment complies with
all applicable zoning ordinance provisions.
         (c)   Off-site parking privileges remain in effect only as long as the
agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If an off-site parking
agreement lapses or is no longer valid, then parking must be provided as
otherwise required by this Chapter. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-13-7: BICYCLE PARKING:
   (A)   Spaces Required
      1.   Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in an amount equal to not
less than 5% of the required number of motor vehicle parking spaces.
   (B)   Location
      1.   Required bicycle parking must be located in highly visible areas
that do not interfere with pedestrian movements.
      2.   At least 50% of required bicycle parking spaces must be located
within 100 feet of a customer entrance, with the remainder located no more than
300 feet from any entrance.
      3.   Bicycle parking must be located on the subject lot, unless an
encroachment license agreement has been approved by the Village to allow
private bicycle parking facilities to be located in the right-of-way.
      4.   Public bicycle parking spaces may be credited toward meeting bicycle
parking requirements if such bicycle parking spaces comply with the location
requirements of this paragraph.
   (C)   Design
All required short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces must:
      1.   Consist of bike racks or lockers that are anchored so that they
cannot be easily removed;
      2.   Resistant to rust, corrosion, hammers, and saws;
      3.   Allow both the bicycle frame and the wheels to be locked with the
bicycle in an upright position;
      4.   Be designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle;
      5.   Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to adjacent
bicycles. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-13-8: OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
   (A)   Design
      1.   Off street parking facilities are subject to the following
dimensional requirements, except as required by Illinois Accessibility Code:
 
Minimum Dimension (feet) Angle of Parking
                         Parallel               45 60 90
Stall Width              7                      9  9  9
Stall Length             21 (middle), 24 (ends) 18 19 18
Aisle Width              1-way = 14 2-way = 24  14 15 24
 
Note:   Dimensions shall be measured from the centerline of the stripe
delineating the space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2990.png]
      2.   Compact Cars. Off street parking facilities may be designed to allow
up to a maximum of 10% of the total number of required off street parking
spaces to be utilized by compact cars. Compact car off street parking spaces
shall not be less than 8 feet by 16 feet.
      3.   Striping. In all parking facilities, striping consisting of parallel
lines, four inches in width, must be provided for each parking space. Striping
must be yellow or white.
      4.   Material. All parking facilities must be surfaced with concrete,
asphalt, or other hard dustless surface. Gravel parking facilities are
prohibited.
   (B)   Location
      1.   All off street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the building, structure or use of land served. Off street parking spaces may
also be located on a lot abutting the lot on which the building, structure or
use of land served is located, provided that said spaces are also within three
hundred (300) feet walking distance of such building, structure, or use of
land. Off-street parking spaces separated by a right-of-way shall not be
included in this calculation. All off street parking spaces shall be located in
the same zoning district as the building, structure, or use of land served. All
off street parking spaces required to serve a detached house, duplex, or
townhouse shall be located on the same lot as the residence.
   (C)   Setbacks of Off Street Parking Facilities
      1.   Off street parking facilities abutting a residential use shall be
setback 10 feet from the common property line.
         (a)   Exceptions
            (1)   Off street parking facility setback requirements do not apply
to off street parking facilities provided for detached houses, duplexes, or
townhouses.
            (2)   Off street parking facilities in the O-R zoning district
shall comply with the building setback requirements established in Chapter 4 of
this Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Collective Off Street Parking Facilities
      1.   Off street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided
collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum
of the separate requirements governing the number of accessory off street
spaces required in relation to the use served.
   (E)   Prohibited Use
      1.   Off-street parking spaces shall not be used for sale, repair,
dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-13-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
   (A)   Required
      1.   Off-street vehicle loading and unloading areas must be provided for
any new proposed public/civic, commercial or industrial use or expansion of
such a use that would result in a building with a floor area of 20,000 square
feet or more.
      2.   Off-street vehicle loading and unloading areas must be provided for
any building containing 50 or more dwelling units.
   (B)   Location and Design
The following location and design regulations apply to all off-street loading
facilities regardless of whether they are required to be provided by this
Chapter.
      1.   Off-street loading facilities must be located on the same lot as the
use served.
      2.   All loading areas adjacent to residential zoning districts must be
screened from view of the residential zoning district.
      3.   Loading spaces shall not be located in a location which is visible
from a public right-of-way.
      4.   All loading docks must have opaque doors which are to remain fully
closed when loading operations are not underway.
      5.   Loading areas and access drives must be paved and maintained with
concrete, asphalt, or similar material of sufficient thickness and consistency
to support anticipated traffic volumes and weights.
      6.   Each off-street loading space must be designed to provide a safe
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that will least
interfere with traffic movement, as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Prohibited Use
      1.   Off-street loading facilities shall not be used for sale, repair,
dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-13-10: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF MOTOR VEHICLES PARKED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   No more than five vehicles owned or controlled by the owner or
occupant of a dwelling unit shall be parked outside of an enclosed building in
the R-1 R-2, R-3, and R-4 zoning districts. All motor vehicles parked outside
of an enclosed building in these districts must be parked on a constructed
driveway.
   (B)   No more than one commercial vehicle with a gross weight of no more
than 8,000 pounds owned or controlled by the owner or occupant of a dwelling
unit shall be parked outside of an enclosed building in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and
R-4 zoning districts. All commercial vehicles parked outside of an enclosed
building in these districts must be parked on a constructed driveway.
   (C)   No more than one recreational vehicle owned or controlled by the owner
or occupant of the subject property shall be parked outside in the R-1, R-2, R-
3, and R-4 zoning districts.
      1.   Recreational vehicles shall not be located in the required front
street or side street setback of a property if they exceed 25 feet in length.
      2.   Recreational vehicles shall not be located closer than five feet to
any rear property line and three feet to any side property line.
      3.   Recreational vehicles shall not block the public right of way and
shall be set back at least three feet from any sidewalk and five feet from any
street.
      4.   Prohibited Uses: No recreational vehicle shall be used for living
purposes or to conduct business.
      5.   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, any
recreational vehicle may be parked in a driveway on a residential lot two times
per month for a period not to exceed 96 hours for the purpose of loading,
unloading, maintenance or repairs of said vehicle. All major repairs shall be
within an enclosed garage in residential areas. “Major repairs” shall be
defined as repair work on a vehicle that needs a complete overhaul or
substantial replacement of parts.
   (D)   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative. Recreational vehicles
and commercial vehicles count towards the total vehicle limitation of five.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 14
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
5-14-1: Purposes
5-14-2: Applicability
5-14-3: Allowed Uses
5-14-4: Site Selection Evaluation And Protocols
5-14-5: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Design Criteria
5-14-6: Required Plans
5-14-7: Abandonment
5-14-1: PURPOSES:
Notwithstanding specific statutory direction related to small wireless
facilities, the purposes of this Chapter are as follows:
   (A)   To direct the location of wireless telecommunications facilities in
the Village;
   (B)   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of wireless telecommunications facilities, including antenna support
structure failure and falling ice;
   (C)   To minimize adverse visual impacts of wireless telecommunications
facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
   (D)   To accommodate the growing need for wireless telecommunications
facilities;
   (E)   To promote and encourage collocation of existing and new wireless
telecommunications facilities as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single use antenna support structures, and to reduce the number of
such structures needed in the future. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-14-2: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to wireless telecommunications facilities
located on property or structures owned by the Village.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to small wireless facilities located in
the right-of-way. Small wireless facilities located in the right-of-way shall
comply with the applicable regulations of Title 7 of the Village Code. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-14-3: ALLOWED USES:
   (A)   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be permitted in all
zoning districts as a special use.
      1.   Exception
         (a)   Small wireless facilities shall be a permitted use in all
nonresidential zoning districts.
   (B)   Collocations
      1.   Collocated wireless telecommunications facilities on existing
antenna support structures are a permitted use in all zoning districts.
         (a)   Exception
Collocated small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole in a
residential zoning district shall be permitted as a special use. (Ord. 2021-
4931, 11-15-2021)
5-14-4: SITE SELECTION EVALUATION AND PROTOCOLS
   (A)   Wireless telecommunications facilities must be located and designed to
minimize any adverse effect they may have on residential property values. Sites
shall be placed in locations where the existing topography, vegetation,
buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening.
   (B)   Wireless telecommunications facilities located on property which is
not used exclusively for nonresidential purposes shall be evaluated using the
following criteria which are not listed in order of priority:
      1.   Topography as it relates to line of sight transmissions for optimum
efficiency in service.
      2.   Availability of road access.
      3.   Availability of electrical power.
      4.   Availability of land based telephone lines or microwave link
capability.
      5.   Leasable lands and landlords who want facilities to be located on
their properties.
      6.   Screening of potential and existing vegetation, structures and
topographic features.
      7.   Compatibility with adjacent land uses.
      8.   The least number of sites to cover the desired area.
      9.   The greatest amount of coverage, consistent with physical
requirements.
      10.   Opportunities to mitigate possible visual impact.
      11.   Availability of suitable existing structures for antenna mounting.
   (C)   The following establishes the order of priorities for locating new
wireless telecommunications facilities:
      1.   Place wireless telecommunications facilities on Village owned
property and structures.
      2.   Place wireless telecommunications facilities on other government
owned property and structures.
      3.   Place wireless telecommunications facilities on private
institutional property and structures.
      4.   Place antennas on other appropriate existing structures such as
buildings, antenna support structures, water towers, and smokestacks.
      5.   Place new wireless telecommunications facilities in nonresidential
districts.
      6.   Place new wireless telecommunications facilities in residential
districts only if locations for which a need has been demonstrated are not
available on existing structures or in nonresidential districts. The
telecommunication company is required to demonstrate that it contacted, in
writing, the owners of other more appropriate properties and was denied, in
writing, for reasons other than economic ones. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-14-5: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES DESIGN CRITERIA:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area
      1.   Wireless telecommunications facilities must be located on a property
that is compliant with the lot area requirement of the underlying zoning
district.
         (a)   The minimum lot area for wireless telecommunications facilities
located in a residential district is three acres
         (b)   There is no minimum lot area requirement for small wireless
facilities
   (B)   Facility height. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply
with the maximum building height for principal buildings of the underlying
zoning district.
   (C)   Minimum setbacks. Wireless telecommunications facilities must be set
back from property lines a distance equal to their height and comply with the
setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
   (D)   Required separation. Wireless telecommunications facilities must be
separated from telecommunications facilities on other properties by a minimum
of 1,500 feet.
      1.   Exception. Small wireless facilities
   (E)   Antenna support structures shall have a noncontrasting blue, grey, or
black finish, or a similar color that minimizes their visibility, unless a
different color is required by the FCC or FAA.
   (F)   Required screening. All ground mounted wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be enclosed with a solid six foot high fence.
   (G)   Driveways and parking areas must be provided as necessary for wireless
telecommunications facilities. If any site is not automated, the number of
required parking spaces shall equal the number of people on the largest shift.
   (H)   Building mounted wireless telecommunications facilities must be
architecturally compatible with the building on which they are mounted and
designed and located so as to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact. Any
antenna support structure or mechanical equipment must be screened or enclosed
in such a manner as to mask such equipment. Said screening shall be of
noncombustible material and of the same color, character and design as the
building upon which the screening is erected. An antenna may be mounted to the
wall of a building or extend above the roof of a building without said
screening provided the antenna is painted, or otherwise made to match the color
of the building or structure or background against which they are most commonly
seen. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not occupy more than an
aggregate total of ten percent (10%) of the roof area of any building.
   (I)   New wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located in
accordance with the site selection and protocol requirements of this chapter
and shall be designed to accommodate antennas for more than one user. All
wireless telecommunications facilities must be architecturally compatible with
surrounding buildings and land uses or otherwise integrated, through location
and design, to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the
extent practical. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-14-6: REQUIRED PLANS:
Applications for special use permit or building permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall include the following:
   (A)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
any proposed small wireless facility or telecommunications facility, on site
land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed facilities and any other structures.
   (B)   Map and/or aerial photograph showing the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility location and surrounding areas within 1,500 feet.
   (C)   Legal description of the property proposed for wireless
telecommunications facility.
   (D)   Exact distances, locations and identifications of surrounding
residential properties or other telecommunications facilities.
   (E)   Method of fencing, color of facilities, and, where applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
   (F)   Construction drawings prepared by an Illinois licensed Design
Professional.
   (G)   Structural analysis prepared by an Illinois licensed Structural
Engineer.
   (H)   A statement by the applicant as to whether the construction of the
wireless telecommunications facility will accommodate collocation of additional
antennas for future users.
   (I)   Evidence of agreements with FCC licensed telecommunications provider
for lease/utilization of the antenna support structure space, written proof of
which must be offered by the applicant.
   (J)   The applicant must demonstrate how the proposed site fits into its
overall network within the Village and plans must include any expected future
facilities to be constructed within the Village.
   (K)   The applicant for a new antenna support structure shall demonstrate
that a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed telecommunications
facilities in accordance with the site selection and protocol requirements of
this chapter and that, due to valid considerations including physical
restraints and economic or technological feasibility, no more appropriate
location is available.
   (L)   The applicant is required to demonstrate that it contacted, in
writing, the owners of tall structures within a 1,500 feet radius of the site
proposed, asked for permission to install the antenna on those structures, and
was denied in writing, for reasons other than economic ones.
   (M)   The applicant proposing to construct an antenna support structure or
mount an antenna on an existing structure is required to demonstrate, using
technological evidence that the antenna must go where it is proposed in order
to satisfy its function in the company’s grid system.
   (N)   The applicant must demonstrate by technological evidence that the
height requested is the minimum height necessary to fulfill the
telecommunications facilities function in the company’s grid system.
   (O)   In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in
the Village in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed
to accommodate antennas for more than one user, unless the applicant
demonstrates in writing why such design is unfeasible for technical or physical
reasons. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-14-7: ABANDONMENT:
Upon abandonment, the owner / operator of a wireless telecommunications
facility shall have 90 days to reactivate the use of the facility, transfer the
facility to another owner / operator who makes actual use of the facility, or
dismantle and remove the facility. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
determine the date of abandonment and shall have the right to request
documentation and/or affidavits from the facility owner/operator regarding the
issue of facility usage.
   (A)   Any wireless telecommunications facility which has not been operated
for a period of 180 consecutive days shall be deemed to be abandoned.
      1.   Exception
Any small wireless facility which has not been operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be deemed abandoned, after which the owner shall notify the
Village within 90 days. Even where there is no notice from the owner of the
facility, a determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the
Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 15
SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
5-15-1: General
5-15-2: Fences And Walls
5-15-3: Dumpster Or Refuse Enclosures
5-15-4: Outdoor Lighting
5-15-5: Visibility Triangles
5-15-6: Cross Access
5-15-7: Sidewalks And Pedestrian Connectivity
5-15-8: Street Frontage And Access
5-15-9: Division Of Lots
5-15-10: Drive-Through Facilities
5-15-11: Residential Driveways
5-15-12: Traffic Studies
5-15-1: GENERAL:
The Village’s regulations relating to specific site design elements are listed
below. When this ordinance refers to site design, it is referring to this
Chapter. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-15-2: FENCES AND WALLS:
   (A)   Applicability. The fence and wall regulations of this Section apply to
all new fences and walls, the relocation of existing fences or walls, and the
replacement of existing fences or walls, except the following:
      1.   Recreational Fencing. Customary fencing provided as a part of a
tennis court, athletic field, or other recreational activity.
      2.   Security Fencing. Security fences required by a local, state or
federal law.
      3.   Construction Fencing. Temporary construction fencing required by the
Village’s adopted building codes.
   (B)   General Design Standards
      1.   Fences shall be installed with the “finished side” out, facing the
adjacent lot.
      2.   Fences shall be elevated 2 inches above grade to allow for the
natural flow of stormwater, except where required to be lower by federal,
state, or local ordinance.
      3.   Open Design Fences. Open design fences must be constructed in such a
manner that no post or vertical element exceeds a width of six inches (6"), and
the ratio of open area to closed are does not exceed 1:2, with the open area
distributed uniformly over the entire fence surface. Open-design fences include
split rail, post and board and similar designs.
      4.   Solid Design Fences. Solid design fences are 100% opaque and
commonly referred to as a privacy fence.
   (C)   Residential Zoning Districts. Fences in residential zoning districts
are subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Side and Rear Yards. Fences shall be open or solid design and shall
not exceed 6 feet in height.
         (a)   Fences shall not exceed 8 feet in height in side or rear yards
abutting a nonresidential zoning district, Interstate 355, Interstate 88, Ogden
Avenue, Route 53, Warrenville Road, or Maple Avenue.
         (b)   On double-frontage lots, when the rear of any principal
structure located on the lot faces a street, and all directly abutting lots
share this layout, the yard along that street frontage is considered a rear
yard for purposes of these fence regulations. On double-frontage lots, when the
rear of any principal structure located on the lot faces a street, and one or
more directly abutting lots has the front of a principal structure that faces
the same street, the fence must adhere to the yard requirements of the front
facing principal structure.
         (c)   On corner lots with three lot lines abutting a street, fences up
to 6 feet in height are permitted only within the two street-facing side yard
areas located from the rear building line to the rear lot line. Any fences
outside this area are subject to a maximum height limit of 4 feet and must be
open design.
      2.   Front Street and Side Street Yards. Fences shall not exceed 4 feet
in height and shall be open design.
         (a)   Fences up to 6 feet in height are permitted in the front street
yard and and side street yard area on corner lots when the side of any
principal structure located on the subject lot faces a street if the rear of
the structure faces the rear of a structure that is located on an adjacent
corner lot, provided that the fence is located only in the area from the rear
line of the structure to the rear lot line.
Residential Fence Regulation Quick Guide
   A: Fences shall be open design and shall not exceed 4 feet in height.
   B: Fences shall be open design or solid and shall not exceed 6 feet in
height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3004.png]
   (D)   Nonresidential Zoning Districts. Fences in nonresidential zoning
districts are subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Fences shall be open design or solid and shall not exceed 8 feet in
height in side and rear yards.
      2.   Fences shall not exceed 4 feet in height and shall be open design
within the front street and side street yard.
   (E)   Prohibited Fences. The following fence types are prohibited:
      1.   Barbed wire
      2.   Razor concertina
      3.   Electric
      4.   Concertina wire
      5.   Chain-link in nonresidential zoning districts. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-
15-2021)
5-15-3: DUMPSTER OR REFUSE ENCLOSURES:
   (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to all new
dumpster or refuse enclosures, the relocation of existing dumpsters or refuse
enclosures, and the replacement of existing dumpster or refuse enclosures.
   (B)   General. All dumpsters and refuse areas shall be enclosed in
accordance with this Section. Dumpster or refuse enclosures are a required
improvement for all nonresidential principal uses an in the R-4 zoning
district.
   (C)   Location
      1.   Dumpster or refuse enclosures are prohibited in the front street
yard and side street yard.
      2.   Dumpster or refuse enclosures are a permitted encroachment in the
required side and rear setback.
      3.   Dumpster or refuse enclosures are prohibited in any parking space,
drive aisle, or fire lane.
   (D)   Design. Dumpster or refuse enclosures shall be four sided consisting
of a solid wall or fence 8 feet in height. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-15-4: OUTDOOR LIGHTING:
   (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to all new outdoor
lighting and the replacement of existing outdoor lighting fixtures, luminaires,
or lamps.
   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this Section do not apply to the
following:
      1.   Outdoor lighting associated with detached houses, duplexes, and
townhouses;
         (a)   Exceptions. Outdoor lighting associated with detached houses,
duplexes, and townhouses must comply with the following:
            (1)   Flickering lights, flashing lights, and laser source lights
are prohibited.
            (2)   All light sources must be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover to adjacent property and abutting rights-of-way.
      2.   Public street lights;
      3.   Lighting in swimming pools and other water features governed by the
Village’s adopted building codes;
      4.   Exit signs and other egress illumination required by the Village’s
adopted building codes;
      5.   Lighting for stairs and ramps required by the Village’s adopted
building codes;
      6.   Temporary holiday lighting;
      7.   Low-voltage landscape lighting.
   (C)   Standards
      1.   Outdoor lighting shall not exceed 0.10 foot-candles at any point on
a property line that abuts a residential zoning district or a lot containing a
residential use. This includes residential zoning districts and uses that are
located across right-of-way.
      2.   Outdoor lighting shall not exceed 1.00 foot-candles at the right-of-
way line or at any point on a property line that abuts non-residential zoning
district or lot containing a nonresidential use.
      3.   All light sources must be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover to adjacent property and abutting rights-of-way.
      4.   Flickering lights, flashing lights, and laser source lights are
prohibited.
      5.   All light sources must have a correlated color temperature of 4,000
Kelvins or less.
Examples of shielded light fixtures:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3002.png]
   (D)   Sports and Recreational Area Lighting
Outdoor lighting that serves sports and recreational areas shall be designed in
accordance with the Sports and Recreational Area Lighting IES RP-6-15,
published by the Illuminating Engineering Society.
      1.   Special use permit required. Sports and recreational lighting
adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be reviewed and approved in
accordance with the special use permit procedures in Chapter 17.
   (E)   Photometric Plan. To ensure compliance with this section, as part of
the submission of building permit applications to install, replace, or
otherwise alter outdoor lighting fixtures, luminaires, or lamps, the applicant
must submit a photometric plan stamped and certified by a licensed
professional. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4985, 11-21-2022)
5-15-5: VISIBILITY TRIANGLES:
   (A)   Intersection Visibility Triangle. On corner lots in all zoning
districts, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow
between a height of 3 feet and 10 feet above grade within the required
intersection visibility triangle, which is formed as follows:
      1.   Two sides of the triangle that begin at the point of intersection of
the subject lot’s street lot lines and extend for a distance of 25 feet along
each street lot line.
      2.   The third side of the triangle connects the other two sides.
   (B)   Driveway Visibility Triangle. In all zoning districts, nothing shall
be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow between a height of 3 feet and
10 feet above grade within the required driveway visibility triangle, which is
formed as follows:
      1.   One side of the triangle extends from the intersection of the street
and the driveway edge for a distance of 10 feet along the lot line abutting the
street.
      2.   The second side of the triangle extends from the intersection of the
street and the property line for a distance of 10 feet inward from the lot line
along the driveway edge.
      3.   The third side of the triangle connects the other 2 sides.
Intersection and Driveway Visibility Triangle
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3000.png]
(Ord. 2021-493 1, 11-15-20 21)
5-15-6: CROSS ACCESS:
   (A)   Cross-access refers to providing vehicular access between two or more
contiguous sites so that motorists and pedestrians are not required to reenter
the public road system to gain access to an abutting site. Cross-access between
abutting properties reduces vehicular conflicts between motorists on the street
and motorists entering and leaving driveways. Reduced traffic conflicts result
in fewer accidents and improved traffic flow on the public road network.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator, review, or decision making body involved in
any proposed use or development may require connections between adjacent
properties using cross-access easements, access driveways, or stub-outs. (Ord.
2022-4972, 8-1-2022)
5-15-7: SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIVITY:
   (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to the following:
      1.   When a new principal building is constructed on the site;
      2.   When the gross floor area, number of dwelling units, or impervious
surface on an existing development is expanded by more than 25%; or
      3.   When the development is associated with a new subdivision or
consolidation.
   (B)   A system of pedestrian walkways must be provided to connect each
principal building on a site with the following: adjacent public sidewalks, on-
site parking lots or parking structures, other on-site primary use buildings,
bicycle storage areas, and common outdoor use areas.
   (C)   Public sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with Village of
Lisle specifications along the property’s street frontage unless specifically
prohibited by the right-of-way authority. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd.
Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-15-8: STREET FRONTAGE AND ACCESS:
Every lot must have frontage on a public street and must be provided with
facilities for ingress and/or egress to and from that public street. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-15-9: DIVISION OF LOTS:
No lot shall be divided into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of
ownership, unless the division complies with all applicable regulations of this
Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-15-10: DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
   (A)   Applicability
      1.   The regulations of this section apply to all uses that include
drive-through facilities and to all portions of a development that comprise the
drive-through facility.
      2.   The regulations apply to new principal buildings, the addition of
drive-through facilities to existing developments, and the relocation of
existing drive-through facilities.
   (B)   Parts of a Drive-through Facility. A drive through facility consists
of the following parts:
      1.   The stacking lanes (the space occupied by vehicles queuing for the
service to be provided); and
      2.   The service area, where the service occurs. In uses with service
windows, the service area starts at the service window. For other facilities,
such as gas pumps, air compressors, and vacuum cleaning stations, the service
area is the area where the vehicles are parked during the service or operation.
For car washes, the service area commences at the opening of the wash bay.
      3.   In food service drive-through facilities, an order box.
   (C)   Landscaping
Property abutting residential zoning districts containing a drive through
facility shall be landscaped in accordance with the perimeter / buffer yard
landscaping requirements of Chapter 12 of this Zoning Ordinance to provide
screening of the drive through facility.
   (D)   Stacking Lanes. These regulations help ensure that there is adequate
on-site maneuvering and circulation areas, that stacking vehicles do not impede
traffic on abutting streets and that stacking lanes will not have nuisance
impacts on nearby residential uses.
      1.   All drive-through facilities must provide at least 4 stacking spaces
for vehicles at service area and at least 4 spaces from the order box. Each
stacking space must be at least 20 feet in length.
      2.   Stacking lanes shall be designed so that they do not interfere with
parking movements or safe pedestrian circulation. Stacking lanes must have a
minimum width of 9 feet with adequate turning radius. Dual stacking lanes must
have a minimum width of 10 feet.
      3.   Stacking lanes shall be clearly identified, through such means as
striping, landscaping, pavement design and signs. Such identification must
comply with all applicable ordinance requirements and engineering standards and
specifications.
      4.    Stacking lanes shall include a bailout lane, which shall have a
minimum width of 10 feet, and provide unobstructed exit capability to all
vehicles that have entered the stacking lane. A drive aisle may serve as a
bailout lane provided that it meets the requirements of this Section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3011.png]
   (E)   Service Area. The service area shall be located on the side yard or
rear yard.
   (F)   Order Box
      1.   Speakers. Speakers must be set back at least 50 feet from
residential zoning districts. Sound attenuation walls, landscaping or other
mitigation measures may be required to ensure that the facility will not have
adverse noise-related impacts on nearby residential uses.
      2.   Menu Board Signs. Menu board signs accessory to a drive-through
facility are permitted and are not counted towards the property’s allowable
signage.
         (a)   Number and Dimensions. A primary menu board not to exceed 36
square feet in area or 8 feet in height is allowed per order station up to a
maximum of 2 primary menu boards. One secondary menu board not to exceed 15
square feet in area or 6 feet in height is allowed.
         (b)   Residential Separation. Menu board signs must be set back at
least 50 feet from residential zoning districts.
         (c)   Visibility. Menu board signs are intended to convey information
to motorists within the boundaries of the development and therefore shall not
be located or oriented to be visible from off site. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-15-11: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS:
   (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to all new and
replacement residential driveways.
      1.   Existing asphalt, concrete, or other dustless surface residential
driveways may be replaced or resurfaced in-kind. In-kind replacement is exempt
from the provisions of this Section and are exempt from maximum lot coverage
limitations.
   (B)   Design
      1.   Material. Residential driveways shall be concrete, asphalt, or other
hard dustless surface. Gravel driveways are prohibited.
      2.   Minimum driveway width: 9 feet measured at the lot line.
      3.   Maximum driveway width: 24 feet measured at the lot line.
      4.   Side Yard Setback: 3 feet. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord.
2022-4972, 8-1-2022)
5-15-12: TRAFFIC STUDIES:
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may require the submission of trip generation
data using data from the Institute of Transportation Engineer’s publication
Trip Generation for any proposed use or development.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator or any review and decision making body
involved in the review of any proposed use or development may require a traffic
study prepared by an Illinois licensed Professional Traffic Operations Engineer
for any proposed development that generates 250 or more average daily (weekday)
trips or 100 or more peak-hour trips.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator or any review and decision making body
involved in the review of any proposed use or development may require vehicle
circulation and stacking details.
   (D)   Decision making bodies may require traffic control improvements,
including off site access and traffic control. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 16
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
5-16-1: Purposes
5-16-2: Residential Architectural Design Standards
5-16-3: Nonresidential Architectural Design Standards
5-16-4: Anti-Monotony Standards
5-16-1: PURPOSES:
This regulations of this Chapter are intended to:
   (A)   Establish architectural design standards for development within the
Village;
   (B)   Improve the overall quality of development in the Village;
   (C)   Ensure the compatibility of development with surrounding land uses;
   (D)   Provide for architectural variety;
   (E)   Establish quantifiable design standards;
   (F)   Provide greater certainty about project design expectations;
   (G)   Establish non-monotonous detached house design; and
   (H)   Guide the development review and entitlement process by clearly
stating the Village’s desires for quality development. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-
2021)
5-16-2: RESIDENTIAL ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
   (A)   Applicability
      1.   The residential architectural design standards of this Section apply
to the construction of a new principal building containing uses classified in
the residential use category, as defined in Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
         (a)   Exception: Multi-unit buildings, as defined in Chapter 7 of this
Ordinance are subject to the nonresidential architectural design standards of
this Chapter.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   Architectural Design Elements
         (a)   A minimum of five of the following architectural design elements
shall be incorporated in the street facing façade(s) of detached houses,
duplexes, townhouses, multi-unit, and group living facilities. Duplexes and
townhouses shall contain a minimum of five of the following architectural
design elements in the street facing façade(s) of each dwelling unit.
            (1)   Wing walls
            (2)   Balconies
            (3)   Bay or oriel windows
            (4)   Dormers
            (5)   Covered front porch
            (6)   Shutters
            (7)   Columns
            (8)   Cupola
            (9)   Ornamental brackets, trusses, or rafters
            (10)   Arbor / trellis
            (11)   Portico
            (12)   Ornate chimney pots
            (13)   Window planting boxes
            (14)   Decorative gable vents
            (15)   Doorway pediment
            (16)   Stone accents
            (17)   Quoins
            (18)   Brick solider coursing and other similar details
            (19)   Decorative trim boards located at outside corners, inside
corners, and at transitions to masonry elements
            (20)   Exterior window molding
            (21)   Similar architectural design elements approved by the Zoning
Administrator
         (b)   A minimum of one of the following architectural design elements
shall be incorporated in all non-street facing facades. Duplexes and townhouses
shall contain a minimum of one of the following architectural design elements
in all non-street facing facades of each dwelling unit.
            (1)   Wing walls
            (2)   Balconies
            (3)   Bay or oriel windows
            (4)   Dormers
            (5)   Covered porch
            (6)   Shutters
            (7)   Columns
            (8)   Cupola
            (9)   Ornamental brackets, trusses, or rafters
            (10)   Arbor / trellis
            (11)   Portico
            (12)   Ornate chimney pots
            (13)   Window planting boxes
            (14)   Decorative gable vents
            (15)   Doorway pediment
            (16)   Stone accents
            (17)   Quoins
            (18)   Brick solider coursing and other similar details
            (19)   Decorative trim boards located at outside corners, inside
corners, and at transitions to masonry elements
            (20)   Exterior window molding
            (21)   Similar architectural design elements approved by the Zoning
Administrator
      2.   Building Material
         (a)   Face brick or stone shall be provided on not less than 50% of
the exterior wall area, not including windows and doors.
            (1)    Exception. Detached houses
         (b)   Face brick or stone shall encompass not less than 90% of the
ground level, not including windows and doors. Ground level shall be defined to
be eight feet measured vertically from the adjacent grade.
            (1)   Exception. Detached houses (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd.
Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022)
5-16-3: NONRESIDENTIAL ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
   (A)   Applicability
      1.   The nonresidential architectural design standards of this Section
apply to the construction of a new principal building containing the following
uses:
         (a)   Buildings containing uses not classified in the residential use
category as defined in Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
         (b)   Mixed use buildings, including mixed use buildings that contain
residential uses.
         (c)   Multi-unit buildings. as defined in Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
   (B)   Façade Articulation. Street facing façades shall consist of one of the
following design elements:
      1.   Changes in horizontal or vertical plane with a depth of a minimum of
two feet occurring at intervals not less than 20 feet or more than 100 feet.
      2.   Changes in exterior wall covering color, texture, or material,
horizontally or vertically, at intervals not less than 20 feet or more than 100
feet.
      3.   A repeating pattern of recesses and projections with a relief of at
least 8 inches.
   (C)   Architectural Relief. No more than one side with fewer than four
outside corners as measured at the foundation plane and carried through the
exterior wall plane(s). To qualify as an outside corner, the corner must be
located within 30 feet of the side in question. Outside corners shall be
defined according to Figure 1 and Figure 2 below.
      1.   Exception. Buildings containing uses classified in the Industrial
use category as defined by Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
Figure 1. Prohibited Design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3023.png]
 
Figure 2. Permitted Design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3021.png]
 
   (D)    Customer Entrances. All street facing facades shall include at least
one customer entrance. Where a principal building directly faces more than two
streets, this requirement shall apply only to two sides of the building.
Customer entrances shall include one of the following design elements:
      1.   Recess or projection
      2.   Canopy or overhang
      3.   Architectural details, such as raised corniced parapets, arches, or
pediments
      4.   Pilaster or decorative columns projecting a minimum of 8 inches
      5.   Similar architectural design elements approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (E)   Primary Entrance Design. All principal buildings shall include one
clearly defined primary entrance. Primary entrances shall consist of at least
two of the following design elements:
      1.   Recess or projection
      2.   Arcade
      3.   Portico
      4.   Canopy or overhang
      5.   Architectural details, such as raised corniced parapets, arches, or
pediments
      6.   Integral planters or wing walls
      7.   Pilaster or decorative columns projecting a minimum of 8 inches
      8.   Similar architectural design elements approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (F)   All facades of a building that are visible from adjoining properties
and/or streets shall feature architectural features similar to the street
facing façade.
   (G)   Building Material
      1.   Primary building material shall encompass a minimum of 50% of the
exterior wall area, not including windows and doors. In addition, the primary
building material shall encompass 100% of the ground level. Ground level shall
be defined to be eight feet measured vertically from the adjacent grade.
Acceptable primary building materials include the following:
         (a)   Face brick, stone, or glass
         (b)   Exception: Buildings containing uses classified in the
Industrial use category as defined by Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
      2.   Accent building material shall encompass a maximum of 50% of the
exterior wall area, not including windows and doors. Acceptable accent building
materials include the following:
         (a)   Split face concrete masonry unit
         (b)   Fiber cement
         (c)   Architectural metal cladding
         (d)   Pre-cast concrete, if texturing, banding, or masonry inlay
products are utilized.
         (e)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve accent
building materials not addressed herein on a case-by-case basis in which the
accent building material shall be evaluated based upon such factors as
durability, quality, maintenance, architectural intent, and compatibility with
the surrounding character of development.
         (f)   Exception: Buildings containing uses classified in the
Industrial use category as defined by Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
   (H)   Roof Design. Roof design shall consist of at least one of the
following design elements:
      1.   Parapets with horizontal tops having height changes of at least one
foot occurring not less than every 100 feet of building frontage.
         (a)   Regardless of building frontage, a minimum of three height
changes of at least one foot shall be required.
      2.   Sloping roofs with a roof slope plane change occurring not less than
every 100 feet of building frontage.
         (a)   Regardless of building frontage, a minimum of three roof slope
plane changes shall be required.
         (b)   Overhanging eaves shall be provided with sloping roofs.
         (c)   Sloping roofs shall have a minimum roof pitch of 3:12.
   (I)   Rooftop Equipment Screening. When rooftop equipment exists, parapet
walls shall be utilized to screen all equipment and appurtenances from the
public right-of-way and adjacent properties. Parapet walls must be constructed
to a height that is greater than the equipment or appurtenance height, unless
demonstrated by line of sight analysis.
   (J)   Windows
      1.   Street facing facades and facades adjacent to parking areas or
pedestrian paths shall incorporate transparent features (clear glass on windows
and doors) over a minimum percentage of the wall surface area at ground level.
Ground level shall be defined to be between two and eight feet measured
vertically from the adjacent grade.
         (a)   For retail, eating, or drinking establishments, a minimum of 50%
shall be transparent.
         (b)   For all other uses, a minimum of 35% shall be transparent. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022; Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-
2023)
5-16-4: ANTI-MONOTONY STANDARDS:
   (A)   Applicability
      1.   The anti-monotony standards of this Section apply to all new
detached houses.
         (a)   Exception. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to modify the
standards of this Section when the applicant for a building permit could not be
expected to anticipate the design of a neighboring detached house for which a
building permit has already been issued but is not yet built.
   (B)   Standards
      1.   No building permit shall be issued for any new detached house which
street facing facade is of substantially similar to any other detached house
within three lots on either side of the subject property and within the four
nearest lots across the street.
      2.   Substantially Similar. To be determined not to be substantially
similar, the street facing façade must differ in a minimum of two of the
following characteristics:
         (a)   Roof type (gable, hip, mansard, gambrel, or combination)
         (b)   Number of stories
         (c)   Shape or silhouette
         (d)   Relative location and size of windows
         (e)   Entryway design elements
         (f)   Garage orientation
         (g)   Primary and accent building materials (type, style, or location)
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 17
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
5-17-1: Applicability
5-17-2: Review And Decision Making Authority
5-17-3: Applications And Fees
5-17-4: Public Hearings
5-17-5: Required Notices
5-17-6: Decision Making Criteria; Burden Of Proof
5-17-7: Required Time-Frames For Action
5-17-8: Appeals Of Administrative Decisions
5-17-9: Development Concept Proposals
5-17-10: Exterritorial Zoning Reviews
5-17-11: Map Amendments
5-17-12: Special Use Permits
5-17-13: Temporary Use Permits
5-17-14: Text Amendments
5-17-15: Variances
5-17-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter apply to all of the procedures in this Zoning
Ordinance unless otherwise expressly stated. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-2: REVIEW AND DECISION MAKING AUTHORITY:
The following table provides a summary of the development review and approval
procedures of this Zoning Ordinance. In the event of conflict between this
table and the detailed procedures contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the
detailed procedures govern.
Procedure Zoning Administrator Planning and Zoning Commission Village Board
Procedure             Zoning Administrator Planning and Zoning Village Board
                                           Commission
Appeals of
Administrative        R                    <DM>                N/A
Determinations
Development Concept   R                    R                   N/A
Proposals
Exterritorial Zoning  R/DM                 N/A                 DM
Reviews
Map Amendments        R                    <R>                 DM
Special Use Permits   R                    <R>                 DM
Temporary Use Permits DM                   N/A                 N/A
Text Amendments       R                    <R>                 DM
Variances             R                    <R>                 DM
R = Review Body (responsible for review and recommendation)
DM = Decision Making Body (responsible for final decision to approve or
deny)
< > = Public Hearing Required
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-3: APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Form of Application
      1.   Applications required under this Zoning Ordinance must be submitted
in a form and in such numbers as required by the Zoning Administrator.
      2.   Applications must include materials and information as may be
required by the Zoning Administrator to establish that the proposed activity
complies with all applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator shall develop checklists of application
submittal requirements and make those checklists available to the public.
   (B)   Application Filing Fees
Applications must be accompanied by the fee amount that has been established by
the Village Board.
   (C)   Application Review
      1.   An application will be considered complete and ready for processing
only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required
information, and is accompanied by the required filing fee.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator must make a determination of
application completeness within 7 business days of application filing.
      2.   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator must provide written notice to the applicant along with an
explanation of the application’s deficiencies. No further processing of the
application will occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
         (a)   If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 60
days, the application will be considered withdrawn.
         (b)   No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and
in-complete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the
deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next
processing cycle.
      3.   Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the
processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision-
making bodies in accordance with applicable development review and approval
procedures of this Chapter.
      4.   The Zoning Administrator may require that applications or plans be
revised before being placed on an agenda for possible action if the Zoning
Administrator determines that:
         (a)   The application or plan contains one or more inaccuracies or
omissions that will hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan’s/
application’s compliance with Zoning Ordinance requirements or other
regulations; or
         (b)   The decision-making body does not have legal authority to
approve the application or plan. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-4: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   (A)   All public hearings are subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5
ILCS 120/1 et seq.)
   (B)   General Procedures
      1.   Public hearings required by this Zoning Ordinance must be conducted
by the designated hearing body. At the hearing, interested persons must be
permitted to submit information and comments, verbally or in writing. The
designated hearing body is authorized to establish rules of procedure.
   (C)   Continued Public Hearings
      1.   Once commenced, a public hearing may be continued by the hearing
body. No re-notification is required if the continuance is set for specified
date and time and that date and time is announced at the time of the
continuance.
      2.   If a public hearing is continued or postponed for an indefinite
period of time from the date of the originally scheduled public hearing, new
public hearing notice must be given before the rescheduled public hearing.
      3.   If the applicant requests and is granted a postponement, the
applicant must pay any costs of re-notification. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-5: REQUIRED NOTICES:
The following table provides a summary of the public notice requirements of
this Zoning Ordinance. In the event of conflict between this table and detailed
public notice requirements contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the detailed
public notice requirements govern.
Procedure Newspaper Notice Delivered Notice Posted Notice
Procedure                     Newspaper Notice Delivered Notice Posted Notice
Appeals of Administrative     N/A              N/A              N/A
Determinations
Development Concept Proposals N/A              N/A              N/A
Exterritorial Zoning Review   N/A              N/A              N/A
Map Amendments                Yes              Yes              Yes
Special Use Permits           Yes              Yes              Yes
Temporary Use Permits         N/A              N/A              N/A
Text Amendments               Yes              Yes[1]           N/A
Variances                     Yes              Yes              Yes
 
[1] When a use currently classified as a prohibited use is proposed to be
reclassified as a permitted use or permitted special use.
   (A)   Newspaper Notice
      1.   Whenever provisions of this Zoning Ordinance require that newspaper
notice be provided, the newspaper notice must be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village at least 15 days before and no more than 30
days before the public hearing. Required newspaper notice must include at least
the following information:
         (a)   The date, time, and place of the public hearing for which the
notice is being given;
         (b)   The common street address(es) and the property index number(s)
of the property affected by the application, or the legal description(s) and
the property index number(s) of the property affected by the application; and
         (c)   A summary of the application request.
   (B)   Delivered Notice
      1.   Whenever provisions of this Zoning Ordinance requires that notices
be delivered to property owners, the delivered notice must be sent standard
mail via the United States Postal Service and be postmarked at least 15 days
before and no more than 30 days before the public hearing.
      2.   Delivered notice shall be mailed to all property owners of property
lying in whole or in part within 250 feet, exclusive of public right-of-way, of
the property lines of the property for which the action is requested, as
reflected by the County property tax records.
   (C)   Posted Notice
      1.   When the procedures of this Zoning Ordinance require that posted
notice be provided, public hearing signs must be posted at least 15 days before
and no more than 30 days before the public hearing.
         (a)   At least one sign must be posted per 500 linear feet of street
frontage with a minimum of one sign on each street abutting the subject
property.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to modify the requirements of
this Section when the requirements are found to be in appropriate or
ineffective in providing the intended notice to passersby. Modifications may
include sign content, format, size, material, quantity, and location.
      3.   Posted notice is a courtesy notice that is not required by state
law. Failure to provide or maintain posted notice or any defect in such notice
does not invalidate, impair, or otherwise affect any application, public
hearing or decision rendered in respect to the matter under consideration.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-6: DECISION MAKING CRITERIA; BURDEN OF PROOF:
Applications must address relevant review and decision-making criteria. In all
cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application complies with
all applicable review or approval criteria. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-7: REQUIRED TIME-FRAMES FOR ACTION:
Any time limit specified in this Chapter for any decision or action on behalf
of a review or decision-making body may be extended if the applicant agrees to
an extension. If a review or decision-making body does not render a decision or
take action within any time period required under this Zoning Ordinance and the
applicant has not agreed to an extension of that time limit, the application is
deemed denied. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-8: APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
   (A)   Intent
The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there has been an error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the administration,
interpretation, or enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Application Filing
      1.   Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
      2.   Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed within 45 days of
the date of the order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed.
   (C)   Effect of Filing
The filing of a complete appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in
the certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property, in
which case the proceedings will not be stayed unless by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by a court of
record based on due cause shown.
   (D)   Record of Decision
Upon receipt of an application of appeal, the Zoning Administrator must
transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission all papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed is taken.
   (E)   Public Hearing and Final Decision
      1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on the
appeal within 45 days of the date that the appeal is filed.
      2.   Within 30 days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission must take action on the appeal. The Planning and Zoning
Commission’s decision must be in writing and be supported by written findings
of fact.
      3.   In exercising the appeal power, the Planning and Zoning Commission
has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is
taken. The Planning and Zoning Commission may affirm or may reverse, wholly or
in part, or modify the decision being appealed.
      4.   Action by the Planning and Zoning commission requires a simple
majority vote of a quorum of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      5.   In acting on the appeal, the Planning and Zoning Commission must
grant to the Zoning Official’s decision a presumption of correctness, placing
the burden of persuasion of error on the appellant.
      6.   All decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission are final
administrative decisions subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions
of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereof,
and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
   (F)   Standards and Review Criteria
An appeal may be sustained only if the Planning and Zoning Commission finds
that the Zoning Administrator erred.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3025.png]
   Appeal of Administrative Decision Process
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-9: DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT PROPOSALS:
   (A)   Intent
The development concept proposal procedures of this Section are intended to
provide a transparent, public review process for development concepts prior to
formal application filing. The development concept proposal process is intended
to be preliminary in nature and to provide an overview of the anticipated
entitlement process and other applicable Village regulations or requirements.
      1.   Any comments, opinions, statements, concerns, or any and all other
forms of feedback or response to the development concept proposal and any of
its associated documents or plans shall not be considered binding on any member
of Village staff or any appointed or elected Village official, nor shall such
feedback or response be construed in any way as approval of the application,
project, or any project element.
   (B)   Authority to File
Development concept proposal applications may be filed by the subject property
owner or by the property owner’s authorized agent.
   (C)   Application Filing
Development concept proposal applications must be filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
   (D)   Application Review and Report
The Zoning Administrator’s review of a development concept proposal is limited
to the identification of anticipated zoning procedures.
      1.   Additional requirements, documentation, plan submittals, and fees
may be determined to be necessary upon submittal of a formal application.
   (E)   Development Concept Proposal Presentation
The Planning and Zoning Commission must allow for a development concept
proposal presentation within 60 days of receipt of a complete application.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-10: EXTERRITORIAL ZONING REVIEWS:
   (A)   Applicability
When an application for a map amendment, special use, or variation is filed
with the County of DuPage for property in unincorporated territory within one
and one-half (1 and ½) miles of the incorporated boundary of the Village of
Lisle, the zoning application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator
except as follows:
      1.   The property subject to the zoning application is not within the
boundaries of the Village’s comprehensive plan is exempt from this requirement.
      2.   The property subject to the zoning application is not subject to
review by the Village of Lisle pursuant to a boundary agreement with another
municipality.
         (a)   In the absence of a boundary agreement, the jurisdiction of the
Village of Lisle pursuant to this section shall extend to a median line
equidistant from its boundary and the boundary of any other municipality
nearest to the boundary of the Village of Lisle at any given point on the line
   (B)   Application Review
      1.   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the zoning application
may adversely affect the Village’s provision of public utilities, adversely
affect property within the Village of Lisle, or is otherwise inconsistent with
the officially adopted plans of the Village of Lisle, the Zoning Administrator
shall refer the matter to the Village Board for the consideration of filing an
objection to the application. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-11: MAP AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Authority to File
Amendments to the zoning map may be initiated by the Village Board or by the
owner of the property that is the subject of the proposed map amendment or by
the subject property owner’s authorized agent.
      1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Administrator may
recommend the initiation of a map amendment to the Village Board. No
application for a map amendment shall be filed by the Village without Village
Board authorization.
   (B)   Application Filing
Complete applications for map amendments must be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. A separate application must be made for each noncontiguous
parcel of land.
   (C)   Application Review and Report
      1.   The Zoning Administrator must prepare a report and recommendation
that evaluates the proposed map amendment in light of the standards and review
criteria of this Section. The report must be transmitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission before their public hearing on the proposed map amendment.
   (D)   Required Notice
      1.   Newspaper Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a map amendment must be published in the newspaper
in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
       2.   Delivered Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a map amendment must be delivered in accordance with
the requirements of this Chapter.
      3.   Posted Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a map amendment must be posted on the subject
property in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
   (E)   Public Hearing
The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed
map amendment within 60 days of receipt of a complete application. Within 60
days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission
must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend that the proposed map
amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its
findings and recommendations to the Village Board.
   (F)   Final Action
Within 60 days of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation, the
Village Board must act to approve the proposed zoning map amendment, approve
the proposed amendment with modifications or deny the proposed amendment. The
Village Board may also remand the proposed map amendment back to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for further consideration.
      1.   If the map amendment application is remanded, the Village Board must
specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings before the
Planning and Zoning Commission must be limited to those identified items. The
Planning and Zoning Commission must conduct further proceedings as may be
appropriate and return a recommendation on the map amendment application to the
Village Board within 60 days of the date that the matter is remanded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 60 days of receipt of the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s recommendation, the Village Board must take final action on
the map amendment application.
   (G)   Standards and Review Criteria
The decision to amend the zoning map is a matter of legislative discretion that
is not controlled by any single standard. In making recommendations and
decisions about map amendments, review and decision-making bodies must consider
at least the following factors:
      1.   Existing legally established uses of property within the general
vicinity of the subject property.
      2.   The zoning classification of property within the general vicinity of
the subject property.
      3.   The suitability of the subject property for the uses allowed under
the existing zoning classification.
      4.   The trend of development, if any, in the general vicinity of the
subject property, including changes, if any, that may have taken place since
the time the subject property was placed in its present zoning classification.
      5.   Compliance with officially adopted plans of the Village.
   (H)   Successive Applications
If a map amendment application is denied, no application absent a change in
circumstances may be accepted that proposes reclassification of any portion of
the same property for the same zoning classification for 12 months from the
date of the Village Board decision to deny.
   (I)   Protest Petitions
      1.   If a valid protest petition is filed against any proposed map
amendment, passage of the map amendment requires a favorable vote of two-thirds
of the Village Board trustees holding office.
      2.   A protest petition will be deemed valid if it is signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by
the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately abutting or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owners of the 20% of the frontage directly opposite the
frontage proposed to be altered.
      3.   A written protest petition opposing a map amendment must be
submitted to the Village Clerk before the Village Board’s vote
      4.   When a written protest petition has been submitted, the protest
petition must be served by the protestors upon the applicant and upon the
applicant’s attorney, if any, by certified mail at the applicant’s and
attorney’s addresses shown on the application.
   Map Amendment Decision Process
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3033.png]
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-12: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   (A)   Intent
The special use permit approval procedures of this section is intended to
provide a transparent, public review process for land uses that, because of
their widely varying design and operational characteristics, require case-by-
case review in order to determine whether they will be compatible with
surrounding uses and development patterns.
   (B)   Authority to File
Special use permit applications may be filed by the subject property owner or
by the property owner’s authorized agent. A separate application must be made
for each noncontiguous parcel of land.
   (C)   Application Filing
Complete applications for special use permits must be filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
   (D)   Application Review and Report
      1.   The Zoning Administrator must review the special use permit
application in accordance with Section
5-17-3-3.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator must prepare a report and recommendation
that evaluates the proposed special use permit in light of the standards and
review criteria of this Section. The report must be transmitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission before their public hearing on the proposed special use
permit.
   (E)   Required Notice
      1.   Newspaper Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a special use permit must be published in the
newspaper in accordance with Section
5-17-5(A).
      2.   Delivered Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a special use permit must be delivered in accordance
with Section
5-17-5(B).
      3.   Posted Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a special use permit must be posted on the subject
property in accordance with
5-17-5(C).
   (F)   Public Hearing
The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed
special use permit within 60 days of receipt of a complete application. Within
60 days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission
must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend that the proposed
special use permit be approved, approved with conditions, approved with
modifications, or denied and transmit its findings and recommendations to the
Village Board.
   (G)   Final Action
Within 60 days of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation, the
Village Board must act to approve the proposed special use permit, approve the
special use permit with conditions, approve the special use permit with
modifications or deny the special use permit. The Village Board may also remand
the proposed special use permit back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
further consideration.
      1.   If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommended denial of the
special use permit, passage of the special use permit requires a favorable vote
of two-thirds of the Village Board trustees holding office.
      2.   If the special use application is remanded, the Village Board must
specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings before the
Planning and Zoning Commission must be limited to those identified items. The
Planning and Zoning Commission must conduct further proceedings as may be
appropriate and return a recommendation on the special use application to the
Village Board within 60 days of the date that the matter is remanded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 60 days of receipt of the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s recommendation, the Village Board must take final action on
the special use application.
   (H)   Standards and Review Criteria
No special use permit may be recommended for approval or approved unless:
      1.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will
not be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety or general
welfare;
      2.   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate area for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
      3.   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of the adjacent property for uses permitted
in the district;
      4.   The special use in all other respects conforms to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations
may in each instance be modified by variation by the Village Board.
   (I)   Conditions of Approval
In granting a special use permit, the Village Board is authorized to impose
conditions upon the subject property benefited by the special use permit that
are necessary to reduce or minimize any potentially adverse impacts on other
property in the surrounding area, and to carry out the stated purpose and
intent of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (J)   Transferability
Approved special use permits run with the land and are not affected by changes
of tenancy, ownership, or management unless otherwise stated in the ordinance
approving the special use.
   (K)   Amendments
A request for changes in the specific nature of the approved special use permit
or changes to any conditions attached to an approved special use permit must be
processed as a new special use permit application, including the requirements
for fees and notices.
   (L)   Successive Applications
If a special use permit application is denied, no application may be accepted
absent a change in circumstances that proposes the same special use of any
portion of the same property for 12 months from the date of the Village Board
decision to deny.
   (M)   Lapse of Approval
      1.   An approved special use permit will lapse and have no further effect
one year after it is approved by the Village Board, unless:
         (a)   A building permit has been issued (if required); or
         (b)   A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or
         (c)   The special use has been lawfully established.
      2.   The Village Board is authorized to extend the expiration period for
good cause on up to two separate occasions, by up to six months each. Requests
for extensions must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and forwarded to
the Village Board for a final decision.
      3.   A special use permit also lapses upon revocation of a building
permit or a certificate of occupancy for violations of conditions of approval
or upon expiration of a building permit to carry out the work authorized by the
special use permit.
      4.   If any special use is abandoned, or is discontinued for a continuous
period of one year or more, the special use permit for such use is void, and
such use may not be reestablished unless and until a new special use permit is
obtained in accordance with the procedures of this Chapter.
   Special Use Permit Decision Process
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3031.png]
 
   (N)   Revocation
      1.   Revocation of an approved special use permit may be initiated by the
property owner of the property subject to the special use permit or by the
Village.
      2.   If revocation is initiated by the Village, the owner shall be
notified, in writing, at least 60 days prior to the Village Board's
consideration of the revocation.
      3.   The voluntary revocation of a special use permit is at the sole
discretion of the Village Board.
      4.   The involuntary revocation of a special use permit shall be based on
the Village Board's determination that the special use permit holder failed to
comply with any or all of the conditions, restrictions, or provisions of the
special use permit.
      5.   Upon revocation of a special use permit, the parcel of land shall
conform to the permitted uses and other regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-
2022; Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-17-13: TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
Refer to Chapter 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-14: TEXT AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Intent
The text of this Zoning Ordinance may be amended from time to time in
accordance with the procedures of this Section. The text amendment process is
intended to allow for clarification of certain provisions, correction of
contradictory clauses, or to change regulations to reflect evolving needs and
concerns.
   (B)   Authority to File
Amendments to the text of this Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by the Village
Board or by a property owner or the property owner’s authorized agent.
      1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Administrator may
recommend initiation of a text amendment. No application for a text amendment
shall be filed by the Village without Village Board authorization.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to initiate text amendments
of this Zoning Ordinance on an annual basis for the purpose of correcting
errors or inconsistencies in the Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Application Filing
Complete applications for text amendments must be filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
   (D)   Application Review and Report
      1.   The Zoning Administrator must review the text amendment application
in accordance with Section
5-17-3(C).
      2.   The Zoning Administrator must prepare a report and recommendation
that evaluates the proposed text amendment in light of the standards and review
criteria of this Section. The report must be transmitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission before their public hearing on the proposed special use
permit.
   (E)   Required Notice
      1.   Newspaper Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a text amendment must be published in the newspaper
in accordance with Section
5-17-5(A).
      2.   Delivered Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a text amendment that proposes reclassification of a
prohibited use to a permitted use or permitted special use within a zoning
district must be delivered in accordance with Section
5-17-5(B).
   (F)   Public Hearing
The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed
text amendment within 60 days of receipt of a complete application. Within 60
days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission
must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend that the proposed
text amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and transmit
its findings and recommendations to the Village Board.
   (G)   Final Action
Within 60 days of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation, the
Village Board must act to approve the proposed text amendment, approve the text
amendment with modifications or deny the text amendment. The Village Board may
also may remand the proposed text amendment back to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for further consideration.
      1.   If the text amendment application is remanded, the Village Board
must specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings
before the Planning and Zoning Commission must be limited to those identified
items. The Planning and Zoning Commission must conduct further proceedings as
may be appropriate and return a recommendation on the text amendment
application to the Village Board within 60 days of the date that the matter is
remanded to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 60 days of receipt of
the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation, the Village Board must
take final action on the text amendment application.
   (H)   Standards and Review Criteria
The decision to amend the Zoning Ordinance text is a matter of legislative
discretion that is not controlled by any one standard. In making
recommendations and decisions about Zoning Ordinance text amendments, review
and decision-making bodies must consider at least the following factors:
      1.   Whether the proposed text amendment is in conformity with the policy
and intent of the comprehensive plan; and
      2.   Whether the proposed text amendment corrects an error or
inconsistency in the Zoning Ordinance, meets the challenge of a changing
condition or is necessary to implement established policy.
      3.   Whether the proposed text amendment reflects a change, new
development, or new use that is beneficial to the Village.
   (I)   Protest Petitions
      1   If a valid protest petition is filed against any proposed text
amendment, passage of the text amendment requires a favorable vote of two-
thirds of the Village Board trustees holding office.
      2.   A protest petition will be deemed valid if it is signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by
the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately abutting or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owners of the 20% of the frontage directly opposite the
frontage proposed to be altered.
      3.   When a written protest petition has been submitted, the protest
petition must be served by the protestors upon the applicant and upon the
applicant’s attorney, if any, by certified mail at the applicant’s and
attorney’s addresses shown on the application.
   Text Amendment Decision Process
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3029.png]
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-17-15: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Intent
Variances are intended to provide relief from practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships resulting from strict application of a numerical or
quantitative requirement of the Zoning Ordinance. Variances shall not be used
to:
      1.   Permit a principal use in a zoning district that is not otherwise
allowed in that zoning district (i.e. “use variances” are prohibited);
      2.   Waive, modify, or amend any definition or use classification;
         (a)   A variance may be used to modify measurable elements within a
definition or use classification.
      3.   Waive, modify, or amend any review and approval procedures; or
      4.   Waive, modify, or amend a condition of approval or requirement
imposed by an authorized decision making body or the state or federal
government.
   (B)   Authority to File
Variance applications may be filed by the subject property owner or by the
property owner’s authorized agent.
   (C)   Application Filing
Complete applications for variances must be filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
   (D)   Application Review and Report
      1.   The Zoning Administrator must review the variance application in
accordance with Section
5-17-3(C).
      2.   The Zoning Administrator must prepare a report and recommendation
that evaluates the proposed variance in light of the standards and review
criteria of this Section. The report must be transmitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission before their public hearing on the proposed variance.
   (E)   Required Notice
      1.   Newspaper Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a variance must be published in the newspaper in
accordance with Section
5-17-5(A).
      2.   Delivered Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a variance must be delivered in accordance with
Section
5-17-5(B).
      3.   Posted Notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
required public hearing on a variance must be posted on the subject property in
accordance with Section
5-17-5(C).
   (F)   Standards and Review Criteria. No variance may be recommended or
approved unless:
      1.   That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
      2.   That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      3.   That the conditions upon which the variance application is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification;
   (G)   Public Hearing
The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed
variance within 60 days of receipt of a complete application. Within 60 days of
the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission must act by
simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend that the variance be approved,
approve the variance with conditions, approve the variance with modifications,
or deny the variance and transmit its findings and recommendations to the
Village Board.
   (H)   Final Action
      1.   Within 60 days of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
recommendation, the Village Board must act to approve the variance, approve the
variance with conditions, approve the variance with modifications or deny the
variance. The Village Board may also may remand the proposed variance back to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration.
         (a)   If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommended denial of the
variance, passage of the variance requires a favorable vote of two-thirds of
the Village Board trustees holding office.
         (b)   If the variance application is remanded, the Village Board must
specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings before the
Planning and Zoning Commission must be limited to those identified items. The
Planning and Zoning Commission must conduct further proceedings as may be
appropriate and return a recommendation on the variance application to the
Village Board within 60 days of the date that the matter is remanded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 60 days of receipt of the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s recommendation, the Village Board must take final action on
the variance application.
   (I)   Conditions of Approval
In granting a variance, the Village Board is authorized to impose conditions
upon the subject property that are necessary to reduce or minimize any
potentially adverse impacts on other property in the surrounding area, and to
carry out the stated purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (J)   Transferability
Approved variances run with the land and are not affected by changes of
tenancy, ownership, or management unless otherwise stated in the ordinance
approving the variance.
   (K)   Amendments
A request for changes in the specific nature of the approved variance or
changes to any conditions attached to an approved variance must be processed as
a new variance application, including the requirements for fees and notices.
   (L)   Successive Applications
If a variance application is denied, no substantially similar application may
be accepted absent a change in circumstances for the same property for 12
months from the date of denial by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (M)   Lapse of Approval
An approved variance will lapse and have no further effect one year after it is
approved by the Zoning Administrator, unless:
      1.   A building permit has been issued (if required); or
      2.   The use or structure has been lawfully established.
      3.   The Village Board is authorized to extend the expiration period for
good cause on up to two separate occasions, by up to six months each. Requests
for extensions must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and forwarded to
the Village Board for a final decision.
      4.   A variance lapses upon revocation of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy for violations of conditions of approval or upon
expiration of a building permit to carry out the work authorized by the
variance.
      5.   If any variance is abandoned or is discontinued for a continuous
period of one year or more, the variance is void, and the use or structure may
not be reestablished unless and until a new variance is obtained in accordance
with the procedures of this Chapter.
   Variance Decision Process
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3027.png]
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 18
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
5-18-1: Overview
5-18-2: Purpose
5-18-3: Objectives
5-18-4: Departures
5-18-5: Standards And Review Criteria
5-18-6: Specific Content
5-18-7: Changes To Approved Planned Unit Developments
5-18-8: Revocation
5-18-1: OVERVIEW:
A planned unit development is established through the special use permit
procedures of Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-18-2: PURPOSE:
Planned unit development regulations are intended to encourage and allow more
creative and imaginative design for land developments than is possible under
conventional zoning regulations. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-18-3: OBJECTIVES:
Planned unit developments are intended to promote the following objectives:
   (A)   To permit a maximum choice in the types of environment available to
the public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the
strict application of this and other Village ordinances pertaining to land
development.
   (B)   To promote a creative approach to the use of land and related physical
facilities that results in better design and development, with the inclusion of
aesthetic amenities.
   (C)   To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and
building relationships with a possible mixing of different urban uses in an
innovative design.
   (D)   To encourage a pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation,
topographic and geological features, and environmentally appropriate features.
   (E)   To provide for the prevention and/or control of soil erosion, surface
flooding and the preservation of subsurface water.
   (F)   To create a method for the permanent preservation of space for the
continued use and enjoyment of the residents of the development.
   (G)   To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities,
schools and other public and private facilities.
   (H)   To promote the more efficient use of the land resulting in more
economically feasible networks of utilities, streets and other facilities.
   (I)   To encourage a land use which promotes the public health, safety,
comfort, morals and welfare.
   (J)   To create a method for the permanent preservation of architectural
and/or historic landmarks.
   (K)   To facilitate the implementation of adopted Village land use policies,
particularly with respect to areas planned for potential redevelopment. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-18-4: DEPARTURES:
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Village Board as part of the planned
unit development approval process, planned unit developments are subject to all
applicable regulations of this Zoning Ordinance and the Village’s subdivision
regulations. Standards of this Zoning Ordinance and the Village’s subdivision
regulations may be modified as part of the planned unit development approval in
direct response to the planned unit development’s advancement of the objectives
identified in this Chapter. Said modifications shall be identified in the
planned unit development application. The departures process shall not be used
to:
   (A)   Permit a principal use or accessory use in a zoning district that is
not otherwise allowed in that zoning district;
   (B)   Waive, modify, or amend any definition or use classification;
   (C)   Waive, modify, or amend any requirements of Title 4 of the Lisle
Village Code. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-18-5: STANDARDS AND REVIEW CRITERIA:
No planned unit development may be recommended for approval or be approved
unless:
   (A)   The planned unit development complies with the standards and review
criteria for a special use permit as established in Chapter 17 of this
Ordinance; and
   (B)   The planned unit development will result in public benefits that are
greater than or at least equal to the benefits to the applicant as a result of
the approval of departures from the regulations of the Village’s Zoning
Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-18-6: SPECIFIC CONTENT:
The following information shall be required unless specifically modified by the
Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section
5-18-4 of this Chapter. All specific content shall identify the preparer and
the preparer’s qualifications.
   (A)   Planned Unit Development Plan
      1.   A drawing of the planned unit development shall be prepared
depicting the following information:
         (a)   Title by which the proposed planned unit development is to be
referred;
         (b)   Legal description of the property and total acreage included;
         (c)   Scale, north point, and date of preparation;
         (d)   Boundary lines;
         (e)   Zoning on and adjacent to the planned unit development;
         (f)   Structures, including gross floor area, building heights, use,
and setbacks;
         (g)   Open space;
         (h)   Easements, including purpose and dimensions;
         (i)   Streets on and adjacent to the planned unit development;
         (j)   Utilities on and adjacent to the planned unit development;
         (k)   Topography depicted in two foot contours;
         (l)   Natural resources including watercourses, floodplains, and
wetlands on and adjacent to the planned unit development;
         (m)   Stormwater facilities;
         (n)   Recreational facilities;
         (o)   Public improvements;
         (p)   Pedestrian and bicycle paths; and
         (q)   Off street parking facilities.
   (B)   Building Elevations. Building elevations shall be provided for all
building and shall comply with the architectural design standards of Chapter 16
of this Ordinance, unless modified in accordance with this Chapter. The
building elevations shall be prepared by an Illinois licensed Architect.
   (C)   Landscape Plans. Landscape plans shall be provided and shall comply
with the landscape and tree preservation standards of Chapter 12 of this
Ordinance, unless modified in accordance with this Chapter. Landscape plans
shall be prepared by an Illinois licensed Landscape Architect.
   (D)   Engineering Plans: Engineering plans shall be provided and shall
comply with the Village’s stormwater and floodplain regulations. Engineering
plans shall be prepared by an Illinois licensed Professional Engineer and shall
include a topographic survey of the area, the design of the sanitary sewer,
water, stormwater control, flood control, and street facilities including
specifications. Engineering plans shall include cost estimates for all public
improvements.
   (E)   School Impact Analysis. The school impact analysis shall contain
information on the projected student count and the financial impact on the
local school district generated by the proposed project.
   (F)   Environmental Impact Study. The environmental impact study shall
consist of the following information:
      1.   Soils report prepared by an Illinois licensed Professional Engineer
      2.   Illinois Department of Natural Resources EcoCAT report;
      3.   Illinois State Historic Preservation Office compliance review;
      4.   Kane-DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District Land Use Opinion
Report;
   (G)   Tax Impact Analysis. The tax impact analysis shall contain information
on the projected property tax and sales tax to be generated by the proposed
project.
   (H)   Traffic Study. The traffic study shall consist of the following
information:
      1.   Trip generation data for the proposed development using data from
the Institute of Transportation Engineers’ Trip Generation Manual.
         (a)   A traffic impact study prepared by an Illinois licensed
Professional Traffic Operations Engineer is required for any proposed
development that generates 250 or more average daily (weekday) trips or 100 or
more peak-hour trips.
      2.   Vehicle circulation and stacking details.
   (I)   Market Study. The market study shall contain information regarding the
economic feasibility of the proposed development, including information on land
utilization and marketing potential.
   (J)   Objectives Statement. The objectives statement shall identify what
objectives identified in this Chapter are to be achieved by the planned unit
development.
   (K)   Character. Explanation of the character of the planned unit
development, the manner in which the planned unit development will take
advantage of the flexibility of these regulations and referencing the general
benefits that will accrue to the public as a result of the development.
   (L)   Ownership. Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land
within the planned unit development.
   (M)   Development Schedule. The development schedule shall include the
following:
      1.   Stages in which the project will be built;
      2.   Approximate dates from beginning to completion of construction; and
      3.   If different land use types are to be included within the planned
unit development, the schedule must include the mix of uses to be built in each
stage.
   (N)   Covenants. Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants that will
govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit
development.
      1.   Covenants are to be reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney
prior to final consideration by the Village Board.
   (O)   Density. Provide preliminary statistics on the proposed density,
including the number of dwelling units by type and bedroom and the number of
buildings by type. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-18-7: CHANGES TO APPROVED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
A planned unit development shall be constructed in accordance with the approved
planned unit development plan and supporting specific content. Changes to the
planned unit development shall be considered to be a major change, minor
change, or administrative change in accordance with this Section.
   (A)   Major Change
      1.   Major changes are modifications which alter the concept or intent of
the planned unit development, or that:
         (a)   Do not comply with the underlying zoning regulations of this
Zoning Ordinance;
         (b)   Does not comply with a condition of approval;
         (c)   Reduces the amount of usable open space, common open space or
landscaping by more than 5%;
         (d)   Increases or decreases the number of off-street parking spaces
provided by more than 5%;
         (e)   Increases the overall building coverage by more than 5%;
         (f)   Increases the building height by more than 5% or 5 feet,
whichever is less;
         (g)   A change in the vehicle circulation pattern that would increase
points of access, change access to another street or increase projected traffic
volumes;
         (h)   Any reductions or alterations in the approved public benefit and
amenities to be provided;
         (i)   A change in the location and arrangement of general land use
categories within the development;
         (j)   An increase or decrease in the final approved land use mix in
any phase of the development;
         (k)   An increase or decrease in the number of dwelling units; and
         (l)   A change to approved project phasing;
   2.   A request for a major change must be processed as a new planned unit
development, including the requirements for fees and notices.
   (B)   Minor Changes
Minor Changes are modifications that are not defined as major changes and do
not alter the concept or intent of the planned unit development. Minor changes
may be approved by the Village Board without the review and recommendation of
the Planning and Zoning Commission unless the Village Board refers the request
for a minor change to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation.
      1.   If the Village Board refers a minor change to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, the minor change shall be processed as a major change in
accordance with this Chapter.
   (C)   Administrative Changes
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve the following administrative
changes to a planned unit development:
      1.   The replacement, modification, or alteration of signs where such
replacement, modification, or alteration complies with Chapter 11 of this
Zoning Ordinance and that:
         (a)   Does not increase the total number of signs;
         (b)   Does not increase the total height of any sign by more than 25%;
         (c)   Does not increase the total sign area of any sign by more than
25%;
         (d)   Does not decrease the setback of any sign; and
         (e)   Does not illuminate any wall sign that was not previously
illuminated.
      2.   The installation of a ground mounted changeable copy sign that
complies with Chapter 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.
      3.   The following accessory uses or structures:
         (a)   Electric vehicle (EV) charging stations.
         (b)   Building-mounted solar energy systems.
         (c)   Wireless telecommunication facilities, where such wireless
telecommunication facilities comply with Chapter 14 of this Zoning Ordinance.
         (d)   Outdoor seating and related improvements in the B-2 zoning
district.
      4.   Demolition of buildings or structures, when the demolition activity
does not result in a change that would be defined as a major change. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-4972, 8-1-2022)
5-18-8: REVOCATION:
   (A)   Revocation of an approved planned unit development may be initiated by
the property owner of the property subject to the planned unit development or
by the Village.
      1.   Revocation of a planned unit development is established through the
special use permit procedures of Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   An application for revocation of a planned unit development must be
accompanied with all zoning requests necessary to ensure that the planned unit
development site complies with the conventional zoning regulations of this
Zoning Ordinance. The zoning requests will be reviewed against the Standards
and Review Criteria, as established in Chapter 17 of this Zoning Ordinance, for
each form of relief requested. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 19
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
5-19-1: Village Board
5-19-2: Planning And Zoning Commission
5-19-3: Zoning Administrator
5-19-4: Village Clerk
5-19-5: Violations, Penalties, And Enforcement
5-19-1: VILLAGE BOARD:
The Village Board is responsible for establishing the regulations and
procedures of this Zoning Ordinance, for confirming appointments to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, and carrying out those specific decision-making
duties assigned by this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-19-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
The Planning and Zoning Commission has those powers and duties expressly
identified in this Zoning Ordinance and in Title 2 of the Lisle Village Code.
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-19-3: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   (A)   General Powers and Duties
The Zoning Administrator has primary responsibility for administration of this
Zoning Ordinance, including the following general powers and duties:
      1.   Authority to Enter. Where it is necessary to conduct an inspection
to enforce provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, or where the Zoning
Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure
or upon property a condition that is contrary to or in violation of this Zoning
Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator or Village employee charged with the
enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance is authorized to enter the structure or
property at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by
this Zoning Ordinance, provided that if such structure or property be occupied
that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry be requested. If such
structure or property is unoccupied, the Zoning Administrator shall first make
a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or
control of the structure or property and request entry.
      2.   Ordering discontinuance of any illegal use of land or structures;
      3.   Ordering removal of illegal structures and additions or alterations
thereto;
      4.   Ordering discontinuation of work being done in violation of this
Zoning Ordinance;
      5.   Receiving and processing all applications for permits and
development approvals under this Zoning Ordinance;
      6.   Providing technical assistance and support to the Village Board,
staff, boards and commissions; and
      7.   Exercising other powers and performing other duties as specified or
necessarily implied by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Promulgation of Administrative Rules
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to render interpretations of this Zoning
Ordinance and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the
application of provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Such interpretations,
policies, and procedures shall be compliant with the intent and purpose of this
Zoning Ordinance. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of
waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord.
2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-19-4: VILLAGE CLERK:
The Village Clerk is responsible for:
   (A)   Maintaining copies of this Zoning Ordinance and signed ordinances with
all attachments for reference by the public; and
   (B)   For receiving protest petitions and forwarding them to the Village
Attorney for legal review and appropriate action. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-19-5: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Responsibility for enforcement. The Zoning Administrator has the
primary responsibility of enforcing this Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this Zoning Ordinance, state
law, or federal law, any violation of a provision of this Zoning Ordinance-
including but not limited to all of the following- may be subject to the
remedies and penalties provided for in this Zoning Ordinance and as established
by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
      1.   To use land or structures in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance;
      2.   To erect a structure in any way not consistent with the requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance;
      3.   To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance;
      4.   To fail to maintain a sign in a safe, presentable, and good
structural condition, including the failure to replace defective parts,
painting, repainting, cleaning, and other acts required for sound maintenance
and appearance of a sign;
      5.   To fail to remove any sign that advertises a business no longer
conducted on the premises;
      6.   To engage in the use of a structure or land, the use or installation
of a sign, or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals
under this Zoning Ordinance without obtaining such required permits or
approvals;
      7.   To engage in the use of a structure or land, the use or installation
of a sign, or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals
under this Zoning Ordinance in any way inconsistent with any such permit or
approval or any conditions imposed on the permit or approval;
      8.   To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
Zoning Ordinance or any condition imposed on the permit or approval;
      9.   To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or
otherwise given under this Zoning Ordinance;
      10.   To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under
this Zoning Ordinance; or
      11.   To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation.
   (C)   Continuing Violations
Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of the
violation from the Village constitutes a separate violation of this Zoning
Ordinance.
   (D)   Remedies and Enforcement Powers
The Village has all remedies and enforcement powers allowed by Illinois law,
including the following:
      1.   Stop Work
With or without revoking permits, the Zoning Administrator may stop work on any
structure on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision
of this Zoning Ordinance or of a permit or other form of authorization issued
under this Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   Injunctive Relief
The Village may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in court to stop
any violation of this Zoning Ordinance or of a permit, certificate or other
form of authorization granted under this Zoning Ordinance.
      3.   Confiscation of Signs on Public Property
Any temporary (not installed on concrete pier, footing, or foundation) sign
installed or placed on public property, except in compliance with the
regulations of this Zoning Ordinance is subject to confiscation. In addition to
other remedies and penalties of this Chapter, the Village has the right to
recover from the sign owner or person who placed the sign, the full costs of
sign removal.
      4.   Abatement
The Village may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement,
injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or remove a violation or to
otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they
existed prior to the violation.
      5.   Cumulative Remedies
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this Zoning Ordinance are
cumulative, and the Village may exercise them in any combination or order.
   (E)   Enforcement Procedures
      1.   Non-Emergency Matters
In the case of violations of this Zoning Ordinance that do not constitute an
emergency or require immediate attention, the Zoning Administrator must give
notice of the nature of the violation to the property owner or to any other
person who is party to the agreement, or to any applicant for any relevant
permit, after which the persons receiving notice have 21 days to correct the
violation before further enforcement action may be taken. Notice must be given
in person, by US Mail, or by posting notice on the premises. Notices of
violation must state the nature of the violation and the time period for
compliance and may state the corrective steps necessary and the nature of
subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the situation not be
corrected. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 20
MEASUREMENTS, OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5-20-1: Lot Area, Frontage, And Coverage
5-20-2: Setbacks
5-20-3: Permitted Projections
5-20-4: Building Height
5-20-5: Fence Height
5-20-6: Operational Performance Standards
5-20-7: Definitions
5-20-1: LOT AREA, FRONTAGE, AND COVERAGE:
   (A)   Lot Area. Lot area includes the total land area contained within the
property lines of a lot.
   (B)   Lot Frontage. Lot frontage is measured along the right-of-way line
between opposite-side boundaries of the lot. Lot frontage on cul-de-sac bulbs
is measured at the actual building line. The lot frontage of a lot or parcel
that is legally created or described as extending to the center line of a
street must be measured along the line that denotes the edge or boundary of the
easement established for the street.
   (C)   Lot Coverage. The total area of a lot improved with structures and
impervious surfaces. Lot coverage is expressed as a percentage of the total lot
area. Lot coverage does not include the following:
      1.   Swimming pools and spas
      2.   Decks
      3.   Permeable asphalt, concrete, or paver systems
      4.   Landscape rock beds
      5.   The lot coverage calculation shall be reduced for principal or
accessory buildings improved with green roof systems. The reduction shall be
equal to the total area of the green roof system.
      6.   Public improvements
      7.   The maximum lot coverage calculation for planned unit developments
containing residential uses approved prior to November 6, 2006 shall only
include the principal building, accessory buildings, and driveway
   (D)   Building Coverage. Building coverage is the area of a lot covered by
principal and accessory buildings. Building coverage is expressed as a
percentage of the total lot area. Only building areas beneath a roof are
counted for purposes of measuring building coverage.
      1.   The building coverage calculation shall be reduced for principal or
accessory buildings improved with green roof systems. The reduction shall be
equal to the total area of the green roof system. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-20-2: SETBACKS:
   (A)   Front Street Setbacks
      1.   Measurement. Front street setbacks are measured from the right-of-
way line to the closest point of the building or structure.
      2.   Permitted Obstructions / Encroachments. Unless specifically
authorized by this Ordinance, front street setbacks must be unobstructed from
the ground to the sky.
      3.   Double Frontage Lots. On double-frontage lots, the Zoning
Administrator is authorized to establish which of the frontages constitutes the
front lot line (and is thereby subject to front street setback regulations)
based on factors such as the pattern of front and rear yards on the subject
block, existing limitations on street access, where the building’s “front” door
is located or other reasonable considerations. Only such obstructions permitted
in front street setback may be located in that part of a rear setback adjoining
a street that is equivalent in depth to a required front setback, except for
lots backing to thoroughfares in subdivisions where no-access strips have been
provided on the recorded plat.
      4.   Front Street Exceptions. When existing buildings on one or more
abutting lots are closer to the street property line than the otherwise
required street setback, additions to existing residential buildings or
construction of new residential buildings on the subject lot may comply with
the average street yard depth that exists on the nearest 2 lots on either side
of the subject lot instead of complying with the zoning district’s minimum
street setback requirement.
         (a)    If one or more of the lots required to be included in the
averaging calculation is vacant, the vacant lot will be deemed to have a front
street yard depth equal to the minimum street setback requirement of the
subject zoning district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3061.png]
 
         (b)    Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot
or that are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used
in computing the average.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3059.png]
 
         (c)    When the subject lot is a corner lot, the average street yard
depth will be computed on the basis of the nearest 2 lots with frontage on the
same street as the subject lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3057.png]
 
         (d)   When the subject lot abuts a corner lot with frontage on the
same street, the average street yard depth will be computed on the basis of the
abutting corner lot and the nearest 2 lots with frontage on the same street as
the subject lot.
   (B)   Side Street Setbacks
      1.   Measurement. Side street setbacks are measured from the right-of-way
line to the closest point of the building or structure.
      2.   Permitted Obstructions / Encroachments. Unless specifically
authorized by this Ordinance, side street setbacks must be unobstructed from
the ground to the sky.
      3.   The zoning administrator is authorized to establish which of the
frontages constitutes the side street (and is thereby subject to side street
setback regulations) based on factors such as the pattern of front yards on the
subject blockface, existing limitations on street access, where the building’s
“front” door is located or other reasonable considerations.
   (C)   Rear Setbacks
      1.   Measurement. Rear setbacks are measured from the rear property line
to the closest point of the building or structure.
         (a)   In subdivisions improved with townhouses, duplexes, or multi-
unit buildings, or in cases in which individual fee simple lots are surrounded
by common area, the rear setback shall be measured to the perimeter of the
subdivision.
      2.   Permitted Obstructions / Encroachments. Unless specifically
authorized by this Ordinance, rear setbacks must be unobstructed from the
ground to the sky.
      3.   Corner Lots. No rear setback is required on corner lots. A corner
lot shall have a front street, side street, and two side setbacks.
   (D)   Side Setbacks
   1.   Measurement. Side setbacks are measured from the interior or side lot
line to the closest point of the building.
      (a)   In subdivisions improved with townhouses, duplexes, or multi-unit
buildings, or in cases in which individual fee simple lots are surrounded by
common area, the side setback shall be measured to the perimeter of the
subdivision.
   2.   Permitted Obstructions / Encroachments. Unless specifically authorized
by this Ordinance, side setbacks must be unobstructed from the ground to the
sky. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-20-3: PERMITTED PROJECTIONS:
The following projections are allowed to encroach into required setbacks to the
extent indicated in the following table. These structures and building features
are not subject to minimum lot area or lot frontage regulations.
Projection Front / Side Street Side Rear
Projection                                        Front / Side Street Side Rear
Awnings, canopies, light shelves, and solar       Yes                 No   Yes
shading devices projecting not more than 3 feet.
Awnings, canopies, light shelves, and solar       Yes                 Yes  Yes
shading devices projecting not more than 2 feet
Balconies                                         Yes                 No   Yes
Bay windows projecting not more than 3 feet.      Yes                 No   Yes
Bay windows projecting not more than 2 feet       Yes                 Yes  Yes
Breezeways                                        No                  No   Yes
Chimneys and flues projecting not more than 3     Yes                 No   Yes
feet.
Chimneys and flues projecting not more than 2     Yes                 Yes  Yes
feet
Eaves, gutters, and roof overhangs projecting not Yes                 No   Yes
more than 3 feet.
Eaves, gutters, and roof overhangs projecting not Yes                 Yes  Yes
more than 2 feet.
Floor decks projecting not more than 2 feet.      Yes                 Yes  Yes
Geothermal pumps and associated equipment up to 3 Yes                 Yes  Yes
feet in height
Insulation added to the exterior wall of a        Yes                 Yes  Yes
building.
Open, roofed porches, to a distance of 6 feet and
not closer than 20 feet from the front street     Yes                 No   No
property line
Sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, and    Yes                 Yes  Yes
similar architectural features.
Air conditioner units, back-up generators, and    No                  Yes  Yes
similar mechanical equipment.
Step and stairs providing access to a building    Yes                 Yes  Yes
Service walkways                                  Yes                 Yes  Yes
Window wells                                      No                  Yes  Yes
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-20-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   (A)   Measurement. Building height is measured as vertical distance from
grade to the highest point of coping of a flat roof (or roof surface when
parapet walls are provided) or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3069.png]
 
      1.   Exceptions. The following are not counted in the measurement of
building height and may exceed otherwise stated maximum height limits:
         (a)   Chimneys, parapet walls, skylights, steeples, cupolas, domes,
spires, steeples, false mansards, parapet walls, smokestacks, cooling towers,
elevator bulkheads, scenery lofts, mechanical appurtenances or penthouses to
house mechanical appurtenances.
         (b)   Buildings elevated to comply with flood-proofing requirements
may exceed otherwise state maximum height limits. (Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021;
amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
5-20-5: FENCE HEIGHT:
   (A)   Measurement. Fence height is measured as vertical distance from the
adjacent grade to the highest point of the fence board or panel.
      1.   When calculating fence height, fence posts or end caps are not
included in the total height if the fence post or end cap is 6 inches or less.
      2.   All maximum fence heights have an allowance of 2 inches in excess of
the codified maximum fence height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a18bb67d03b1c3026de0206dbf4b9f126458bb7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3067.png]
 
(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021)
5-20-6: OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   (A)   General
      1.   Applicability. The operational performance standards of this Section
apply to all uses in all zoning districts.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to require that uses provide
a certificate from a scientific testing laboratory certifying compliance with
the standards of this Section.
   (B)   Noise. The decibels generated from a use shall not exceed the exterior
noise limitations set forth in Table 1 of this Section as measured at the
property line of the parcel from which the noise is generated.
      1.   Measurement of Noise. Noise shall be measured at the property line
of the parcel from which the noise is generated. Noise shall be muffled so as
not to become violative of applicable standards due to intermittence, beat
frequency, shrillness, or intensity. The sound pressure level shall be measured
with a sound level meter and an octave band analyzer that conforms to ANSI
S1.4-1983 (American national standards institute) specifications, or any
successor standard promulgated by ANSI. Preferred frequencies for acoustical
measurements shall be used.
   TABLE 1
 
Land Use       7:00 a.m. to 6:59 p.m. (Daytime) 7:00 p.m. to 6:59 a.m.
                                                (Nighttime)
Residential    55 dBA                           50 dBA
Nonresidential 65 dBA                           55 dBA
 
      2.   Exceptions
         (a)   Nighttime building or construction operations (including
construction related noises, such as the delivery of equipment or material, or
the operation of tools, machinery, or apparatus) on private property between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. when such activity is a minimum of 1,000
feet from a residential use.
         (b)   Daytime building or construction operations and performance of
landscape maintenance between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:59 p.m.
         (c)   Emergency public utility repairs.
         (d)   Disaster recovery operations.
         (e)   Valves, warning devices, aircraft and railroads, emergency
generators, snowplowing, mosquito abatement, and emergency equipment/vehicles
used only during times of emergency.
         (f)   Church bells, chimes, and carillons.
         (g)   Substations for public utilities.
         (h)   The authorized use of recreational facilities within the
property of schools, colleges, and public parks between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m.
         (i)   Special events authorized by the Village.
         (j)   The maintenance of public or private golf courses.
   (C)   Odors. At a point along or outside any property line, the emission of
odorous matter in such quantity as to be offensive or in excess of the odor
threshold shall not be permitted.
      1.   Measurement of Odors. In accordance with Title 35, Subtitle B,
Chapter 1, Part 245 of the Illinois Administrative Code, as amended.
   (D)   Fire and Explosion Hazards. Materials that present potential fire and
explosion hazards must be transported, stored and used only in conformance with
all applicable federal, state, county and local regulations.
   (E)   Vibration. It is a violation of this Zoning Ordinance if any earthborn
vibration caused by the operation of any use is detectable at any point off the
lot on which the use is located.
   (F)   Smoke and Particulate Matter
      1.   Measurement of Smoke and Particulate Matter shall be taken from the
point of emission.
         (a)   The emission of particulate matter containing more than five
percent (5%) by weight, of particles having a particle diameter larger than
forty-four (44) microns, is prohibited.
         (b)   The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources
within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one-half (½)
pound per acre of lot size during any one hour.
         (c)   Smoke not darker or more opaque than no. 0 on the Ringelmann
smoke chart (as published by the United States Bureau of Mines) may be emitted
except that smoke not darker or more opaque than no. 1 on said chart may be
emitted for periods not longer than four (4) minutes in any thirty (30)
minutes. These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply
to visible smoke of a different color but with an equivalent apparent opacity.
         (d)    Dust or other types of air pollution borne by the wind from
such sources as storage areas, trash enclosures, and yards within the
boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
screening, paving, oiling, wetting, or other acceptable means. (Ord. 2021-4931,
11-15-2021)
5-20-7: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Use definitions. See Chapter 7 of this Ordinance for use-related
definitions.
   (B)   General rules of language. See Section Chapter 1 of this Ordinance for
information about general use of language and ordinance construction.
   (C)   General definitions. The words and terms expressly defined in this
section have the specific meanings assigned, unless the context expressly
indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined have their
common dictionary meaning.
ABUT or        To touch or to share a contiguous boundary or border.
ABUTTING:
ACCESSORY      See ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE.
BUILDING:
               An accessory structure or accessory use is one that:
ACCESSORY      a.   Is subordinate to the principal building or principal use in terms of area and
STRUCTURE OR   function;
USE:           b.   Is customarily found in association with the principal use or principal
               building.
ADJACENT:      Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
ADJOIN or      Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.
ADJOINING:
AGENT:         A person duly authorized to act on behalf of the subject property owner.
               A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a
ALLEY:         means of secondary access to abutting property. Frontage on an alley may not be
               counted toward satisfying the requirements of this zoning ordinance related to
               frontage on a dedicated street.
               Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency
ANTENNA:       signals used in the provision of wireless communications services. An antenna
               includes any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television
               communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
ANTENNA        Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod, or other freestanding structure which
SUPPORT        supports an antenna. For purposes of this ordinance, a building is not an antenna
STRUCTURE:     support structure.
APPLICANT:     Any authorized person, firm, corporation or agency who submits an application.
AQUATIC        A facility that is designed for free-form aquatic play and recreation. The
RECREATION     facilities may include, but are not limited to, wave or surf action pools, leisure
FACILITIES:    rivers, sand bottom pools, vortex pools, activity pools, inner tube rides, body
               slides, and interactive play attractions.
               A roof-like structure typically made of cloth, metal or other material attached to a
AWNING:        frame that extends from and is supported by a building. Awnings are typically
               erected over a window, doorway or building front and they may be raised or retracted
               to a position adjacent to the building.
BASEMENT:      The part of a building that is wholly or partly below ground level.
BERM:          An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen views from a less
               intensive use to a more intensive use, and/or decrease noise.
               A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences
BUFFER:        or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and screen incompatible land uses from
               each other.
BUILDING:      A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or
               enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING,      See NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE in Chapter 10 of this Zoning Ordinance.
NONCONFORMING:
               A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measured six
CALIPER:       inches above natural ground for trees having calipers less than or equal to six
               inches diameter and measured 12 inches above grade for tree calipers greater than
               six inches diameter.
CERTIFY or     Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests where required have been
CERTIFICATION: performed and that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this Zoning
               Ordinance.
COLLOCATE OR   To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a wireless
COLLOCATION:   telecommunications facilities on or adjacent to an existing antenna support
               structure or utility pole.
COMMERCIAL     A motor vehicle that is used or intended to be used primarily for commercial
MOTOR VEHICLE: purposes.
CORNER LOT:    See LOT, CORNER.
DECIDUOUS:     A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
               The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units in a development
DENSITY:       by the gross area of the tract of land upon which the dwelling units are located.
               Dedicated streets are counted in the calculation of gross density.
               Any human change to land, including:
               a.   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any
               addition to a building.
               b.   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or
               similar projects.
DEVELOPMENT:   c.   Construction or erection of, grading, excavating, paving, or other alterations
               of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
               DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such
               as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no increase in elevation, or
               gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling,
               grading, or construction of levees.
DIAMETER AT
BREAST HEIGHT  The diameter of a tree measured at a point 4.5' above grade.
(DBH):
DISABLED or    A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life
DISABILITY:    activities.
DRIP LINE:     The outer perimeter of the largest branches or limbs of a tree, as measured on the
               ground around the base of the tree.
               That portion of a lot used to provide access from the street to a place of residence
DRIVEWAY:      or business and which has been graded and surfaced with concrete, or other hard and
               dustless material.
DWELLING:      A building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential
               occupancy.
               One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by a single household for
DWELLING UNIT: living purposes and having its own permanently installed cooking and sanitary
               facilities.
               Any vehicle that is licensed and registered for operation on public and private
ELECTRIC       highways, roads, and streets; either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy
VEHICLE (EV):  from the grid or an off-board source, that is stored on-board via a battery.
               “Electric vehicle” includes: battery electric vehicles; and plug-in hybrid electric
               vehicles.
ELECTRIC       Any electric vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy from an off-
VEHICLE,       board source that is stored in the vehicle’s batteries and that produces zero
BATTERY:       tailpipe emissions or pollution when stationary or operating.
               An electric vehicle that contains an internal combustion engine and also allows
ELECTRIC       power to be delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor; charges its battery
VEHICLE, PLUG- primarily by connecting to the grid or other off-board electrical source; may
IN HYBRID:     additionally be able to sustain battery charge using an on-board internal-
               combustion-driven generator; and has the ability to travel powered by electricity.
ELECTRIC
VEHICLE (EV)   A public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station
CHARGING       equipment.
STATION:
ELECTRIC       An EV charging station that is not available for use by the general public. Examples
VEHICLE        include electric vehicle charging stations that serve residential homeowners or
CHARGING       renters, executive parking areas, designated employee parking areas and fleet
STATION,       parking areas.
PRIVATE:
ELECTRIC
VEHICLE        An EV charging station that is accessible to and available for use by the general
CHARGING       public.
STATION,
PUBLIC:
ELECTRIC       Any parking space that is clearly identified to be used exclusively for the parking
VEHICLE        of an electric vehicle.
PARKING SPACE:
EVERGREEN:     A plant with foliage that persists and remains green year-round.
               All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to,
               track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment
               enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables,
FACILITY:      small wireless facilities, as defined in this chapter, and appurtenances thereto)
               located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under
               this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term “facility” shall not include
               any facility owned or operated by the Village.
               The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at
FACILITY       grade to the highest point of the facility even if said highest point is an antenna.
HEIGHT:        If the facility is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and
               lowest grades shall be used in calculating the facility height.
               Any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry, or other material erected to
FENCE:         create a barrier for the purpose of assuring privacy, protection, screening, or
               restraining animals.
               Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited,
FILL:          placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by man to a new
               location and include the conditions resulting from fill activities.
FRONTAGE:      A lot line or the length of a lot line that is also the line of any public street
               right-of- way other than an alley.
               Equipment that transfers thermal energy to and/or from the ground for the purposes
GEOTHERMAL     of heating and/or cooling a building. Geothermal energy systems consists of a
ENERGY SYSTEM: closed-loop system of pipes filled with liquid, a heat exchanger and heat pump. This
               includes vertical closed loop, horizontal closed loop and water body closed loop
               systems.
GRADE:         The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the building or
               structure.
HEIGHT OF
ELECTRIC-      The height above grade of the system including the fixed portion of the tower,
GENERATING     generating unit, and the highest vertical extend of any blades or rotors.
WIND DEVICE:
HEIGHT (OF     See Section
BUILDING):     5-20-4(A) of this Zoning Ordinance.
HOME           Any ongoing activity conducted on the property with the intent to gain income
OCCUPATION:    whether it be the primary source of income or secondary source of income and
               incidental to the primary use of the property as residential.
               One or more related persons occupying a premises and living together as a single
               housekeeping unit, provided, however, that:
               1.   No housekeeping unit consisting of all unrelated persons may exceed 3 persons.
               2.   No housekeeping unit consisting of related and unrelated persons may consist of
HOUSEHOLD:     more than the related family and no more than 2 other unrelated persons.
               For the purpose of this definition of “household,” the phrase “living together as a
               single housekeeping unit” means that all members of the household share common
               meals, that all members have the equal right to use, in common with each other, the
               areas customarily considered to be common area in a dwelling unit, including ingress
               and egress, and that all members share customary household obligations.
               Any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines,
LANDSCAPING:   hedges, or trees) and nonliving landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand,
               mulch, walls, fences, or decorative paving materials).
               A use, structure, lot or sign (as the context indicates) that was established in
LAWFULLY       conformance with all applicable zoning regulations in effect at the time of its
ESTABLISHED:   establishment or which becomes lawful after its establishment due to an amendment to
               zoning regulations.
LIGHT          Light that is emitted into an unintended area.
TRESPASS:
               A legally divided area or portion of land under a single ownership or control that
LOT:           is intended to be occupied by a use or group of uses, and/or a principal building or
               structure.
LOT AREA:      See Section
               5-20-1(A).
               A lot at the intersection of two streets or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving
LOT, CORNER:   street and any two chords of which form an angle of 120 degrees or less measured on
               the lot side.
LOT, DOUBLE    A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two or more streets. Note: An alley
FRONTAGE:      is not considered a street for purposes relating to determination of a double
               frontage lot.
LOT FRONTAGE:  See Section
               5-20-1(B).
LOT LINE:      An imaginary line at the edge or boundary of a zoning lot or a line at the boundary
               of a lot of record.
LOT LINE,      The property line abutting or within a street that is legally accessible for ingress
FRONT STREET:  and egress to the property. On a corner lot, lot lines along streets are considered
               to be front street lot lines.
LOT LINE,      A lot line shared with another lot other than a street or rear lot line.
INTERIOR:
LOT LINE,      The lot line most nearly parallel to and most removed from the street lot line.
REAR:
LOT LINE,      Lot lines other than street or rear lot lines.
SIDE:
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been legally recorded or
               a parcel of land with a legally recorded deed in accordance with the Plat Act.
LOT, THROUGH:  See LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.
               A tract of land, composed of one or more recorded lots or a parcel of land described
               by metes and bounds, that is of sufficient size to meet the minimum district
               requirements of this Zoning Ordinance concerning use, coverage, width, area,
LOT, ZONING:   setbacks, or other district requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and having
               frontage on an improved public street, and which is designated by its owner or
               developer as a tract of land to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under
               single ownership or control. A “zoning lot” may or may not coincide with the
               definition of a “lot of record.”
               A factory-built, single- household structure that is manufactured under the
MOBILE HOME:   authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5401, the National Manufactured Home Construction and
               Safety Standards Act.
NONCONFORMITY: Any nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming structure, nonconforming
               development feature or nonconforming sign.
NONRESIDENTIAL Any business, office, light industrial / business park, or college university zoning
ZONING         district.
DISTRICT:
NUDE:          Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device, costume, or covering that
               gives the appearance of or simulates any specified anatomical areas.
NUISANCE:      A condition that interferes with the use or enjoyment of another’s property, or that
               affects the health, safety, welfare or comfort of the public at large.
               Uses of land that do not involve buildings or that involve buildings that are
OPEN-AIR USES: incidental and accessory to the open-air use of the lot. Typical examples include
               storage yards, vehicle impound yards, auto salvage uses.
OUTDOOR        The keeping of any inventory, goods, material, machinery, equipment or merchandise,
STORAGE:       including raw, semi-finished and finished materials, and vehicles weighing more than
               8,000 pounds for any period of time outside of an enclosed building.
PARAPET or     A wall-like barrier at the edge of a roof that acts as a vertical extension of an
PARAPET WALL:  exterior building wall extending above the roof height of the building. Parapets may
               serve as a safety or architectural feature.
               Any individual, firm, or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois and
PERSON:        its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its
               agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any
               of the foregoing.
PLANNED UNIT   A development approved in accordance with the planned unit development procedures of
DEVELOPMENT:   Chapter 18 of this Zoning Ordinance or the planned unit development procedures in
               effect at the time the development was approved.
PORCH:         A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure
               and commonly open to the weather in part.
PRINCIPAL      A building or combination of buildings of chief importance or function on a lot. In
BUILDING:      general, the principal use is carried out in a principal building.
               An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on a lot. One of the
PRINCIPAL USE: main purposes for which the land, buildings or structures are intended, designed, or
               ordinarily used.
PROPERTY LINE: See LOT LINE.
PUBLIC WAY:    Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare.
RAILROAD       Strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not
RIGHT-OF-WAY:  including freight depots, stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car
               or locomotive shops, or car yards.
RENEWABLE      Energy from resources that are quickly replenished, such as sunlight, wind, water,
ENERGY:        biomass, geothermal resources.
ROTOR:         Rotating member of the small wind energy system that actually captures the wind. A
               typical rotor has two or three blades that spin on a horizontal axis.
RUNOFF:        The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing
               over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
SCREENING:     A structure or evergreen vegetation maintained for the purpose of concealing from
               view the area behind the structure or evergreen vegetation.
               Exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque covering, any portion of the female
               breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the buttocks. This definition
SEMI-NUDE:     shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include
               any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse,
               shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided that the areola is not
               exposed in whole or in part.
SETBACK:       Open space areas required between buildings and lot lines. See Section
               5-20-2 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SHADE TREE:    Deciduous trees planted primarily for their high crown of foliage or overhead
               canopy.
SHOOTING       A facility designed for the purpose of providing a place for the discharge of
RANGE:         various types of firearms.
SHRUB:         A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the
               ground, or small branches near the ground. May be deciduous or evergreen.
SITE:          A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is
               performed as a single unified operation.
SITE           Altering terrain and/or vegetation and construction improvements.
DEVELOPMENT:
               A wireless telecommunications facility that meets both of the following
               qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
               (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
               the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure
SMALL WIRELESS of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached
FACILITY:      directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than
               twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary
               equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter,
               concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures,
               grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs
               for the connection of power and other services.
SOLAR ENERGY   A system intended to convert solar energy into thermal, mechanical or electrical
SYSTEM:        energy.
               A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building,
SOLAR ENERGY   rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an
SYSTEM,        architectural or structural part of the building. Building-integrated systems
BUILDING -     include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are
INTEGRATED:    contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and similar
               architectural components.
SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEM,        A solar energy system that is mounted on the façade or roof of either a principal or
BUILDING -     accessory building.
MOUNTED:
SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEM,        A solar energy system mounted on the ground and not attached to any other structure
GROUND-        other than structural supports.
MOUNTED:
               A product intended for the immersion of persons in temperature-controlled water
SPA:           circulated in a closed system, and not intended to be drained and filled with each
               use.
               The human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair,
               any portion of the areola of the female breast if less than fully and opaquely
SPECIFIED      covered; and the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely
ANATOMICAL     covered by an opaque covering. In determining whether any of the foregoing portions
AREA:          of the anatomy are fully and opaquely covered, coverage by makeup, paint, or similar
               matter applied directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and
               opaquely covered.
               Any of the following, whether actual or simulated:
               1.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area, perineum,
               anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female breasts, regardless of
               whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a state of nudity or in a state of
               semi nudity;
               2.   The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by the use of
SPECIFIED      any portion of manipulator’s body, whether covered or uncovered, or by any device,
SEXUAL         if the person performing the manipulation or the person receiving the manipulation
ACTIVITIES:    is in a state of nudity or semi nudity;
               3.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual, including,
               without limitation, intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, analingus, masturbation,
               bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism, and any other act
               intended to cause sexual arousal;
               4.   Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or with the
               intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
STREET:        All property dedicated or intended for public highway, freeway, or roadway purposes
               or subject to public easements.
STRUCTURE:     The results of a human change to the land constructed on or below the ground.
               Any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for
SWIMMING POOL: swimming or wading, having a depth of two feet or more at any point. This definition
               includes in-ground, above and on-ground swimming pools but does not include hot
               tubs, spas, or other structures for recreational bathing.
TREE:          A large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and
               numerous branches. May be classified as shade, ornamental or evergreen.
USE:           The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended,
               or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased.
USE,           A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts,
PERMITTED:     provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards
               (if any) of such districts.
USE,           The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory
PRINCIPAL:     use. A principal use may be either a permitted use or a special use.
VACANT:        Land on which there are no structures or only structures that are secondary to the
               use or maintenance of the land itself.
VEHICLE:       See VEHICLE, MOTOR.
VEHICLE,       Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the
COMMERCIAL:    furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire.
VEHICLE,       Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle,
MOTOR:         tractor-trailer, truck-trailer, trailer or semitrailer propelled or drawn by
               mechanical power.
               A travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, camper shell, motor home, tent
VEHICLE,       trailer, boat, houseboat, boat trailer, snowmobile, personal watercraft, or similar
RECREATIONAL:  vehicle. Camper shells that are attached to a pickup truck are not considered a
               recreational vehicle.
VEHICLE FUELS, Electricity, CNG (compressed natural gas), LNG (liquefied natural gas), LPG
ALTERNATIVE:   (liquefied petroleum gas), and hydrogen.
VEHICLE FUELS, Gasoline and diesel fuel.
CONVENTIONAL:
               That part of the signal distribution system used or operated by a telecommunications
WIRELESS TELE- carrier or AM broadcast station under a license from the FCC consisting of one or
COMMUNICATIONS more antennas; an antenna support structure and the hardware by which antennas are
FACILITY:      attached; equipment housing; or ancillary equipment such as signal transmission
               cables and miscellaneous hardware.
WOODY PLANT:   A plant that uses wood as part of its structural support.
YARD:          The actual (as opposed to “required”) horizontal distance that exists between a
               principal building and a property line. See also SETBACK.
ZONING         The Development Services Director or individual designated by the Development
ADMINISTRATOR: Services Director.(Ord. 2021-4931, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-5042, 12-18-2023)
 
TITLE 6
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LEGAL FRAMEWORK
SECTION:
6-1-1: Official Name
6-1-2: Purpose
6-1-3: Legal Authority
6-1-4: Effective Date
6-1-5: Adoption
6-1-6: Territorial Limits Of Regulations
6-1-7: Minimum Requirements
6-1-8: Subdivision Plat Required
6-1-9: Consolidation Plat Required
6-1-10: Platted Setbacks And Building Lines
6-1-11:    Conflicting Provisions
6-1-12:    Rules Of Language And Construction
6-1-13:    Transitional Provisions
6-1-14:    Severability
6-1-1: OFFICIAL NAME:
   The official name of this document (Title 6) is the "Subdivision Ordinance
of the Village of Lisle, Illinois." For convenience, it is referred to
throughout this title as the "Subdivision Ordinance."
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-2: PURPOSE:
   This Subdivision Ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To establish the requirements and standards regulating the subdivision
and platting of land within the corporate limits and up to a distance of one
and one-half (1 ½) miles of its corporate limits.
   (B)   For the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare of the community.
   (C)   To provide for the orderly and harmonious development of the Village
and the surrounding areas within the incorporated area of the Village and up to
a distance of one and one-half (1 ½) miles of its corporate limits.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-3: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
   This Subdivision Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and
limitations imposed by Illinois law, including 65 ILCS 5/11-12-5 and 765 ILCS
205/1 et. seq.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-4: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   The provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance become effective on November 1,
2024, except as otherwise expressly stated.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-5: ADOPTION:
   Adoption of Village of Lisle Design Manual: It is hereby adopted by the
Village for the purpose of establishing uniform engineering practices,
specifications, and design standards for public and private improvements, that
certain manual known as the Village of Lisle Design Manual being particularly
the May 10, 2023 edition thereof, as may be amended from time to time by the
Village Engineer, of which one copy has been and now is filed in the Office of
the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-6: TERRITORIAL LIMITS OF REGULATIONS:
   This title applies to all property located within the incorporated area of
the village and up to a distance of one and one-half (1 ½) miles of its
corporate limits.
   Should the Village enter into a boundary agreement with any other
municipality, then the terms and provisions of this title shall apply within
such adjacent unincorporated areas as provided in any applicable boundary
agreement.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-7: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance are the minimum
requirements deemed necessary to carry out the subdivision ordinance's stated
purposes.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance, all
uses, development, and construction activities must comply with all other
applicable ordinances, laws and regulations of the Village.
   (C)   All references in this Subdivision Ordinance to other governmental
regulations are for informational purposes only and do not necessarily
constitute a complete list of other applicable regulations. These references do
not imply responsibility for the Village to enforce regulations imposed by
other government authorities.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-8: SUBDIVISION PLAT REQUIRED:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to divide land into two or more parts
unless by subdivision plat prepared in accordance with this Ordinance;
provided, however, that the following shall not be considered a subdivision and
shall be exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance:
   (A)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5)
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
   (B)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one (1) acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
   (C)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land;
   (D)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe
lines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
   (E)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
   (F)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
   (G)   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
   (H)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of
land existing on July 17, 1959 and not involving any new streets or easements
of access;
   (I)   The sale of a single lot of less than five (5) acres from a larger
tract when a survey is made by an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor; provided,
that this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the
same larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of
the larger tract on October 1, 1973, and provided also that this exemption does
not invalidate any local requirements applicable to the subdivision of land;
   (J)   The preparation of a plat for wind energy devices under Section 10-620
of the Property Tax Code.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-9: CONSOLIDATION PLAT REQUIRED:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consolidate two (2) or more parcels
into either one platted lot or multiple platted lots that are fewer in number
than the initial lots of real property unless by consolidation plat prepared in
accordance with this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-10: PLATTED SETBACKS AND BUILDING LINES:
   All building and setback lines shown on plats of subdivision recorded after
June 3, 1958 shall be presumed to be reflective of the Village Board's intent.
   (A)   Where a platted building or setback line is in conflict with the
minimum setback provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the more restrictive
requirement shall apply.
      1.   Relief: Property owners may seek relief from a platted building or
setback line in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Where a platted building or setback line is the same as the
minimum setback for a subject property pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance, the
property owner shall only be required to seek approval of a variance to the
Zoning Ordinance and shall not be required to obtain approval of a platted
setback waiver as prescribed herein.
         (b)   Where a platted building or setback line is greater than the
minimum setback for a subject property pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance, the
property owner shall be required to seek approval of a waiver to the
subdivision regulations, which shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 3
of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-11: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Conflict with State or Federal Regulations: If the provisions of this
Subdivision Ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state or federal
government, the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by
law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent
controls.
   (B)   Conflict with Other Village Regulations: If the provisions of this
Subdivision Ordinance are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict
with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the
Village, the more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly
stated. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent
controls.
   (C)   Conflict with Private Agreements: This Subdivision Ordinance is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed
restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of
this Subdivision Ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by an
agreement or covenant among private parties, the provisions of this Subdivision
Ordinance govern.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-12: RULES OF LANGUAGE AND CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Meanings and Intent: The language of this Subdivision Ordinance must
be read literally. Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Words
and terms expressly defined in this Subdivision Ordinance have the specific
meanings assigned unless the context indicates another meaning. General usage
terms that are not expressly defined in this Subdivision Ordinance have the
meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Dictionary.
   (B)   Public Officials and Agencies: All employees, public officials, bodies
and agencies to which references are made are those of the Village of Lisle
unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (C)   Computation of Time:
      1.   References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly
stated. References to "business days" are references to regular Village
government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by
Village government.
      2.   The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by excluding
the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday
or holiday observed by Village government, that day is excluded and the last
would be deemed to be the following day.
      3.   A day concludes at the close of business of Village Hall and any
materials received after that time will be considered to have been received the
following day.
   (D)   Tenses and Usage:
      1.   Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also
true.
      2.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The
reverse is also true.
      3.   The words "must," "will," and "shall" are mandatory.
      4.   The words "should", "may" are advisory, not mandatory or required.
      5.   When used with numbers, "up to x," "not more than x" and "a maximum
of x" all include "x."
      6.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust company or corporation, as well as an individual.
      7.   The words "used" and "occupied" include "intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied."
   (E)   Conjunctions: Unless the context otherwise expressly indicates,
conjunctions have the following meanings:
      1.   "and" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
      2.   "or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
   (F)   Headings and Illustrations: Headings and illustrations are provided
for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any
provision of this Subdivision Ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning
or implication between the text of this Subdivision Ordinance and any heading,
drawing, table, figure or illustration, the text governs.
   (G)   Current Versions: All references in this Subdivision Ordinance to
other Village, state or federal regulations refer to the most current version
of those regulations in effect at the time of interpretation.
   (H)   Lists and Examples: Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of
items or examples that use "including," "such as," or similar terms are
intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive
lists of all possibilities.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-13: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Complete applications that are pending approval before the effective
date of this Subdivision Ordinance must be reviewed and approved in accordance
with the ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date. Incomplete
applications filed before the effective date will not be reviewed until they
are complete. Once complete, the application must be reviewed and approved in
accordance with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time that the
application is deemed complete.
   (B)   Any development for which a preliminary or final plat was approved
before the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance, may be completed in
conformance with the approved plat and other applicable permits and conditions
applicable at the time the original plat was approved, even if the development
does not fully comply with provisions of this Ordinance. If construction is not
commenced and diligently pursued within the time allowed under the original
plat approval or any extension granted, then the development must be
constructed, completed and occupied only in accordance with the standards of
this Ordinance.
   (C)   All applications completed on or after the effective date, must be
reviewed under the terms of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-1-14: SEVERABILITY:
   If any portion of this Subdivision Ordinance is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion is to be
deemed severed from the subdivision ordinance and in no way affects or
diminishes the validity of the remainder of the subdivision ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Village Board
6-2-2: Planning And Zoning Commission
6-2-3: Zoning Administrator
6-2-4: Village Engineer
6-2-5: Village Clerk
6-2-6: Violations, Penalties, And Enforcement
6-2-1: VILLAGE BOARD:
   The Village Board is responsible for establishing the regulations and
procedures of this Subdivision Ordinance and has those powers and duties
expressly identified in this Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-2-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   The Planning and Zoning Commission has those powers and duties expressly
identified in this Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-2-3: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   (A)   General Powers and Duties: The Zoning Administrator has primary
responsibility for administration of this Subdivision Ordinance, including the
following general powers and duties:
      1.   Receiving and processing all applications under this Subdivision
Ordinance.
      2.   Providing technical assistance and support to the Village Board,
staff, boards and commissions; and
      3.   Exercising other powers and performing other duties as specified or
necessarily implied by the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance.
   (B)   Promulgation of Administrative Rules: The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to render interpretations of this Subdivision Ordinance and to adopt
policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of provisions of
this Subdivision Ordinance. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures
shall be compliant with the intent and purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance.
Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided for in this Subdivision Ordinance.  
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-2-4: VILLAGE ENGINEER:
   (A)   General Power and Duties: The Village Engineer shall be primarily
responsible for review and approval of engineering documents and shall have the
following powers and duties:
      1.   Providing technical assistance and support to the Village Board,
staff, boards and commissions.
      2.   Exercising other powers and performing other duties as specified or
necessarily implied by the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-2-5: VILLAGE CLERK:
   General Powers and Duties: The Village Clerk shall have the responsibility
to maintain copies of this Subdivision Ordinance and signed ordinances with all
attachments for reference by the public.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-2-6: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Responsibility for enforcement: The Zoning Administrator has the
primary responsibility of enforcing this Subdivision Ordinance.
   (B)   Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this Subdivision Ordinance,
state law, or federal law, any violation of a provision of this Subdivision
Ordinance-including but not limited to all of the following-may be subject to
the remedies and penalties provided for in this Subdivision Ordinance.
      1.   To subdivide, resubdivide, consolidate, or otherwise adjust lot
lines of a parcel in any way not consistent with the requirements of this
Subdivision Ordinance:
      2.   To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
Subdivision Ordinance or any condition imposed on the permit or approval;
      3.   To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under
this Subdivision Ordinance; or
      4.   To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation.
   (C)   Continuing Violations: A separate offense shall be deemed committed
for each and every day during which a violation continues or is permitted to
exist.
   (D)   Remedies and Enforcement Powers: The Village has all remedies and
enforcement powers allowed by Illinois law, including the following:
      1.   Stop Work: With or without revoking permits, the Zoning
Administrator may stop work on any structure on any land on which there is an
uncorrected violation of a provision of this Subdivision Ordinance or of a
permit or other form of authorization issued under this Subdivision Ordinance.
      2.   Injunctive Relief: The Village may seek an injunction or other
equitable relief before a court of competent jurisdiction to stop any violation
of this Subdivision Ordinance or of a permit, certificate or other form of
authorization granted under this Subdivision Ordinance.
      3.   Abatement: The Village may seek a court order in the nature of
mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the
condition that existed prior to the violation.
      4.   Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this Subdivision
Ordinance shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
for each and every day during which a violation continues or is permitted to
exist.
   (E)   Cumulative Remedies: The remedies and enforcement powers established
in this Subdivision Ordinance are cumulative, and the Village may exercise them
in any combination or order.
   (F)   Enforcement Procedures:
      1.   Non-Emergency Matters: In the case of violations of this Subdivision
Ordinance that do not constitute an emergency or require immediate attention,
the Zoning Administrator must give notice of the nature of the violation to the
property owner or to any other person who is party to the agreement, or to any
applicant for any relevant permit, after which the persons receiving notice
have 21 days form the postmark date to correct the violation before further
enforcement action may be taken. Notice must be given in person, by US Mail, or
by posting notice on the premises. Notices of violation must state the nature
of the violation and the time period for compliance and may state the
corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and
enforcement actions should the situation not be corrected.
      2.   Emergency Matters: In the case of violations of this Subdivision
Ordinance that constitute an emergency situation as a result of public health
or safety concerns or violations that will create increased problems or costs
if not remedied immediately, the Village may use the enforcement powers
available under this Subdivision Ordinance without prior notice, but the Zoning
Administrator must attempt to give notice simultaneously with beginning
enforcement action. Notice may be provided to the property owner, to any other
person who is party to the agreement, and to applicants for any relevant
permit.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 3
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Applicability
6-3-2: Review And Decision Making Authority
6-3-3: Applications And Fees
6-3-4: Public Hearings
6-3-5: Required Notices
6-3-6: Required Time-Frames For Action
6-3-7: Preliminary Plat Of Subdivision
6-3-8: Final Plat Of Subdivision
6-3-9: Exterritorial Review - County Plat
6-3-10: Plat Of Consolidation
6-3-11:    Waivers And Modifications
6-3-12:    Dedication Or Vacation Of Village Easement
6-3-13:    Dedication Or Vacation Of Village Right-Of-Way
6-3-14:    Village Easement Encroachment License
6-3-15:    Appeals Of Administrative Determinations
6-3-16:    Text Amendments
6-3-1: APPLICABILITY:
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to all of the procedures in this
Subdivision Ordinance unless otherwise expressly stated.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-2: REVIEW AND DECISION MAKING AUTHORITY:
   The following table provides a summary of the development review and
approval procedures of this Subdivision Ordinance. In the event of conflict
between this table and the detailed procedures contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, the detailed procedures govern.
Procedure Zoning Administrator Planning and Zoning Commission Village Board
                                                                   Zoning        Planning   Village
Procedure                                                          Administrator and Zoning Board
                                                                                 Commission
Preliminary Plat of Subdivision                                    R             R          DM
Final Plat of Subdivision
   With prior preliminary plat approval                         R                        DM
   Without prior preliminary plat approval                      R             R          DM
Exterritorial Review - County Plat                                 R/DM                     DM
Plat of Consolidation, except as follows:                          DM
   The plat of consolidation will result in a parcel 5 acres or R             DM
larger.
Waivers and Modifications, except as follows:                      R             R          DM
   Waiver of platted setback or building line                   R             <R>        DM
Dedication or Vacation of Village Easement                         R                        DM
Dedication or Vacation of Village Right-of-Way                     R                        <DM>
                                                                                            [1]
Village Easement Encroachment License                              DM
Appeals of Administrative Determinations                           R             DM
Text Amendments                                                    R             R          DM
[1] A public hearing shall be conducted for vacation of Village right-of-way in accordance with 65
ILCS 5/11-91-1.
 
R = Review body (responsible for review and recommendation)
DM = Decision making body (responsible for final decision to approve or deny)
<> = Public Hearing
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-3: APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Form of Application:
      1.   Applications required under this Subdivision Ordinance must be
submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the Zoning
Administrator.
      2.   Applications must include materials and information as may be
required by the Zoning Administrator to establish that the proposed activity
complies with all applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator shall develop checklists of application
submittal requirements and make those checklists available to the public.
   (B)   Application Filing Fees:
      1.   Applications must be accompanied by the fee amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
   (C)   Application Review:
      1.   An application will be considered complete and ready for processing
only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required
information, and is accompanied by the required filing fee.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator must make a determination of
application completeness within seven (7) business days of application filing.
      2.   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator must provide written notice to the applicant along with an
explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of the
application will occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
         (a)   If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within
sixty (60) days of the date of the written notice, the application will be
considered withdrawn.
         (b)   No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and
in-complete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the
deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next
processing cycle.
      3.   Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the
processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision
making bodies in accordance with applicable development review and approval
procedures of this Chapter.
      4.   The Zoning Administrator may require that applications or plans be
revised before being placed on an agenda for possible action if the Zoning
Administrator determines that:
         (a)   The application or plan contains one or more inaccuracies or
omissions that will hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan's/
application's compliance with Subdivision Ordinance requirements or other
regulations; or
         (b)   The decision making body does not have legal authority to
approve the application or plan.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-4: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   (A)   All public hearings are subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5
ILCS 120/1 et seq.)
   (B)   General Procedures:
      1.   Public hearings required by this Subdivision Ordinance must be
conducted by the designated hearing body. At the hearing, interested persons
must be permitted to submit information and comments, verbally or in writing.
The designated hearing body is authorized to establish the applicable rules of
procedure.
   (C)   Continued Public Hearings:
      1.   Once commenced, a public hearing may be continued by the hearing
body. No re-notification is required if the continuance is set for specified
date and time and that date and time is announced at the time of the
continuance.
      2.   If a public hearing is continued or postponed for an indefinite
period of time from the date of the originally scheduled public hearing, a new
public hearing notice must be given before the rescheduled public hearing.
      3.   If the applicant requests and is granted a postponement, the
applicant must pay any costs of re-notification.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-5: REQUIRED NOTICES:
   The following table provides a summary of notice requirements of this
Subdivision Ordinance. In the event of conflict between this table and detailed
agency notice requirements contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the detailed
agency notice requirements govern.
Procedure Agency Notice Newspaper Notice Delivered Notice
Procedure                                                          Agency Newspaper Delivered
                                                                   Notice Notice    Notice
Preliminary Plat of Subdivision                                    Yes    No        No
Final Plat of Subdivision
   With preliminary plat approval                               No     No        No
   Without preliminary plat approval                            Yes    No        No
Exterritorial Review - County Plat                                 No     No        No
Plat of Consolidation                                              No     No        No
   The plat of consolidation will result in a parcel 5 acres or No     No        No
larger.
Waivers and Modifications, except as follows:                      No     No        No
   Waiver of platted setback or building line.                  No     Yes       Yes
Dedication or Vacation of Village Easement                         No     No        No
Dedication or Vacation of Village Right-of-Way                     No     Yes / No  No
                                                                          [1]
Village Easement Encroachment License                              Yes /  No        No
                                                                   No [2]
Appeals of Administrative Determinations                           No     No        No
Text Amendments                                                    No     No        No
[1] A public hearing shall be conducted for vacation of Village right-of-way in accordance
with 65 ILCS 5/11-91-1.
[2] Agency notice is required for those agencies that are easement holders
 
   (A)   Agency Notice:
      1.   Whenever provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance requires that
notices be delivered to agencies, the notice must be sent certified mail,
return receipt requested via the United States Postal Service, or by personal
delivery.
      2.   Agency notice shall be delivered to the following agencies in the
case of a preliminary plat of subdivision or final plat of subdivision without
preliminary plat of subdivision approval:
         (a)   The president of the school board and superintendent of each
school district in which any of the subdivided land is located.
         (b)   The road authority of any roadway in which the subdivided land
will access.
         (c)   The fire district that will serve the subdivided land.
         (d)   The library district that will serve the subdivided land.
         (e)   The park district that will serve the subdivided land.
         (f)   The township supervisor of each township in which any of the
subdivided land is located.
         (g)   Public utility companies that will serve the subdivided land.
      3.   Agency notice shall be delivered to the following agencies in the
case of an easement encroachment:
         (a)   Public utility companies that hold or will hold easement rights.
      4.   Agency notice must include at least the following information:
         (a)   The date, time, and place of the public hearing or meeting;
         (b)   The common street address(es) and the property index number(s)
of the property affected by the application, or the legal description(s) and
the property index number(s) of the property affected by the application; and
         (c)   A copy of the proposed plat.
   (B)   Newspaper Notice: Whenever provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance
require that newspaper notice be provided, the newspaper notice must be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village at least fifteen
(15) days before and no more than thirty (30) days before the public hearing.
Required newspaper notice must include at least the following information:
      1.   The date, time, and place of the public hearing for which the notice
is being given;
      2.   The common street address(es) and the property index number(s) of
the property affected by the application, or the legal description(s) and the
property index number(s) of the property affected by the application; and
      3.   A summary of the application request.
   (C)   Delivered Notice: Whenever provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance
requires that notices be delivered to property owners, the delivered notice
must be sent standard mail via the United States Postal Service and be
postmarked at least fifteen (15) days before and no more than 30 days before
the public hearing.
      1.   Delivered notice shall be mailed to all property owners of property
lying in whole or in part within two hundred fifty (250) feet, exclusive of
public right-of-way, of the property lines of the property for which the action
is requested, as reflected by the County property tax records.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-6: REQUIRED TIME-FRAMES FOR ACTION:
   Any time limit specified in this Chapter for any decision or action on
behalf of a review or decision making body may be extended if the applicant
agrees to an extension.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-7: PRELIMINARY PLAT OF SUBDIVISION:
   The purpose of preliminary plats is to establish lot design for the
subdivision, establish utility layout and street and intersection design, and
to approve waivers from the subdivision ordinance regulations. Outside agency
review is included at this stage, so that utility and street issues are
addressed early in the development process, and the subdivider can be assured
of final approval at the time of construction. Preliminary plats are not
recorded and are not the legal document used for sale of lots.
   (A)   Authority to File: A preliminary plat of subdivision may be filed by
the owner of the property that is subject to the proposed subdivision or by the
subject property owner's authorized agent.
   (B)   Application Filing: A preliminary plat of subdivision shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Required Information:
      1.   The following shall be submitted with a preliminary plat of
subdivision application and shall contain the information and details as set
forth by the Village of Lisle Design Manual:
         (a)   Preliminary Plat of Subdivision.
         (b)   Plat of Survey.
         (c)   Preliminary Engineering Plan.
         (d)   Declarations, Restrictive Covenants.
         (e)   Preliminary Parkway Landscape Plan.
      2.   If applicable under the Village's Zoning Ordinance, the following
shall be submitted with a preliminary plat of subdivision application and shall
comply with the standards as set forth by the Zoning Ordinance:
         (a)   Preliminary Tree Preservation Plan.
         (b)   Preliminary Architectural Plan.
         (c)   Preliminary Landscape Plan.
         (d)   Preliminary Outdoor Lighting Plan.
         (e)   Proposed Sign Package.
         (f)   Traffic Study/Analysis.
   (D)   Required Certificates: The preliminary plat of subdivision shall
include the following certificates in the format established by the Village of
Lisle Design Manual.
      1.   Village of Lisle Planning and Zoning Commission Certificate:
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to sign on behalf of the
Planning and Zoning Commission commensurate with the findings and
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      2.   Village of Lisle Certificate.
      3.   Village Clerk's Certificate.
   (E)   Application Review and Report: The Zoning Administrator must prepare a
report and recommendation that evaluates the preliminary plat of subdivision
for compliance with the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance, Village of
Lisle Design Manual and applicable ordinances, laws and regulations of the
Village.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator's report to the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall include:
         (a)   The applicant's request for waivers, and justification provided
therefor;
         (b)   Background information;
         (c)   Comments and recommendations of the Village Engineer;
         (d)   Comments and recommendation of the Public Works Department; and
         (e)   Outside agency comments
   (F)   Required Notice:
      1.   Agency Notice: Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
hearing on a preliminary plat of subdivision must be delivered in accordance
with this Chapter.
   (G)   Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation: The Planning
and Zoning Commission must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend
that the proposed preliminary plat of subdivision be approved, approved with
conditions, approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its findings
and recommendations to the Village Board within ninety (90) days of the filing
of a complete application.
   (H)   Final Action: Within thirty (30) days after its next regular scheduled
meeting following the action by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Village
Board must act to approve the proposed preliminary plat of subdivision, approve
with conditions, approve with modifications, or deny. The Village Board may
also remand the proposed preliminary plat of subdivision back to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for further consideration.
   (I)   Lapse of Approval: The applicant shall apply for approval of a final
plat of subdivision within one (1) year after Village Board approval of the
preliminary plat of subdivision. If the applicant does not apply for final plat
of subdivision approval within one (1) year after Village Board approval, the
preliminary plat of subdivision approval will lapse and have no further effect.
      1.   The applicant may elect to submit a final plat of subdivision for a
geographical part (phase) of the preliminary plat of subdivision that received
preliminary approval, and may delay application for approval of other parts to
a specified later date or specified dates beyond the one year of the date of
preliminary plat of subdivision approval at the discretion of the Village
Board.
      2.   This one-year limit may be extended by written request and at the
discretion of the Village Board.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-8: FINAL PLAT OF SUBDIVISION:
   A final plat of subdivision is a legal document that is recorded with the
County Recorder's office. Upon this recording, the sale of lots may proceed.
The primary purpose of the final plat is to delineate property boundaries and
to describe and dedicate right-of-way and easements.
   (A)   Authority to File:
      1.   A petition for final plat of subdivision approval may be filed by
the owner of the property that is subject to the proposed subdivision or by the
subject property owner's authorized agent if:
         (a)   A preliminary plat of subdivision has been approved and the
final plat of subdivision is in substantial compliance with the approved
preliminary plat of subdivision; and
         (b)   The final plat of subdivision does not include additional waiver
requests that were not part of the application for preliminary plat of
subdivision approval.
         (c)   If the final plat is not in substantial conformance with the
approved preliminary plat of subdivision, or if the final plat includes
additional waiver or modification requests, then the final plat shall be
referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review in a manner
consistent the preliminary plat of subdivision and waiver procedures of this
Ordinance.
      2.   With approval of the Zoning Administrator, the preliminary and final
plat of subdivision may be combined into a plat document called a "preliminary
/ final" plat of subdivision.
         (a)   The development review and approval procedures for preliminary
plats of subdivision and final plats of subdivision, as set forth in this
Chapter, shall both apply to combined plats.
   (B)   Application Filing: A final plat of subdivision shall be filed with
the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Required Information:
      1.   The following shall be submitted with a final plat of subdivision
application and shall contain the information and details as set forth by the
Village of Lisle Design Manual:
         (a)   Final Plat of Subdivision.
         (b)   Final Engineering Plan.
         (c)   Final Parkway Landscape Plan.
         (d)   Declarations, Restrictive Covenants.
         (e)   Street and Traffic Identifiers Plan.
         (f)   Soils Report.
         (g)   Field Tile Study.
         (h)   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
         (i)   Traffic Control Plan.
         (j)   Stormwater Management Permit Application.
      2.   If applicable under the Village's Zoning Ordinance, the following
shall be submitted with a final plat of subdivision application and shall
comply with the standards as set forth by the Zoning Ordinance:
         (a)   Final Tree Preservation Plan.
         (b)   Final Architectural Plan.
         (c)   Final Landscape Plan.
         (d)   Final Outdoor Lighting Plan.
         (e)   Traffic Study/Analysis.
         (f)   Final Sign Package.
   (D)   Required Certificates: A final plat of subdivision shall include the
following certificates in the format established by the Village of Lisle Design
Manual.
      1.   Owner's Certificate.
      2.   Surveyor's Certificate.
      3.   Drainage Certificate.
      4.   County Clerk's Certificate.
      5.   County Recorder's Certificate.
      6.   Village of Lisle Certificate.
      7.   Village Clerk's Certificate.
      8.   Village of Lisle Planning and Zoning Commission Certificate.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to sign on behalf of the
Planning and Zoning Commission commensurate with the findings and
recommendations of the PZC.
      9.   Village Chief Financial Officer's Certificate.
      10.   Illinois Department of Transportation Certificate.
         (a)   This is required if the subdivision has frontage or access to a
roadway under the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois.
      11.   Township Highway Commissioner's Certificate.
         (a)   This is required if the subdivision has frontage or access to a
roadway under the jurisdiction of a township road district.
      12.   County Superintendent of Highways Certificate.
         (a)   This is required if the subdivision has frontage or access to a
roadway under the jurisdiction of DuPage County.
   (E)   Application Review and Report: The Zoning Administrator must prepare a
report and recommendation that evaluates the final plat of subdivision for
compliance with the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance, Village of
Lisle Design Manual and applicable ordinances, laws and regulations of the
Village. The report must be transmitted to the Village Board before their
hearing on the proposed final plat of subdivision.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator's report to the Village Board shall
include:
         (a)   The applicant's request for waivers, and justification provided
therefor;
         (b)   Background information;
         (c)   Comments and recommendations of the Village Engineer;
         (d)   Comments and recommendation of the Public Works Department;
         (e)   Outside agency comments; and
         (f)   The Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation.
   (F)   Final Action: The Village Board must act to approve or disapprove the
proposed final plat of subdivision within ninety (90) days of the filing of a
complete application.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-9: EXTERRITORIAL REVIEW - COUNTY PLAT:
   When a subdivision plat is filed with the County of DuPage for property in
unincorporated territory within one and one-half (1 and ½) miles of the
incorporated boundary of the Village of Lisle, the subdivision plat shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Administrator except as follows:
   (A)   The property subject to the subdivision plat is not within the
boundaries of the Village's comprehensive plan.
   (B)   The property subject to the subdivision plat is not subject to review
by the Village of Lisle pursuant to a boundary agreement with another
municipality.
      1.   In the absence of a boundary agreement, the jurisdiction of the
Village of Lisle pursuant to this section shall extend to a median line
equidistant from its boundary and the boundary of any other municipality
nearest to the boundary of the Village of Lisle at any given point on the line.
   (C)   Application Review: The Zoning Administrator shall refer the
subdivision plat to the Village Board for consideration if it is determined
that:
      1.   The subdivision plat is inconsistent with the officially adopted
plans of the Village of Lisle; or
      2.   The subdivision plat is inconsistent with the requirements of this
Ordinance or the Village of Lisle Design Manual; or
      3.   The subdivision plat may adversely affect the Village's provision of
public utilities; or
      4.   The subdivision plat may adversely affect property within the
Village of Lisle.
   (D)   Application Report: If the subdivision plat is referred to the Village
Board, the Zoning Administrator must prepare a report and recommendation. The
report must be transmitted to the Village Board before their hearing on the
proposed subdivision plat.
   (E)   Final Action: Within thirty (30) days of application, the Village
Board must act to approve the proposed plat of subdivision, approve the plat of
subdivision with modifications or deny the proposed plat of subdivision.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-10: PLAT OF CONSOLIDATION:
   A plat of consolidation may be approved administratively by the Zoning
Administrator, provided the lot(s) created by said plat of consolidation meets
or exceeds the minimum lot area and frontage requirements of the underlying
zoning district, does not include the creation of any new streets or easements
of access, and is otherwise in full compliance with adopted ordinances or
regulations of the Village. The intent of this section is not to avoid
compliance with the subdivision regulations, but to allow an applicant to
combine multiple, adjacent parcels of real property into either one platted lot
or multiple platted lots that are fewer in number than the initial lots of real
property that are subject to the consolidation request.
   (A)   Authority to File: A petition for plat of consolidation approval may
be filed by the owner of the property that is subject to the proposed
consolidation or by the subject property owner's authorized agent.
   (B)   Application Filing: A plat of consolidation shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Required Information: A plat of consolidation shall be submitted and
shall contain the information and details for final plats as set forth by this
chapter and the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
   (D)   Required Certificates: A plat of consolidation shall include the
following certificates in the format established by the Village of Lisle Design
Manual.
      1.   Owner's Certificate.
      2.   Surveyor's Certificate.
      3.   County Clerk's Certificate.
      4.   County Recorder's Certificate.
      5.   Zoning Administrator's Certificate.
      6.   Village Engineer's Certificate.
      7.   Village Chief Financial Officer's Certificate.
      8.   Village of Lisle Planning and Zoning Commission Certificate, if the
plat of consolidation will result in a parcel five (5) acres or larger.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to sign on behalf of the
Planning and Zoning Commission commensurate with the findings and
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (E)   Final Action:
      1.   If the plat of consolidation results in a parcel less that is less
than five (5) acres, the Zoning Administrator must act to approve, approve with
conditions, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed plat of
consolidation within ninety (90) days of the filing of a complete application.
      2.   If the plat of consolidation results in a parcel that is five (5)
acres or larger, the Planning and Zoning Commission must act by simple majority
vote of a quorum to recommend that the proposed plat of consolidation be
approved, approved with conditions, approved with modifications, or denied
within 90 days of the filing of a complete application.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-11: WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   Waivers and modifications are intended to provide relief from practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships resulting from the strict application of
the regulations of this Subdivision Ordinance or the Village of Lisle Design
Manual.
   (A)   Authority to File: A petition to waive or modify the regulations of
this Subdivision Ordinance or Village of Lisle Design Manual may be filed by
the owner of the property that is subject to the petition or by the subject
property owner's authorized agent.
   (B)   Application Filing: Waivers or modifications shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator. If the waiver or modification request relates to a plat
of subdivision request, the waiver or modification request shall be filed
concurrent with the preliminary plat of subdivision request.
   (C)   Required Information: The petition shall include all pertinent
background information and justification for the applicant's request for waiver
or modification.
   (D)   Application Review and Report: The Zoning Administrator must prepare a
report and recommendation that evaluates the waiver or modification request.
The report must be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission before
their hearing on the waiver of modification request.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator's report to the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall include:
         (a)   The applicant's request for waiver or modification, and
justification provided therefor;
         (b)   Background information;
         (c)   Comments and recommendations of the Village Engineer;
         (d)   Comments and recommendation of the Public Works Department; and
         (e)   Outside agency comments
   (E)   Required Notices: Waiver or modification of a platted setback or
building line is subject to the following required notices:
      1.   Newspaper notice in accordance with Section
6-3-5.
      2.   Delivered notice in accordance with Section
6-3-5.
   (F)   Standards and Review Criteria: No waiver or modification request may
be recommended or approved unless:
      1.   That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
      2.   That the request, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality; and
      3.   That the conditions upon which the application is based would not be
applicable generally to other property.
   (G)   Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation: The Planning
and Zoning Commission must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend
that the proposed waiver or modification be approved, approved with conditions,
approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its findings and
recommendations to the Village Board within ninety (90) days of the filing of a
complete application.
   (H)   Public Hearing Required: The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold
a public hearing for a proposed waiver or modification of a platted setback or
building line within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application.
Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend
that the waiver or modification be approved, and transmit its findings and
recommendations to the Village Board.
   (I)   Final Action: Within thirty (30) days after its next regular scheduled
meeting following the action by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Village
Board must act to approve the proposed waiver or modification, approve with
conditions, approve with modifications, or deny. The Village Board may also
remand the proposed waiver or modification back to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for further consideration.
      1.   If the application is remanded, the Village Board must specify the
reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings before the Planning
and Zoning Commission must be limited to those identified items. The Planning
and Zoning Commission must conduct further proceedings as may be appropriate
and return a recommendation on the application to the Village Board within
sixty (60) days of the date that the matter is remanded to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the Planning and Zoning
Commission's recommendation, the Village Board must take final action on the
application.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-12: DEDICATION OR VACATION OF VILLAGE EASEMENT:
   An easement is a right-of-use by a private party or by the public of a
designated portion of private property for a limited purpose. When an easement
is dedicated or granted, the owner retains the fee simple ownership while
another party receives the right to use the specific area for a specific
purpose which is described in the easement. Public easements are dedicated
either to the "public" or to a specific governmental unit. Public easements are
controlled by the governmental unit that has jurisdiction over the land in
question for the purpose designated in the easement. Easements are defined by
how they are created, to whom they are dedicated, or how they are used.
   (A)   Authority to File: A petition to dedicate or vacate a Village easement
may be filed by the owner of the property that is subject to the proposed
easement or by the subject property owner's authorized agent.
   (B)   Application Filing: The petitioner shall submit a written request for
acceptance or release of the Village easement to the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Required Information:
      1.   Dedication of a Village Easement. A plat of easement shall be
submitted and shall contain the information and details for a plat of easement
as set forth by the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
      2.   Vacation of a Village Easement. A plat of easement vacation shall be
submitted and shall contain the information and details for a plat of vacation
as set forth by the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
   (D)   Required Certificates: A plat of easement or plat of easement vacation
shall include the following certificates in the format established by the
Village of Lisle Design Manual.
      1.   Owner's Certificate.
      2.   Surveyor's Certificate.
      3.   County Clerk's Certificate.
      4.   County Recorder's Certificate.
      5.   Village of Lisle Certificate.
      6.   Village Clerk's Certificate.
      7.   Village Engineer's Certificate.
   (E)   Application Review and Report: The Zoning Administrator must prepare a
report and recommendation that evaluates the request to dedicate or vacate the
Village easement. The report must be transmitted to the Village Board before
the hearing on the request to dedicate or vacate the Village easement.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator's report to the Village Board shall
include:
         (a)   The applicant's request and justification provided therefor;
         (b)   Background information;
         (c)   Comments and recommendations of the Village Engineer; and
         (d)   Comments and recommendation of the Public Works Department.
   (F)   Final Action:
      1.   The Village Board must act to approve or disapprove the proposed
dedication or vacation of Village easement within ninety (90) days of the
filing of a complete application.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-13: DEDICATION OR VACATION OF VILLAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY:
   A right-of-way is dedicated through either a statutory or common law
process. Statutory dedication occurs through the platting process and results
in a fee simple (ownership) interest in the governmental unit to which the
right-of-way is dedicated. Common law dedication occurs through an ineffective
platting process or through public use over a prolonged period of time. Common
law dedication of a right-of-way results in an easement in favor of the public,
not an ownership interest of a governmental unit. This Section covers statutory
dedication of right-of-way.
   When vacating right-of-way, the Village Board reserves the right to require
payment of the land value as determined by an appraisal report, prepared by an
Illinois licensed Appraiser, at a cost borne by the petitioner
   (A)   Authority to File: A petition to dedicate or vacate a Village right-
of-way may be filed by the owner of the owner of affected or adjoining land or
by the owner's authorized agent.
   (B)   Application Filing: The petitioner shall submit a written request for
dedication or vacation of Village right-of-way to the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Required Information
      1.   Dedication of a Village Right-of-Way: A plat of dedication shall be
submitted and shall contain the information and details for a plat of easement
as set forth by the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
      2.   Vacation of Village Right-of-Way. A plat of vacation shall be
submitted and shall contain the information and details for a plat of vacation
as set forth by the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
   (D)   Required Certificates: A plat of dedication or plat of vacation shall
include the following certificates in the format established by the Village of
Lisle Design Manual.
      1.   Owner's Certificate
      2.   Surveyor's Certificate
      3.   County Clerk's Certificate
      4.   County Recorder's Certificate
      5.   Village of Lisle Certificate
      6.   Village Clerk's Certificate
      7.   Village Engineer's Certificate
   (E)   Application Review and Report: The Zoning Administrator must prepare a
report and recommendation that evaluates the request to dedicate or vacate the
Village right-of-way. The report must be transmitted to the Village Board
before the hearing on the request to dedicate or vacate the Village easement.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator's report to the Village Board shall
include:
         (a)   The applicant's request and justification provided therefor;
         (b)   Background information;
         (c)   Comments and recommendations of the Village Engineer; and
         (d)   Comments and recommendation of the Public Works Department.
   (F)   Required Notices: Vacation of Village right-of-way is subject to the
following required notice:
      1.   Newspaper notice in accordance with Section
6-3-5.
   (G)   Public Hearing Required: The Village Board must hold a public hearing
prior to vacating right-of-way in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-91-1 as may be
amended.
   (H)   Final Action:
      1.   The Village Board must act to approve or disapprove the proposed
dedication or vacation of Village right-of-way within 90 days of the filing of
a complete application. In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-91-1, an affirmative
vote of at least three-fourths of the trustees then holding office is required
to approve vacation of right-of-way.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-14: VILLAGE EASEMENT ENCROACHMENT LICENSE:
   An easement is a right-of-use by a private party or by the public of a
designated portion of private property for a limited purpose. Encroachment into
an easement held by the Village requires Village approval of an easement
encroachment license. Said license authorizes the encroachment and establishes
terms and conditions that the encroachment must adhere to.
   (A)   Authority to File: Village easement encroachment license requests may
be filed by the owner of the property that is subject to the easement
encroachment or by the subject property owner's authorized agent.
   (B)   Application Filing: Village easement encroachment license requests
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Required Information: A plat of survey illustrating the easement
encroachment and other information as may be deemed necessary by the Village
Engineer and Public Works Department.
   (D)   Required Notice: Agency notice shall be delivered to public utility
companies that hold easement rights.
   (E)   Application Review and Report: The Village Engineer and Public Works
Department shall review the proposed easement encroachment and recommend to the
Zoning Administrator that the proposed encroachment be approved, approved with
conditions, approved with modifications, or denied.
   (F)   Easement Encroachment License: Approved Village easement encroachments
are subject to the execution of an easement encroachment license as set forth
in the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
   (G)   Recording of Easement Encroachment License : The easement encroachment
license shall be recorded in the County Recorder's Office and constitute legal
notice to all concerned, as well as to any subsequent purchasers, transferees,
grantees, mortgagees, lessees and all persons claiming or acquiring interest in
the property.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-15: APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS:
   The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there has been an error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by an administrative official in the administration,
interpretation, or enforcement of this Subdivision Ordinance.
   (A)   Authority to File: An appeal of an administrative determination may be
filed by any party that alleges there has been an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in
the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this Subdivision
Ordinance.
   (B)   Application Filing: Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed
with the Zoning Administrator within forty five (45) days of the date of the
order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed.
   (C)   Required Information: An appeal shall include the administrative
order, requirement, decision or determination that is being appealed with a
written statement demonstrating that the administrative order, requirement,
decision or determination was made in error.
   (D)   Effect of Filing: The filing of an appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies
to the Planning and Zoning Commission, after the appeal is filed, that, because
of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to
life or property, in which case the proceedings will not be stayed unless by a
restraining order granted by a court of competent jurisdiction based on due
cause shown.
   (E)   Record of Decision: Upon receipt of an application of appeal, the
Zoning Administrator must transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken.
   (F)   Final Action:
      1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a hearing on the appeal
within forty five (45) days of the date that the appeal is filed.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing, the Planning
and Zoning Commission must take action on the appeal. The Planning and Zoning
Commission's decision must be in writing and be supported by written findings
of fact.
      3.   In exercising the appeal power, the Planning and Zoning Commission
has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is
taken. The Planning and Zoning Commission may affirm or may reverse, wholly or
in part, or modify the decision being appealed.
      4.   Action by the Planning and Zoning commission requires a simple
majority vote of a quorum of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      5.   In acting on the appeal, the Planning and Zoning Commission must
grant to the administrative official's decision a presumption of correctness,
placing the burden of persuasion of error on the appellant.
      6.   All decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission are final
administrative decisions subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions
of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereof,
and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
   (G)   Standards and Review Criteria: An appeal may be sustained only if the
Planning and Zoning Commission finds that the administrative official erred.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-3-16: TEXT AMENDMENTS:
   The text of this Subdivision Ordinance may be amended from time to time in
accordance with the procedures of this Section. The text amendment process is
intended to allow for clarification of certain provisions, correction of
contradictory clauses, or to change regulations to reflect evolving needs and
concerns.
   (A)   Authority to File:
      1.   Amendments to the text of this Subdivision Ordinance may be
initiated by the Village Board or by a property owner or the property owner's
authorized agent.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Administrator may
recommend initiation of a text amendment. No application for a text amendment
shall be filed by the Village without Village Board authorization.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to initiate text amendments
of this Subdivision Ordinance on an annual basis for the purpose of correcting
errors or inconsistencies in the Subdivision Ordinance.
   (B)   Application Filing: Complete applications for text amendments must be
filed with the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Required Information: A text amendment application shall include a
redline of the proposed text amendment with a written explanation as to why the
text amendment is being requested.
   (D)   Application Review and Report: The Zoning Administrator must prepare a
report and recommendation that evaluates the proposed text amendment in light
of the standards and review criteria of this Section. The report must be
transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission before their public hearing
on the proposed text amendment.
   (E)   Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation: The Planning
and Zoning Commission must hold a hearing on the proposed text amendment within
sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application. Within sixty (60) days of
the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission must act by
simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend that the proposed text amendment
be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its findings
and recommendations to the Village Board.
   (F)   Final Action: Within sixty (60) days of the Planning and Zoning
Commission's recommendation, the Village Board must act to approve the proposed
text amendment, approve the text amendment with modifications or deny the text
amendment. The Village Board may also may remand the proposed text amendment
back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration.
      1.   If the text amendment application is remanded, the Village Board
must specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings
before the Planning and Zoning Commission must be limited to those identified
items. The Planning and Zoning Commission must conduct further proceedings as
may be appropriate and return a recommendation on the text amendment
application to the Village Board within sixty (60) days of the date that the
matter is remanded to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Within sixty (60)
days of receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation, the
Village Board must take final action on the text amendment application.
   (G)   Standards and Review Criteria: The decision to amend the Subdivision
Ordinance text is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by
any one standard. To assist the Village Board in exercise of its legislative
discretion, in making recommendations and decisions about Subdivision Ordinance
text amendments, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Zoning Administrator
must consider at least the following factors:
      1.   Whether the proposed text amendment corrects an error or
inconsistency in the Subdivision Ordinance, meets the challenge of a changing
condition or is necessary to implement established policy.
      2.   Whether the proposed text amendment reflects a change, new
development, or new use that is beneficial to the Village.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 4
IMPROVEMENTS AND GUARANTEES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Minimum Public Improvements Required
6-4-2: Public Improvement Construction Security
6-4-3: Acceptance Of Public Improvements
6-4-4: Post Construction Guarantee Of Completed Public Improvements
6-4-5: Long Term Maintenance Guarantee
6-4-1: MINIMUM PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
   (A)   All subdivisions within the Village's corporate boundary and planning
jurisdiction shall provide, at the subdivider's expense, the following public
improvements, in accordance with this Ordinance and the Village of Lisle Design
Manual:
      1.   Street pavement, including combination curb and gutter.
      2.   Public sidewalks and pedestrian facilities.
      3.   Water supply and distribution system, including mains and service
stubs.
      4.   Sanitary sewer system, including mains and service stubs.
      5.   Stormwater management facilities, including but not limited to storm
sewers.
      6.   Street lighting facilities.
      7.   Fire hydrants.
      8.   Street signs.
      9.   Survey monuments and stakes.
      10.   Parkway landscaping.
   (B)   All plats of consolidation within the Village's corporate boundary
shall provide, at the subdivider's expense, the following public improvements,
in accordance with this Ordinance and the Village of Lisle Design Manual:
      1.   Street pavement, including combination curb and gutter.
      2.   Public sidewalks and pedestrian facilities.
      3.   Water supply and distribution system, including mains and service
stubs.
      4.   Sanitary sewer system, including but not limited to mains and
service stubs.
      5.   Stormwater management facilities, including storm sewers.
      6.   Street lighting facilities.
      7.   Fire hydrants.
      8.   Street signs.
      9.   Survey monuments and stakes.
      10.   Parkway landscaping.
   (C)   Construction of all improvements (with the exception of the final
surface course of asphalt on dedicated streets, sidewalks, and parkway
landscaping) required by this Chapter must be completed within two (2) years of
the date of final plat of subdivision approval unless good cause can be shown
for granting an extension of time.
      1.   The final roadway surface course of bituminous asphalt (surface)
must be installed within three (3) years from the date of final plat approval
or when individual buildings are completed on eighty percent (80%) of the lots
in the subdivision, whichever comes first. When the final roadway surface
course of asphalt is placed before eighty percent (80%) of the lots are built
out, the subdivision warranty will not expire until two years after the
completion of eighty percent (80%) of the lots.
      2.   Any gaps in the sidewalk or parkway landscaping shall be completed
within two (2) years from the date of final plat approval or when individual
buildings are completed on eighty percent (80%) of the lots in the subdivision,
whichever comes first. For industrial or commercial developments, when
individual buildings are completed on fifty percent (50%) of the lots have been
completed
   (D)   If a final plat of subdivision is for only a portion of the
subdivision for which a preliminary plat of subdivision was approved, the
public improvements required to be constructed, installed and maintained in
accordance with that final plat of subdivision must be those public
improvements that the Village deems necessary to serve the lots shown on the
final plat of subdivision.
   (E)   Building permits may not be issued until all required public
improvements are completed and operable, with the exception of the final
roadway surface course of bituminous asphalt if a two-layer construction is
used. The final surface course of asphalt must be completed before acceptance
of the subdivision.
   (F)   Until final acceptance of public improvements by the Village, the
developer is solely responsible for:
      1.   Maintaining all public improvements;
      2.   Vegetation maintenance and weed abatement;
      3.   Keeping all public ways, sewers and drains free from soil, debris
and trash;
      4.   Providing for snow removal on all streets within the subdivision.
         (a)   The developer is required to provide snow removal on all streets
within the subdivision until acceptance of improvements by the Village.
However, if the developer does not promptly remove snow, the Village may clear
the snow and submit the invoice for this work to the developer for payment. If
the developer does not pay this invoice, the construction security may be
utilized to pay the snow removal costs.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-4-2: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION SECURITY:
   (A)   Prior to issuance of a site development permit, the Owner shall submit
to the Village, construction security to guarantee completion of public
improvements prior to the expiration of two (2) years from the approval and
recording of the final plat of subdivision. Such construction security shall be
one hundred ten percent (110%) of the engineer's probable estimate of cost.
Such construction security shall be in one of the following forms:
      1.   A cash security deposit, together with an agreement for the
disposition thereof, in form and substance as set forth in the Village of Lisle
Design Manual.
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit in form and substance as set forth
in the Village of Lisle Design Manual. The letter of credit must be an original
copy. All letters of credit shall be valid for a minimum of a one-year term,
and the permit applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the letter of
credit at all times during the construction of the public improvements.
      3.   A performance bond in form and substance as set forth in the Village
of Lisle Design Manual. The performance bond must be an original copy. All
performance bonds shall be valid for a minimum of a one-year term, and the
permit applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the performance bond at
all times during the construction of the public improvements.
      4.   In the event the construction security is insufficient to fund any
charges, costs or expenses described in this section, including collection
costs and attorney fees, the Owner shall be responsible for such deficiency.
The Owner shall cause such deficiency to be paid to the Village upon thirty
(30) days notice. In the event such payment is not timely made, the Village may
institute appropriate proceedings to collect such amounts, plus all costs
associated with such collection, including attorney fees.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator, with concurrence of the Village Engineer,
may reduce the public improvement construction security as each division of the
required land improvements are initially accepted. Land improvements shall be
divided into the following categories, as applicable:
      1.   Sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances;
      2.   Water mains and appurtenances;
      3.   Storm sewer mains, drainage ways, and storm water management
facilities;
      4.   Streets and parkway grading and seeding/sodding;
      5.   Erosion and sediment control, mass grading;
      6.   Miscellaneous improvements (landscaping, street traffic signs,
street lights, pedestrian paths, traffic signals, etc.).
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-4-3: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Except as provided herein, all public improvements to be transferred
to the Village must be properly completed before acceptance by the Village.
Where, in the sole discretion of the Village, it is determined that it is in
the best interest of the Village that completion of parkway restoration and/or
sidewalks be delayed to prevent damage during subsequent construction activity,
the Village may accept all properly completed public improvements, retaining a
portion of the construction security to ensure proper completion of the parkway
restoration and/or sidewalks.
   (B)   Upon completion of the public improvements required under the
provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance, the Owner shall file with the Village
all of the following:
      1.   Certification by an Illinois registered professional engineer, to
the effect that all such public improvements have been completed substantially
in accordance with the final plans and specifications approved by the Village;
      2.   Surveyor's statement signed by an Illinois licensed Professional
Land Surveyor stating that all of the required monuments and irons are in
place;
      3.   Record (as-built) drawings in the form and manner as established by
the Village of Lisle Design Manual;
      4.   Appropriate bills of sale, Contractor's Affidavit, and lien waivers
for those required public improvements to be transferred to the Village. The
Contractor's Affidavit and Lien Waivers shall be in accordance with the
Illinois Mechanics Lien Act;
      5.   Recorded copy of homeowner's association covenants, code, and
restrictions;
      6.   Guarantee security as required under this Ordinance;
      7.   Storm sewer cleaning and televising report;
      8.   Sanitary sewer televising report;
      9.   Maintenance and monitoring for wetlands and stormwater best
management practices, if required; and
      10.   Any other documents determined as appropriate by the Village
Engineer.
   (C)   In accepting public improvements, the Village shall release or refund
to the depositor thereof the construction security, or such part thereof
applicable to the accepted public improvements. Provided, the Village may
authorize retention or deduction therefrom for the following:
      1.   An amount equal to any extraordinary costs incurred by the Village;
and/or
      2.   An amount necessary to secure completion of any uncompleted parkway
restoration or sidewalks; and/or
      3.   An amount necessary to fund the guarantee of completed public
improvements as required under this Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-4-4: POST CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEE OF COMPLETED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   The Owner shall guarantee the public improvements for a period of
eighteen (18) months from the date the Village accepts such improvements.
During such eighteen (18)-month period, the owner shall be obligated, upon
written notice from the Village as provided herein, to repair or reconstruct
any public improvement or portion thereof which may deteriorate, fail or
otherwise cease to meet the standard established by the engineer's certificate
or record drawings.
   (B)   The Village shall provide written notice to the Owner of deterioration
of public improvements, specifying a time period in which such deterioration is
to be remedied and the Owner shall perform the necessary repair or
reconstruction at his/her own expense, within the time specified.
   (C)   In the event that it is determined by the Village that failure of the
Owner to restore existing public improvements will result in imminent hazard to
life or property within the subdivision or in areas adjacent thereto the
Village may, without prior notice to the Owner, perform or have performed on
its behalf any restoration work reasonably necessary to prevent such hazards.
Within thirty (30) days thereafter, the Owner shall be notified in writing by
the Village of the performance of such work and of the cost thereof. Within
thirty (30) days from notification from the Village of the work performed and
the cost of the work, Owner shall reimburse the Village for the full amount
incurred by the Village.
   (D)   As a condition of, and prior to, acceptance of any public improvement,
the Owner shall submit to the office of the Village Engineer, guarantee
security to secure the performance of the obligations imposed by this Section.
The guarantee security shall be in the amount of twenty percent (20%) of the
total cost of the public improvements, which shall expire no earlier than
eighteen (18)-months after acceptance of such public improvements by the
Village Council. Such guarantee security shall be in one of the following
forms:
      1.   A cash security deposit, together with an agreement for the
disposition thereof, in form and substance as set forth in the Village of Lisle
Design Manual.
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit. The letter of credit must be an
original copy. All letters of credit shall be valid for a minimum of a one-year
term, and the permit applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the letter
of credit at all times during the eighteen (18)-month guarantee period.
      3.   A performance bond in form and substance as set forth in the Village
of Lisle Design Manual. The performance bond must be an original copy. All
performance bonds shall be valid for a minimum of an eighteen (18)-month term,
and the permit applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the performance
bond at all times during the eighteen (18)-month guarantee period.
   (E)   In the event the guarantee security is insufficient to fund any
charges, costs or expenses described in this section, including collection
costs and attorney fees, the Owner shall be responsible for such deficiency.
The Owner shall cause such deficiency to be paid to the Village upon thirty
(30) days notice. In the event such payment is not timely made, the Village may
institute appropriate proceedings to collect such amounts, plus all costs
associated with such collection, including attorney fees.
   (Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-4-5: LONG TERM MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE:
   (A)   Grant of Easement:
      1.   Access to privately-owned land for inspection and maintenance of,
including but not limited to, open space, common area, recreational areas, site
runoff storage facilities, compensatory storage facilities, stormwater
facilities, storm sewers, and Village utility systems shall be through a grant
of easement in a form as established by the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
      2.   Open space, common area, recreational areas, site runoff storage
facilities, compensatory storage facilities, stormwater facilities, storm
sewers, and Village utility systems not already located in dedicated rights-of-
way or easements, shall be located either:
         (a)   On a parcel granted or dedicated to, and accepted by, a public
entity; or
         (b)   On a parcel, or parcels, conveyed by plat as undivided equal
interests to each lot in the subdivision or otherwise conveyed or dedicated to
conservation or land preservation entities.
   (B)   Covenants: When title to land containing open space, site runoff
storage facilities, compensatory storage facilities, stormwater systems, storm
sewers, or other Village utility systems is conveyed by plat as undivided equal
interests to each lot in the subdivision:
      1.   A covenant shall appear on the face of the plat of subdivision, and
on each deed conveying ownership of a subdivision lot, which states that title
to such land shall be held in undivided equal interests by each lot owner
within the subdivision; and
      2.   A covenant shall appear on the face of the plat of subdivision, and
on each deed conveying ownership of the subdivision lots, which states that in
the event the governmental unit having easement rights exercises its right to
perform maintenance to such land, that governmental unit may lien each lot
within the subdivision for the costs of any maintenance work performed.
   (C)   Property Owner Associations:
      1.   A property owner association may be established for the maintenance
of the common areas and facilities, payment of property taxes, and the
assessment and collection of owner dues or fees to fund said activities. Such
associations shall be duly incorporated and the property owner association's
declaration of covenants and bylaws shall be recorded against the title for all
lots in that subdivision.
      2.   Documents providing for the establishment of a property owner
association must be submitted to the Village before approval and recordation of
a final plat of subdivision.
         (a)   The documents shall ensure that the property owners association
has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the common
areas and facilities, including the power to compel contributions from
residents and property owners to cover their proportionate share of the costs
associated with the maintenance of the common areas and facilities.
   (D)   Special Service Area:
      1.   The Village may require a backup special service area to be
established that may provide any or all of the following services: maintenance
of curbs, alleys, and parking areas, including but not limited to snow removal,
salt/sand spreading, street sweeping, striping, and traffic controls; sidewalks
and trails; street lighting; street and community identification signs;
landscaping and fencing along rights-of-way and common areas; security;
residential waste collection, recycling, and yard waste; common area benches,
waste and recycling receptacles and other furniture; pest control; pond
aerators; parkway tree removal and replacement; common area or open space
maintenance; stormwater facility maintenance; site runoff storage facility
maintenance; compensatory storage facility maintenance; stormwater system
maintenance; storm sewers maintenance; Village utility system maintenance; SSA
administration and staffing, and other services as it relates to subdivision
maintenance.
      2.   If the Village requires a backup special service area to be
established, a declaration of consent consenting to the establishment of a
maintenance special service area shall be recorded concurrent with the final
plat of subdivision and any other documents as may be necessary to establish a
backup special service area shall be executed by Owner prior to recording of
the final plat of subdivision.
         (a)   The terms of the declaration of consent shall run with the land
and be binding on all future owners of property within the subdivision.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Lots
6-5-2: Street Layout
6-5-3: Underground Utilities
6-5-1: LOTS:
   The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions and
consolidations within the jurisdiction of the Village:
   (A)   Lots shall conform to the lot and building standards of the underlying
zoning district, except as such lot and building standard may be modified by
zoning variation by the Village Board.
   (B)   The creation of a double frontage lot that abuts a collector or
arterial street is prohibited.
      1.   Exception. Double frontage lots are permitted if common area, a
minimum of twenty (20) feet in width, is platted between the lots and the
collector or arterial street. The common area shall comply with the perimeter/
buffer yard landscaping requirements for nonresidential property or multi-unit
abutting residential property as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   The creation of a flag lot is prohibited.
   (D)   Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right of
way line of the street on which the lot fronts.
   (E)   Any outlots intended for conveyance to a property owners association
or others must be included in the subdivision and be numbered consecutively.
      1.   The subdivision plat and supporting documentation must designate the
intended use and ownership, as well as maintenance responsibilities for the
outlot.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-5-2: STREET LAYOUT:
   The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the
jurisdiction of the Village:
   (A)   All streets and rights-of-way shall be designed in accordance with the
Village of Lisle Design Manual.
   (B)   All pavement shall be designed in accordance with the Village of Lisle
Design Manual.
   (C)   All lots within the subdivision must be served by public streets.
   (D)   Subdivisions shall be served by a minimum of two points of ingress/
egress.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator, with the concurrence of the Public Works
Director and Village Engineer, is authorized to waive the requirement of this
Section if any of the following circumstances exist:
         (a)   The proposed subdivision is a resubdivision of an existing
subdivision that was approved by the Village with less than two points of
ingress / egress.
         (b)   The proposed subdivision is adjacent to existing subdivisions
that were approved by the Village without the platting of stub streets for
future road network connection.
   (E)   Stub streets must be platted, dedicated and constructed for public use
to the boundary line of the subdivision when necessary to afford road network
connection and continuity.
      1.   Stub streets must be clearly marked on plats and labeled "Future
Street Extension".
      2.   The following notation must be incorporated into any plat showing a
stub street:
         (a)   This right-of-way is platted with the intent of being extended
and continued in order to provide ingress and egress to and from adjoining
properties.
   (F)   Whenever there exists a partially dedicated or platted portion of a
street or alley adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the
street or alley shall be platted to the prescribed width within the proposed
subdivision.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-5-3: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
   (A)   Subdivisions, Underground Lines Required: All utility distribution
lines for broadband telecommunications, electric, and gas service in the
subdivision shall be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area.
Subject to the foregoing requirement to place utility distribution lines
underground, installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with
the applicable orders, rules and regulations of the state commerce commission
now or hereafter effective, and the subdivider shall be responsible for
compliance with rules and regulations now and hereafter effective and filed
with the commission pursuant to the state public utilities act, or any public
utility whose service will be required for the subdivision with respect to the
provision of such facilities.
   (B)   Consolidations, Underground Lines Required: Review and decision making
bodies are authorized to require all utility distribution lines for broadband
telecommunications, electric, and gas service in the consolidated area to be
placed underground.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 6
LAND DEDICATION AND CONTRIBUTION FEES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Dedication Of Park Lands
6-6-2: Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreation Land Dedication
6-6-3: Dedication Of School Sites
6-6-4: Criteria For Requiring School Site Dedication
6-6-5: Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Park And School Sites
6-6-6: Density Formula
6-6-7: Contribution For Library Purposes
6-6-8: Sample Formulas
6-6-1: DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS:
   As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, each subdivider
or developer will be required to dedicate land for park and recreational
purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
development. The dedication of aforesaid land and any other land dedicated to
the village shall be accompanied by a title insurance policy acceptable to the
village attorney. A cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a
combination of both, at the option of the village, will be acceptable in
accordance with the following criteria and formula.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-6-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK AND RECREATION LAND DEDICATION:
   (A)   Requirement and Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed
development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be five and five-tenths (5.5) acres of
land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the
following classifications:
 
Types Of Recreation Areas     Size Range                Minimum Acres Per 1,000
                                                        People
Play lot                      Minimum 8,000 square feet Not applicable
School-park (neighborhood     Minimum park of 5 acres   1.25
playground)
Neighborhood park             Minimum 31/2 acres        1.0
Districtwide park or play     Minimum 4 acres up to 30  1.25
field                         acres
Communitywide recreation park Minimum 12 acres up to 30 2.0
                              acres
                                                      Total: 5.5
 
   (B)   Location: The comprehensive park and recreation plan and/or the
"Standards By Types Of Recreation And Park Areas", as adopted by the Lisle Park
District, shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A park site adjoining
all elementary school sites of not less than five (5) acres shall be considered
a requirement. A central location which will serve equally the entire
development is most desirable. In large developments, these sites can be
located throughout the development according to established standards for park
area distances.
   (C)   Credit for Private Open Spaces and Recreation Areas: When subdividers
or developers provide their own open spaces for recreation areas and
facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public
recreational services. Depending on the site of the development, a portion of
the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit developments may,
at the option of the Village Board, be provided in the form of "private" open
space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of same shall be
determined by the Village Board, based upon the needs of the projected
residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the
general area.
      In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will
imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his
obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of
facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village and before any
credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must
guarantee that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained
for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private
"swimming clubs" are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private
recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park
land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned
unit development and then subtract the credit to be given.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-6-3: DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES:
   (A)   As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or a final
plat of planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required
to dedicate land for school sites, to serve the immediate and future needs of
the residents of the development. The dedication of aforesaid land and any
other land dedicated to the village shall be accompanied by a title insurance
policy acceptable to the village attorney. A cash contribution in lieu of
actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village,
will be acceptable in accordance with the following criteria and formula.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-6-4: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION:
   (A)   Requirement and Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to
be generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly
upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land
dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: 1)
estimated children to be served in each such school classification over the 2)
maximum recommended number of students to be served in each such school
classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to the 3) said
minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of each such school
classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land
deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated
increased children in each such school classification.
   (B)   School Classifications and Size of School Site: School classifications
and size of school sites within the village shall be determined in accordance
with the following criteria:
 
School Classification by  Maximum Number of Students Minimum Number of Acres of
Grades                    For Each Such School       Land For Each School Site
                          Classification             of Such Classification
Elementary Schools        600                        11
Junior high schools,      900                        19
grades 6 through 8
High schools, grades 9-12 2,300                      48
 
   (C)   Location: The comprehensive school plan and/or the standards adopted
by the affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-6-5: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK AND SCHOOL SITES:
   The Village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash
contribution in lieu of or in combination with the land dedication required
when so determined by the Village. The cash contributions in lieu of park and
recreation land as hereinbefore classified, shall be available to serve the
immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development
or for the improvement of other existing local park and recreation land which
already serves such needs. The cash contributions in lieu of park land shall be
paid to and held in trust by the Village, or the park district, as determined
by the Village. The cash contributions in lieu of school sites shall be paid to
and held in trust by the Village, or the public school district, as determined
by the Village, and used solely for the acquisition of land for a school site
to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or
development or for the improvement to any existing school site which already
serves such needs. Improvement under this section shall be liberally construed
and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the development of parking
lots; sidewalks; traffic signals; arterial streets; collector streets; internal
roadways; connections with sewer, water and electrical lines; and street
lights; playgrounds; recreation grounds; athletic fields; excavation and site
preparation, and the purchase of any material, goods or equipment necessary to
said development and construction. Improvement shall further include the
construction of buildings; additions to existing school buildings; remodeled or
renovated non instructional spaces in classrooms and the purchase of
prefabricated classroom units to be used at a school site. If any portion of a
cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication or cash
contribution in lieu of school site is not expended for the purposes set forth
herein within ten (10) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded to
the developer who made such contribution.
   (A)   Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be
based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as
specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and
recreation and school sites. It has been determined that the impact fee of such
improved land in and surrounding the Village is established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per acre and such figure shall be used in making any calculation
herein unless the subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In
the event of any such objection, the developer shall submit an appraisal
showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of his
development or other evidence thereof and final determination of said fair
market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the Village Board
based upon such information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from
other sources which may be submitted to the village board by the park district,
school district or others.
   (B)   Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Fee: There will be situations
in subdivisions when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in
lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise when:
      1.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park or school site. That portion of the land within the
subdivision falling within the park or school location shall be dedicated as a
site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required
for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated;
      2.   A major part of the local park or recreational site or school site
has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by
dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-6-6: DENSITY FORMULA:
   The following table of population density or the most current version of
such table as prepared from time to time by the Illinois School Consulting
Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., is generally indicative of
current and short range projected trends in family size for new construction
and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of
land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is
filed thereto by the subdivider or developer:
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
CHILDREN PER UNIT [1]
                  Elementar Junior    Total
Type Of Preschool y Grades  High      Grades K- High School Adults 18 Total Per
Unit    0-4 Years K-5 5-10  Grades 6- 8 5-13    Grades 9-12 Years +   Dwelling
                  Years     8 11-13   Years     14-17 Years           Unit
                            Years
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
CHILDREN PER UNIT [1]
                     Elementar Junior   Total     High
Type Of    Preschool y Grades  High     Grades K- School    Adults 18 Total Per
Unit       0-4 Years K-5 5-10  Grades   8 5-13    Grades 9- Years +   Dwelling
                     Years     6-8 11-  Years     12 14-17            Unit
                               13 Years           Years
Detached Single Family
2 bedroom  0.113     0.136     0.048    0.184     0.020     1.700     2.017
3 bedroom  0.292     0.369     0.173    0.542     0.184     1.881     2.899
4 bedroom  0.418     0.530     0.298    0.828     0.360     2.158     3.764
5 bedroom  0.283     0.345     0.248    0.593     0.300     2.594     3.770
Attached Single Family
1 bedroom  0.000     0.000     0.000    0.000     0.000     1.193     1.193
2 bedroom  0.064     0.088     0.048    0.136     0.038     1.752     1.990
3 bedroom  0.212     0.234     0.058    0.292     0.059     1.829     2.392
4 bedroom  0.323     0.322     0.154    0.476     0.173     2.173     3.145
Apartments
Efficiency 0.000     0.000     0.000    0.000     0.000     1.294     1.294
1 bedroom  0.000     0.002     0.001    0.003     0.001     1.754     1.758
2 bedroom  0.047     0.086     0.042    0.128     0.046     1.693     1.914
3 bedroom  0.052     0.234     0.123    0.357     0.118     2.526     3.053
 
[1]   There are only three significant categories provided in this chart.
Because of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single-family
dwelling units, only one category is provided. The same is true with
apartments; thus, only one category. Because of the relatively short history of
some newer types of detached and attached single-family units, individual
evaluations may be necessary.
   Copyright 1996
   Illinois School Consulting Service/
   Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.
   Number 96-7 Naperville, Illinois
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-6-7: CONTRIBUTION FOR LIBRARY PURPOSES:
   As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final
plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer shall be
required to pay a cash contribution for library purposes in accordance with
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
6-6-8: SAMPLE FORMULAS:
   (A)   Park Formula:
      Number of Acres = (People Produced* / 1,000) x 5.5 acres
      * TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT CHILDREN PER
UNIT
      Contribution Fee = Number of Acres x Fair Market Value
   (B)   School Formula:
      1.   Elementary Schools:
         Number of Acres = (People Produced*) / 600 x 11
         Contribution Fee = Number of Acres x Fair Market Value
      2.   Junior High Schools (Grades 6-8):
         Number of Acres = (People Produced*) / 900 x 19
         Contribution Fee = Number of Acres x Fair Market Value
      3.   High Schools:
         Number of Acres = (People Produced*) / 2,300 x 48
         Contribution Fee = Number of Acres x Fair Market Value
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 7
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   General rules of language. See Chapter 1 of this Ordinance for
information about general use of language and ordinance construction.
   (B)   General definitions. The words and terms expressly defined in this
section have the specific meanings assigned, unless the context expressly
indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined have their
common dictionary meaning.
APPROVED:      Unless otherwise stated, materials, equipment or methods accepted and approved by
               the Development Services and/or Public Works Departments.
               A track of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public
BLOCK:         parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines of
               waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the Village.
BUILDING:      A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support
               or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
COMPREHENSIVE  Reference to "Comprehensive Plan" shall mean the approved Comprehensive Plan of
PLAN:          the Village of Lisle, Illinois.
CONSOLIDATION: The combination of two or more parcels into either one platted lot or multiple
               platted lots that are fewer in number than the initial lots of real property.
               The individual(s), company, corporation, or other legal entity who holds title to
DEVELOPER:     or an equitable interest in the property on which construction operations are to
               be conducted.
               Any human change to land, including:
               (A) Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any
               addition to a building.
               (B) Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or
               similar projects.
DEVELOPMENT:   (C) Construction or erection of, grading, excavating, paving, or other
               alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or
               liquid waste.
               The term "Development" does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
               facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no increase
               in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do
               not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EASEMENT:      An easement is a right-of-use by a private party or by the public of a designated
               portion of private property for a limited purpose.
ENGINEERING    A drawing or set of drawings sealed by a Registered Professional Engineer which
PLAN:          illustrates and/or describes all Engineering aspects of the site development.
               A plot of land that resembles a flag and flagpole, with a long, slender strip
FLAG LOT:      extending from a street to a rectangular main section. The strip that extends
               from the street is deficient in the minimum lot frontage for the underlying
               zoning district in which the flag lot is located.
FRONTAGE:      A lot line or the length of a lot line that is also the line of any public street
               right-of- way other than an alley.
LOT:           A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land of
               record.
               A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two or more streets. Note: An
LOT, THROUGH:  alley is not considered a street for purposes relating to determination of a
               double frontage lot.
PARKWAY:       A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and whose right-of-
               way is or is intended to be developed in a park-like character.
PLANNING AND
ZONING         The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Village of Lisle, Illinois.
COMMISSION:
               A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the subdivision
PLAT:          of land is presented and which he submits for approval and intends to record in
               final form.
PLATTED
SETBACK OR     Open space areas required between buildings and lot lines.
BUILDING LINE:
ROADWAY:       The paved area within a street right-of-way intended for vehicular traffic,
               including all curb and gutter facilities.
STREET:        A public way other than an alley, which affords a primary means of access to
               abutting property.
STREET,        A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a
ARTERIAL:      major traffic artery connecting various sections of Lisle.
STREET,        A street that collects traffic from local streets and connects with arterials.
COLLECTOR:
STREET,        Any street that is shown on a subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated for
PUBLIC:        public use.
STREET WIDTH:  The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the public street.
               The person or persons responsible for preparing the plats of the subdivision and
SUBDIVIDER:    for carrying out all appropriate requirements relating thereto as outlined in
               this ordinance.
               The division of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose, whether
               immediate or future, or transfer of ownership or development; provided, however,
               that the following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from
               the requirements of this Ordinance:
               (A)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5)
               acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
               access;
               (B)   The division of lots or blocks of less than 1 acre in any recorded
               subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
               (C)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and
               contiguous land;
               (D)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a right
               of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe lines
               which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
               (E)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which
SUBDIVISION:   does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
               (F)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or
               conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
               relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
               (G)   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
               (H)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the division
               into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of land existing
               on July 17, 1959 and not involving any new streets or easements of access;
               (I)   The sale of a single lot of less than five (5) acres from a larger tract
               when a survey is made by an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor; provided, that
               this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same
               larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of the
               larger tract on October 1, 1973, and provided also that this exemption does not
               invalidate any local requirements applicable to the subdivision of land;
               (J)   The preparation of a plat for wind energy devices under Section 10-620 of
               the Property Tax Code.
VILLAGE        The Public Works Director or the person or firm charged with the responsibility
ENGINEER:      of municipal engineering matters.
ZONING         The Development Services Director or individual designated by the Development
ADMINISTRATOR: Services Director.
 
(Ord. 2024-5096, 10-7-2024)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-1-1: Purpose And Scope
7-1-2: Adoption Of Construction Standards
7-1-3: Alternative Design And Methods
7-1-4: Definitions
7-1-5: Permit Required
7-1-6: Application For Permit
7-1-7: Design Plans
7-1-8: Effect Of Permit
7-1-9: Validity Of Permit
7-1-10: Expiration Of Permit
7-1-11: Stop Work Order
7-1-12: Preconstruction Meeting Required
7-1-13: Inspections
7-1-14: Revised Permit Drawings
7-1-15: Certificate Of Compliance
7-1-16: Insurance
7-1-17: Indemnification
7-1-18: Security
7-1-19: Change Of Ownership Or Owner’s Identity Or Legal Status
7-1-20: Traffic Control
7-1-21: Location Of Facilities
7-1-22: Construction Methods And Materials
7-1-23: Vegetation Control
7-1-24: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
7-1-25: Notice Of Completion, Cleanup And Restoration
7-1-26: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
7-1-27: Appeals Of Administrative Decisions
7-1-28: Violations; Penalties
7-1-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for excavating, and for constructing facilities on rights-of-way
within the Village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent
with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
Village rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent: In enacting this Chapter, the Village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities and contractors, by establishing
uniform standards to address issues presented by small wireless facilities and
utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities locations.
   (C)   Applicability of this Chapter: This Chapter applies to all excavation
and construction within the right-of-way and facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the
Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this
chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the wireless
provider or utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be
otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
Further, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to excavation work under
the direction of the Public Works Director by Village employees or contractors
performing work under contract with the Village, necessitating excavation in
the Village rights-of-way or property.
   (D)   Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   (E)   Effect of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicting Provisions:
      1.   Conflict with State or Federal Regulations. If the provisions of
this Chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government,
the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by law. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
      2.   Conflict with Other Village Regulations. If the provisions of this
Chapter are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with provisions
found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the Village, the more
restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-2: ADOPTION OF CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Adoption of Village of Lisle Design Manual: It is hereby adopted by
the Village for the purpose of establishing uniform engineering practices,
specifications, and design standards for public and private improvements, that
certain manual known as the Village of Lisle Design Manual being particularly
the May 10, 2023 edition thereof, as may be amended from time to time by the
Public Works Director, of which one copy has been and now is filed in the
Office of the Village Clerk.
   (B)   Interpretation of Construction Standards: If a discrepancy exists
between or among differing principles and standards required by this chapter,
the Public Works Director shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering
judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. Nothing
herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate it
rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-3: ALTERNATIVE DESIGN AND METHODS:
   (A)   The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to prohibit any design
or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Chapter, provided
that any such alternative has been approved by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   An alternative design or method of construction may be approved when
the Public Works Director finds that the proposed alternative meets all of the
following:
      1.   Quality.
      2.   Strength.
      3.   Effectiveness.
      4.   Durability.
      5.   Safety.
   (C)   Where the alternative design or method of construction is not
approved, the Public Works Director shall respond in writing, stating the
reasons why the alternative was not approved.
   (D)   Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of the
alternative design or method of construction, shall consist of valid research
reports from approved sources.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO:                               American Association of State Highway and
                                      Transportation Officials.
ANSI:                                 American National Standards Institute.
ASTM:                                 American Society for Testing and
                                      Materials.
APPLICANT:                            A person applying for a permit under this
                                      chapter.
BACKFILL:                             The methods or materials for replacing
                                      excavated material in a trench or pit.
                                      To excavate an underground cylindrical
BORE OR BORING:                       cavity for the insertion of a pipe or
                                      electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR:                       That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE:                        That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM:                         That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE:                         The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or
                                      slurry to be transported.
                                      A structural protective enclosure for
CASING:                               transmittal devices such as: carrier
                                      pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber
                                      optic devices.
                                      The total roadside border area, starting
                                      at the edge of the pavement, available
                                      for safe use by errant vehicles. This
                                      area may consist of a shoulder, a
                                      recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable
CLEAR ZONE:                           slope, and a clear run out area. The
                                      desired width is dependent upon the
                                      traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
                                      roadside geometry. Distances are
                                      specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design
                                      Guide".
                                      Protective wrapping or mastic cover
COATING:                              applied to buried pipe for protection
                                      against external corrosion.
CODE:                                 The Village Code of the Village of Lisle.
CONDUCTOR:                            Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT:                              A casing or encasement for wires or
                                      cables.
                                      The installation, repair, maintenance,
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT:            placement, alteration, enlargement,
                                      demolition, modification or abandonment
                                      in place of facilities.
COVER:                                The depth of earth or backfill over
                                      buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY:                    A facility that crosses one or more
                                      right-of- way lines of a right-of-way.
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR:        The Village Development Services Director
                                      or his or her designee.
                                      For the purposes of this chapter, any
                                      work that obstructs the right-of-way or
                                      causes a material adverse effect on the
                                      use of the right-of-way for its intended
                                      use. Such work may include, without
                                      limitation, the following: excavating or
                                      other cutting; placement (whether
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY:             temporary or permanent) of materials,
                                      equipment, devices, or structures; damage
                                      to vegetation; and compaction or
                                      loosening of the soil, and shall not
                                      include the parking of vehicles or
                                      equipment in a manner that does not
                                      materially obstruct the flow of traffic
                                      on a highway.
                                      Any immediate maintenance to the facility
                                      required for the safety of the public
EMERGENCY:                            using or in the vicinity of the right-
                                      of-way or immediate maintenance required
                                      for the health and safety of the general
                                      public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT:                           Provision of a protective casing.
                                      Materials, tools, implements, supplies,
EQUIPMENT:                            and/or other items used to facilitate
                                      construction of facilities.
                                      The making of a hole or cavity by
EXCAVATION:                           removing material, or laying bare by
                                      digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE:                     Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
                                      designation.
                                      All structures, devices, objects, and
                                      materials (including, but not limited to,
                                      track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber
                                      optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes,
                                      equipment enclosures, cabinets,
                                      pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
                                      covers, pipes, cables, small wireless
FACILITY:                             facilities, as defined in this chapter,
                                      and appurtenances thereto) located on,
                                      over, above, along, upon, under, across,
                                      or within rights-of-way under this
                                      chapter. For purposes of this chapter,
                                      the term "facility" shall not include any
                                      facility owned or operated by the
                                      Village.
                                      A facility that is not a crossing
FREESTANDING FACILITY:                facility or a parallel facility, such as
                                      a monopole, utility pole, antenna,
                                      transformer, pump, or meter station.
                                      Roadway, usually parallel, providing
FRONTAGE ROAD:                        access to land adjacent to the highway
                                      where it is precluded by control of
                                      access to a highway.
                                      Any substance or material which, due to
                                      its quantity, form, concentration,
                                      location, or other characteristics, is
                                      determined by the Public Works Director
                                      to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk
                                      to the life, health or safety of persons
                                      or property or to the ecological balance
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:                  of the environment, including, but not
                                      limited to explosives, radioactive
                                      materials, petroleum or petroleum
                                      products or gases, poisons, etiology
                                      (biological) agents, flammables,
                                      corrosives or any substance determined to
                                      be hazardous or toxic under any Federal
                                      or State law, statute or regulation.
                                      A specific type of right-of-way used for
                                      vehicular traffic including rural or
                                      urban roads or streets. "Highway"
                                      includes all highway land and
HIGHWAY:                              improvements, including roadways, ditches
                                      and embankments, bridges, drainage
                                      structures, signs, guardrails, protective
                                      structures and appurtenances necessary or
                                      convenient for vehicle traffic.
                                      The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois
HIGHWAY CODE:                         Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as
                                      amended from time to time.
                                      A person or entity that has received
                                      authorization to offer or provide cable
HOLDER:                               or video service from the ICC pursuant to
                                      the Illinois Cable and Video Competition
                                      Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
                                      401.
ICC:                                  Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT:                                 Illinois Department of Transportation.
                                      Pushing a pipe horizontally under a
JACKING:                              roadway by mechanical means with or
                                      without boring.
                                      Pushing a pipe through the earth using
JETTING:                              water under pressure to create a cavity
                                      ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE:                            The use of pole lines, trenches or other
                                      facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
                                      The joint utility locating information
JULIE:                                for excavators utility notification
                                      program.
MAJOR INTERSECTION:                   The intersection of two (2) or more major
                                      arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY:                            The presence of facilities on, over or
                                      under right-of- way.
                                      A facility that is generally parallel or
PARALLEL FACILITY:                    longitudinal to the centerline of a
                                      right-of-way.
PARKWAY:                              Any portion of the right-of-way not
                                      improved by street or sidewalk.
                                      The removal of an area of pavement for
PAVEMENT CUT:                         access to facility or for the
                                      construction of a facility.
                                      That entity to which a permit has been
PERMITTEE:                            issued pursuant to sections
                                      7-1-4 and
                                      7-1-5 of this chapter.
                                      Pipelines carrying crude or refined
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES:         liquid petroleum products including, but
                                      not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
                                      propane, butane, or coal slurry.
                                      That which is performable, feasible or
PRACTICABLE:                          possible, rather than that which is
                                      simply convenient.
                                      The internal force acting radially
PRESSURE:                             against the walls of a carrier pipe
                                      expressed in pounds per square inch gauge
                                      (psig).
                                      That which is done within a period of
PROMPT:                               time specified by the Village. If no time
                                      period is specified, the period shall be
                                      thirty (30) days.
                                      A legal entity that constitutes or is
PUBLIC ENTITY:                        part of the government, whether at local,
                                      State or Federal level.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:                The Village Public Works Director or his
                                      or her designee.
                                      The repair of a right-of-way, highway,
RESTORATION:                          roadway, or other area disrupted by the
                                      construction of a facility.
                                      Any street, alley, other land or
                                      waterway, dedicated or commonly used for
                                      pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
                                      similar purposes, including utility
                                      easements, in which the Village has the
                                      right and authority to authorize,
                                      regulate or permit the location of
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY:        facilities other than those of the
                                      Village. Right-of-way or "rights-of-way"
                                      shall not include any real or personal
                                      Village property that is not specifically
                                      described in the previous sentence and
                                      shall not include Village buildings,
                                      fixtures and other structures or
                                      improvements, regardless of whether they
                                      are situated in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY:                              That part of the highway that includes
                                      the pavement and shoulders.
                                      The transmitting, supplying, or
                                      furnishing of telecommunications and all
                                      services rendered in connection therewith
                                      for a consideration, other than between a
                                      parent corporation and its wholly owned
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: subsidiaries or between wholly owned
                                      subsidiaries, when the gross charge made
                                      by one such corporation to another such
                                      corporation is not greater than the gross
                                      charge paid to the retailer for their use
                                      or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND:                        That amount of security required pursuant
                                      to section 7-1-11 of this chapter.
                                      A width of roadway, adjacent to the
                                      pavement, providing lateral support to
SHOULDER:                             the pavement edge and providing an area
                                      for emergency vehicular stops and storage
                                      of snow removed from the pavement.
                                      A decision(s) consistent with generally
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT:           accepted engineering principles,
                                      practices and experience.
                                      This term includes, but is not limited
                                      to, messages or information transmitted
                                      through use of local, toll and wide area
                                      telephone service, channel services,
                                      telegraph services, teletypewriter
                                      service, computer exchange service,
                                      private line services, mobile radio
                                      services, cellular mobile
                                      telecommunications services, stationary
                                      two-way radio, paging service and any
                                      other form of mobile or portable one-way
                                      or two- way communications, and any other
                                      transmission of messages or information
                                      by electronic or similar means, between
                                      or among points by wire, cable, fiber
                                      optics, laser, microwave, radio,
                                      satellite, or similar facilities.
                                      "Private line" means a dedicated non-
                                      traffic sensitive service for a single
                                      customer that entitles the customer to
                                      exclusive or priority use of a
                                      communications channel, or a group of
                                      such channels, from one or more specified
                                      locations to one or more other specified
TELECOMMUNICATIONS:                   locations. "Telecommunications" shall not
                                      include value added services in which
                                      computer processing applications are used
                                      to act on the form, content, code and
                                      protocol of the information for purposes
                                      other than transmission.
                                      "Telecommunications" shall not include
                                      purchase of telecommunications by a
                                      telecommunications service provider for
                                      use as a component part of the service
                                      provided by such provider to the ultimate
                                      retail consumer who originates or
                                      terminates the end to end communications.
                                      "Telecommunications" shall not include
                                      the provision of cable services through a
                                      cable system as defined in the Cable
                                      Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
                                      sections 521 and following), as now or
                                      hereafter amended, or cable or other
                                      programming services subject to an open
                                      video system fee payable to the Village
                                      through an open video system as defined
                                      in the rules of the Federal
                                      Communications Commission (47 CFR section
                                      76.1500 and following), as now or
                                      hereafter amended.
                                      Any person that installs, owns, operates
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:          or controls facilities in the right-of-
                                      way used or designed to be used to
                                      transmit telecommunications in any form.
                                      Means and includes every person engaged
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER:          in making sales of telecommunications at
                                      retail as defined herein.
                                      A relatively narrow open excavation for
TRENCH:                               the installation of an underground
                                      facility.
                                      The individual or entity owning or
UTILITY:                              operating any facility that is not a
                                      small wireless facility as defined in
                                      this chapter.
                                      A pipe to allow the dissipation into the
VENT:                                 atmosphere of gases or vapors from an
                                      underground casing.
                                      That term as defined in section 21-201(v)
VIDEO SERVICE:                        of the Illinois Cable and Video
                                      Competition Law of 2007, 220 Illinois
                                      Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
VILLAGE:                              The Village of Lisle, DuPage County,
                                      Illinois.
                                      The Public Works Director or the person
VILLAGE ENGINEER:                     or firm charged with the responsibility
                                      of municipal engineering matters.
VILLAGE MANAGER:                      The Village Manager or his or her
                                      designee.
WATER LINES:                          Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
                                      Boring using water under pressure at the
WET BORING:                           cutting auger to soften the earth and to
                                      provide a sluice for the excavated
                                      material.
 
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall make any excavation in any Village right-of-way, or construct
(as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within any Village right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of
the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right-of- way (as defined
in this chapter), or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within
the right-of-way, without first filing an application and obtaining a permit
from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right-of-way.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-6: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   (A)   Applications required under this Chapter must be submitted in a form
and in such manner as required by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Applications must include materials and information as may be required
by the Public Works Director to establish that the proposed excavation or
construction activity complies with all applicable requirements of this
Chapter.
   (C)   The Public Works Director shall examine or cause to be examined
applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after
filing. If the application or required plans do not conform to the requirements
of this Chapter, the Public Works Director shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Public Works Director is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the applicable requirements of
this Chapter, the Public Works Director shall issue a permit therefor as soon
as practicable.
   (D)   Authority to withhold permits. The Public Works Director may deny or
withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of authorization being
requested by a utility, contractor, or person who otherwise caused an
uncorrected violation of a provision of any code or ordinance of the Village,
or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other
authorization previously granted by the Village.
   (E)   An application for permit shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180-
days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good
faith or a permit has been issued.
   (F)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Public Works
Director shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility
may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the Public Works Director fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to this Chapter, the telecommunications
retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and
all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to
be constructed.
      4.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Complete
applications by a utility that is a holder of a State issued authorization
under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty
five (45) days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by
the Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes,
ordinances, and regulations.
   (G)   Applicant's Duty to Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the applicant in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   (H)   Permit Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, applications for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code. No application fee is required
to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the Municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act. Permit fees shall double for any person who commences any
work before obtaining the necessary permits.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-7: DESIGN PLANS:
   (A)   The Public Works Director is authorized to determine what design plans
are required to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter, the Village of Lisle
Design Manual, and any other code or ordinance of the Village of Lisle.
   (B)   Design plans are to be prepared by an Illinois licensed design
professional where required by statute.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-8: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created: A permit from
the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this Chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does not create a
property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights
of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-9: VALIDITY OF PERMIT:
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for,
or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or
any other code or ordinance of the Village of Lisle. Permits presuming to give
authority to violation or cancel the provisions of this Chapter or any other
code or ordinance of the Village of Lisle shall not be valid. The issuance of a
permit based on required plans and other data shall not prevent the Public
Works Director from requiring the correction of errors in the required plans
and other data.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-10: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
If the work on site authorized by such permit is not completed within 120 days
from the date of issuance, the permit shall become invalid. The Public Works
Director is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time,
for periods not more than thirty (30) days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-11: STOP WORK ORDER:
   (A)   Authority: The Public Works Director or Development Services Director
may issue a stop work order for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this Chapter or any other code or ordinance of
the Village of Lisle;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given
to the permit holder, the permit holder's authorized agent, or the person
performing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and
the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume.
   (C)   Failure to Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the
provisions of subsection of this section, the Village or its designee may, at
the option of the Village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than
twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or
equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee
of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the
Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all
costs of removal.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-12: PRECONSTRUCTION MEETING REQUIRED:
No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this Chapter
prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction
meeting. The Public Works Director may waive the requirement for a
preconstruction meeting for work which is substantially similar to that for
which a meeting has been previously held. The preconstruction meeting, if any,
shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such
Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other facilities in the
area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other facilities,
use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress
by adjacent property owners.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-13: INSPECTIONS:
Construction pursuant to a permit issued under this Chapter shall be subject to
inspection and such construction or work shall remain visible and able to be
accessed for inspections purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an
inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter or any other code or ordinance of the Village of
Lisle. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this Chapter or any other code or ordinance of the Village of
Lisle shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their
authorized agent to cause work to remain visible and able to be accessed for
inspection purposes. The Public Works Director nor the Village of Lisle shall
not be liable for the expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any
material required to allow inspection.
   (A)   Preliminary Inspection: Before the issuance of a permit, the Public
Works Director is authorized to examine or cause to be examined the site for
which an application has been filed.
   (B)   Required Inspections: The Public Works Director is authorized to make
or require inspections of any construction or work when such inspection is
necessary to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or any
other codes or ordinance of the Village of Lisle.
   (C)   Inspection Agencies: The Public Works Director is authorized to accept
reports inspections agencies, provided that such agencies satisfy the
requirements as to qualifications and reliability as determined by the Public
Works Director.
   (D)   Inspection Requests: It shall be the duty of the permit holder or
their authorized agent to notify the Public Works Director when work is ready
for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to
and means for inspections of such work performed under this Chapter.
   (E)   Inspection Approval Required: Work shall not be done beyond the point
indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining approval of the
Public Works Director. The Public Works Director, upon notification, shall make
the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the
construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or
the permit holder's authorized agent wherein the same fails to comply with this
Chapter. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion
shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-14: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within thirty (30)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-15: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
After the Public Works Director inspects the construction and does not find a
violation of the provisions of this Chapter or any other code or ordinance of
the Village of Lisle, the Public Works Director shall issue a certificate of
compliance that contains the following:
   (A)   The permit number.
   (B)   The address or location description of the site.
   (C)   A statement that the site has been inspected for compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
   (D)   Any special stipulations and conditions of the certificate.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-16: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each wireless provider, utility or contractor
excavating or occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-
of- way shall secure and maintain liability insurance policies insuring the
wireless provider, utility or contractor as named insured and naming the
Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and
employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsection (A)1 of
this section, and in
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures":
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures":
         (a)   Bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Property damage resulting from any one accident; and
         (c)   All other types of liability;
      2.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      3.   Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks.
      If the utility or contractor is not providing such insurance to protect
the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors
and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies Required: The wireless provider or utility shall provide copies
of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten (10)
days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
   (D)   Maintenance and Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or not
to renew.
      1.   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice,
and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
wireless provider or utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence
of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-Insurance: A wireless provider or utility may self- insure all or
a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by
subsection (A) of this section. A wireless provider or utility that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (A) of
this section, or the requirements of subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this
section. A wireless provider or utility that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability
to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
subsection (A) of this section, such as evidence that the wireless provider or
utility is a "private self-insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Wireless Provider Or
Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the wireless provider or utility to
the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the
insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-17: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying, excavating, or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a
utility or contractor shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold
the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees,
agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the contractor, wireless
provider or utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors
or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-
of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such
acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the wireless
provider or utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by
the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-18: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section and
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance
with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion
of the work authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as
security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in
the form of cash or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to
the Village. Any letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall,
at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
      2.    Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Public Works Director, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Public Works
Director may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post
a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing and Return of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-19: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less
than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership or control of any
facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new
owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and
privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect
to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. Any transactions which
singularly or collectively result in a change of ten percent (10%) or more of
the ownership or working control of the grantee or of the ownership or working
control of affiliated entities having ownership or working control of the
grantee, shall be considered a transfer of ownership or control. Transactions
between affiliated entities are not exempt from the notice requirement.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-
of- way.
   (C)   Insurance And Security: All required insurance coverage or security
instrument must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-20: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this Code.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility or
contractor is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable Federal,
State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the wireless
provider or utility or contractor's workers when performing any work on the
rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the wireless provider, utility or
contractor shall notify the resident, business or institution of the
approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that
in cases involving emergency repairs performed pursuant to this Chapter, the
utility contractor shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances. It is the permittee's responsibility to notify the Lisle
Woodridge Fire District, the Lisle Police Department and the Lisle Public Works
Department if the permittee's construction work inhibits or prohibits the flow
of traffic on the roadway.
   (E)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to its
attention by the Village.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-21: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference with Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the Public Works Director determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
Village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the Village's utility facilities. All utility facilities
shall be located so to maintain not less than five feet (5') of clearance from
the Village's utility facilities, except where it is found to be commercially
impracticable by the Public Works Director.
      2.   Minimum Interference and Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      3.   No Interference with Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      4.   No Limitations on Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      5.   Size of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face
of the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Culverts or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be
located in culverts or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right- of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal Regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within the right-of-way.
      2.   The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities Installed Above Ground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles or
monopoles is strongly discouraged.
   (G)   Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the wireless provider or utility has demonstrated that
all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means
shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent
poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated
from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that
are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the wireless provider or
utility and their comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the wireless facility or
utility service as compared to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-22: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         (a)   Pits and Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Public
Works Director from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
         (a)   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only
one-half (½) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Public Works Director.
         (b)   Open Trench and Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD). Where practicable, the
excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip Line of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Public Works Director, the utility, at its expense, shall remove
any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place
and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Public Works
Director.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts shall be permitted on a highway only if
that portion of the highway is closed to traffic, unless otherwise authorized
by the Public Works Director. If pavement cuts without road closure is
authorized by the Public Works Director, the following requirements shall
apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with controlled low strength material (CLSM), as
designated by the Public Works Director.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                    determined by Village)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection
 
   (B)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         (a)   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
"Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the
National Electrical Safety Code.
         (b)   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
            (4)   Burial of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year unless otherwise
permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after
placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities other than Electric Power or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois".\
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Public Works Director. With the approval of
the Public Works Director, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used
in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances
shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage on Right-Of-Way: No material shall be stored on the
right-of-way or the root zone of trees and shrubs without the prior written
approval of the Public Works Director. When such storage is permitted, all
pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed
along the right-of- way prior to and during installation in a manner to
minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or
damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on
right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the Village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Public Works Director when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction
are those set forth in Title 5 of the Village Code.
      4.   No tractor, traction engine, motor truck, tracked or lugged vehicle
or other similar vehicle shall be operated across, over or along any Village
street if any such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road wheels any
block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug or any projection of metal or wood which
projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the tire; except this
prohibition shall not apply to tractors or tractor engines equipped with what
is known as crawler type tractors when same does not contain any projections of
any kind likely to injure the surface of the road, nor to tractors, traction
engines and similar vehicles which have upon their road wheels V-shaped,
diagonal or other cleats arranged in such a manner as to be in continuous
contact with the road surface. In no event shall the oil mat surface of any oil
treated Village street be used as an area or space for turning any tractor or
other farm or construction machinery in carrying on or performing any farm or
construction operations on adjacent land. Provided, further, this prohibition
shall not apply to the use of "snow chains" on vehicles during months when
substantial snowfalls can reasonably be expected in this vicinity.
   (E)   Location of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-23: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the Village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right- of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application for Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers, supervised by a certified arborist, who are experienced in accepted
tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously
accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The Village may require the removal and replacement of
trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable
condition.
   (C)   Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance: The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the Village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Public Works Director that such spraying is the only practicable method
of vegetation control.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-24: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the
Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate Authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or
upon, the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities: The Village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment Of Facilities: As used in this chapter, a facility that is
not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the
Village, the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days. The
owner of the abandoned facility must remove the facility within ninety (90)
days after sending such written notice to the Village. The Village may direct
the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Public Works
Director determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. If the facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of the
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-25: NOTICE OF COMPLETION, CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility or contractor shall remove all excess material and restore all turf
and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This
includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of pavement
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Public Works
Director. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-
of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to
the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may
be extended by the Public Works Director for good cause shown. Failure by the
utility or contractor to comply with the restoration work requirements within
ten (10) days, referred to in this section, or failure to request inspection of
same, shall result in the Public Works Director withdrawing an amount from the
construction deposit, deemed sufficient by the Public Works Director to
complete the restoration work.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-26: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Public Works Director or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency Repairs: The utility or contractor must file in writing with
the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-27: APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
   The Village Board shall hear appeals where it is alleged there has been an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Public
Works Director in the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this
Chapter.
   (A)   Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed within forty-five
(45) days of the date of the order, requirement, decision or determination
being appealed.
   (B)   In acting on the appeal, the Village Board must grant to the Public
Works Director's decision a presumption of correctness, placing the burden of
persuasion of error on the appellant.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-1-28: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs,
including third party claims, because the wireless provider or utility will not
or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the
wireless provider, utility or contractor shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the wireless provider
or utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of
installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that
is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a wireless provider, utility or contractor that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may
have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 2
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Purpose And Scope
7-2-2: Conflicts With Other Ordinances
7-2-3: Conflicts With State And Federal Laws
7-2-4: Definitions
7-2-5: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
7-2-6: Permit Required
7-2-7: Permit Exceptions
7-2-8: Collocation Requirements And Conditions
7-2-9: Application Fees
7-2-10: Exceptions To Applicability
7-2-11: Pre-Existing Agreements
7-2-12: Annual Recurring Rate
7-2-13: Abandonment
7-2-14: Indemnification
7-2-15: Insurance
7-2-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations, standards and
procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the Village, or outside the rights-of-way on property
zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner
that is consistent with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, 50 ILCS
840/1 et seq.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-2: CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
This Chapter supersedes all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances adopted prior
hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-3: CONFLICTS WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
In the event that applicable state or federal laws or regulations conflict with
the requirements of this Chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the
requirements of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating
state or federal laws or regulations.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
                                        Communications equipment that transmits
                                        or receives electromagnetic radio
                                        frequency (RF) radiation, to be
                                        operated or operating from a fixed
                                        location pursuant to Federal
ANTENNA:                                Communications Commission (FCC)
                                        authorization, for the provision of
                                        personal wireless service and any
                                        commingled information services. The
                                        antenna does not include an
                                        unintentional radiator, mobile station
                                        or device.
                                        Uniform building, fire, electrical,
                                        plumbing or mechanical codes adopted by
APPLICABLE CODES:                       a recognized national code organization
                                        or local amendments to those codes,
                                        including the National Electric Safety
                                        Code.
                                        Any person or entity that submits an
APPLICANT:                              application and the agents, employees
                                        and contractors of such person or
                                        entity.
                                        A request submitted by an applicant to
                                        the City/Village/Town for a permit to
                                        collocate small wireless facilities at
APPLICATION:                            a specified location, and a request
                                        that includes the installation of a new
                                        utility pole for such collocation, as
                                        well as any applicable fee for the
                                        review of such application.
                                        To install, mount, maintain, modify,
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION:               operate, or replace wireless facilities
                                        on or adjacent to a wireless support
                                        structure or utility pole.
                                        Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
                                        522(6), as amended; information
                                        service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
                                        (24), as amended; telecommunications
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE:                 service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
                                        (53), as amended; mobile service, as
                                        defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
                                        amended; or wireless service other than
                                        mobile service.
                                        A cable operator, as defined in 47
                                        U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider
                                        of information service, as defined in
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER:        47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a
                                        telecommunications carrier, as defined
                                        in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a
                                        wireless provider.
FCC:                                    The Federal Communications Commission
                                        of the United States.
FEE:                                    A one-time charge.
                                        A building, property, or site, or group
                                        of buildings, properties, or sites that
                                        are either (i) listed in the National
                                        Register of Historic Places or formally
                                        determined eligible for listing by the
                                        Keeper of the National Register, the
                                        individual who has been delegated the
                                        authority by the federal agency to list
                                        properties and determine their
                                        eligibility for the National Register,
                                        in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i
                                        through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
                                        codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C;
                                        or (ii) designated as a locally
                                        landmarked building, property, site, or
                                        historic district by an ordinance
                                        adopted by the City/Village/Town
                                        pursuant to a preservation program that
                                        meets the requirements of the Certified
                                        Local Government Program of the
                                        Illinois State Historic Preservation
                                        Office or where such certification of
                                        the preservation program by the
                                        Illinois State Historic Preservation
                                        Office is pending.
                                        A federal or state statute, common law,
LAW:                                    code, rule, regulation, order, or local
                                        ordinance or resolution.
                                        A small wireless facility that is not
                                        larger in dimension than twenty-four
                                        (24) inches in length, fifteen (15)
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY:                inches in width, and twelve (12) inches
                                        in height and that has an exterior
                                        antenna, if any, no longer than eleven
                                        (11) inches.
                                        A utility pole owned or operated by the
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE:                 City/Village/Town in public rights-of-
                                        way.
                                        A written authorization required by the
PERMIT:                                 City/Village/Town to perform an action
                                        or initiate, continue or complete a
                                        project.
                                        An individual, corporation, limited
PERSON:                                 liability company, partnership,
                                        association, trust, or other entity or
                                        organization.
                                        The functional division of the federal
                                        government, the state, a unit of local
                                        government, or a special purpose
                                        district located in whole or in part
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY:                   within this state, that provides or has
                                        authority to provide firefighting,
                                        police, ambulance, medical, or other
                                        emergency services to respond to and
                                        manage emergency incidents.
RATE:                                   A recurring charge.
                                        The area on, below, or above a public
                                        roadway, highway, street, public
RIGHT-OF-WAY:                           sidewalk, alley or utility easement
                                        dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-
                                        way does not include City/Village/Town-
                                        owned aerial lines.
                                        A wireless facility that meets both of
                                        the following qualifications: (i) each
                                        antenna is located inside an enclosure
                                        of no more than six (6) cubic feet in
                                        volume or, in the case of an antenna
                                        that has exposed elements, the antenna
                                        and all of its exposed elements could
                                        fit within an imaginary enclosure of no
                                        more than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii)
                                        all other wireless equipment attached
                                        directly to a utility pole associated
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY:                with the facility is cumulatively no
                                        more than twenty-five (25) cubic feet
                                        in volume. The following types of
                                        associated ancillary equipment are not
                                        included in the calculation of
                                        equipment volume: electric meter,
                                        concealment elements,
                                        telecommunications demarcation box,
                                        ground-based enclosures, grounding
                                        equipment, power transfer switch, cut-
                                        off switch and vertical cable runs for
                                        the connection of power and other
                                        services.
                                        A pole or similar structure that is
                                        used in whole or in part by a
UTILITY POLE:                           communications service provider or for
                                        electric distribution, lighting,
                                        traffic control or a similar function.
                                        Equipment at a fixed location that
                                        enables wireless communications between
                                        user equipment and a communications
                                        network, including: (i) equipment
                                        associated with wireless
                                        communications; and (ii) radio
                                        transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
                                        fiber optic cable, regular and backup
                                        power supplies, and comparable
                                        equipment, regardless of technological
WIRELESS FACILITY:                      configuration. Wireless facility
                                        includes small wireless facilities.
                                        Wireless facility does not include: (i)
                                        the structure or improvements on, under
                                        or within which the equipment is
                                        collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul
                                        facilities, coaxial or fiber optic
                                        cable that is between wireless support
                                        structures or utility poles or coaxial,
                                        or fiber optic cable that is otherwise
                                        not immediately adjacent to or directly
                                        associated with an antenna.
                                        Any person authorized to provide
                                        telecommunications service in the state
                                        that builds or installs wireless
                                        communication transmission equipment,
                                        wireless facilities, wireless support
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER:       structures or utility poles and that is
                                        not a wireless services provider but is
                                        acting as an agent or a contractor for
                                        a wireless services provider for the
                                        application submitted to the City/
                                        Village/Town.
WIRELESS PROVIDER:                      A wireless infrastructure provider or a
                                        wireless services provider.
                                        Any services provided to the general
                                        public, including a particular class of
                                        customers, and made available on a
WIRELESS SERVICES:                      nondiscriminatory basis using licensed
                                        or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
                                        fixed location or mobile, provided
                                        using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER:             A person who provides wireless
                                        services.
                                        A freestanding structure, such as a
                                        monopole; tower, either guyed or self-
                                        supporting; billboard; or other
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE:             existing or proposed structure designed
                                        to support or capable of supporting
                                        wireless facilities. Wireless support
                                        structure does not include a utility
                                        pole.
 
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-5: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to
administrative review, except as provided in Section
7-2-8(I) regarding Height Exceptions or Variances, but not subject to zoning
review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning
district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for
commercial or industrial use.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a
small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and
permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
   (A)   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
      1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
      3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
      6.   Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation
Requirements and Conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
      7.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      8.   Certification by a radio engineer that a new, replacement or
modified small wireless facility operates within all applicable FCC standards.
   (B)   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
      1.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
      2.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
      However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy
five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
      The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this Ordinance.
      FCC regulation provides that an application to collocate a small wireless
facility using an existing structure shall be granted or denied within sixty
(60) days of submission of a completed application. Delays beyond that time
limit are available only in exceptional circumstances. These FCC time limits
may be enforced through litigation.
      3.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes
the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
      However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one
hundred and five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
      The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this Ordinance.
      FCC regulation provides that an application to collocate a small wireless
facility using a new structure shall be granted or denied within ninety (90)
days of submission of a completed application. Delays beyond that time limit
are available only in exceptional circumstances. These FCC time limits may be
enforced through litigation.
      4.   The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this Ordinance.
      If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the Collocation Requirements and
Conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
      The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific
code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies
an application.
      The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and
resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee.
The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30)
days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved.
Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial
shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees,
and recommencement of the Village's review period.
      The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
      Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
      5.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement,
provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole
by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant
shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
   (C)   Completeness of Application: Within ten (10) days after receiving an
application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
ten (10) days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated
in the permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
FCC regulation allows ten (10) days for determination of completion, and that
ten (10)-day time frame replaces the thirty (30)-day period provided in the
state Act.
      Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
   (D)   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
      1.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village;
or,
      2.   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay.
   (E)   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
      If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided, or that do not qualify for consolidated
treatment, or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each
collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
   (F)   Duration of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of
not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this Ordinance.
   (G)   If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable Village code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
   (H)   Means of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-7: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      1.   Routine maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications and certifications consistent with the
Section titled Application Requirements; or
      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-8: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village's reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   (B)   Installation and Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
Ordinance. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   (C)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
      A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type
and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
      Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on
such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code
of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (D)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on
the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space,"
"communication worker safety zone," and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (E)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes,
including acoustic regulations, and local code provisions or regulations that
concern public safety.
   (F)   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that
are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Village
ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   (G)   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this Collocation
Requirements and Conditions Section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocat small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category
of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a
single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within two hundred
(200) feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
      If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
   (H)   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which
small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
      1.   Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred (300) feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
      2.   Forty five (45) feet above ground level.
   (I)   Height Exceptions or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for
a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which
the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall
apply for a Variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set
forth in Title 5 of the Village Code.
   (J)   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (K)   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
   (L)   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
   (M)   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   (N)   Residential Design Standards:
      1.   Purpose: Ensure visually acceptable facility design and to provide
discretion on required and preferred design of small wireless facilities.
      2.   Applicability: These design standards shall apply to each facility
located in a district zoned for residential uses:
         (a)   Applicants must use architectural treatments and stealth
techniques to reduce potential visual impacts from all small wireless
facilities.
         (b)   All new utility poles installed for the purpose of mounting a
facility must be stealth or camouflaged to blend into the surrounding
environment.
         (c)   Small wireless facilities and all ancillary equipment associated
with the facility must not emit sound.
         (d)   Cables must be routed directly from the ground through the pole
and equipment enclosures must completely enclose or hide cabling. No exposed
cable is allowed.
         (e)   No flashing lights or unnecessary, non-essential stickers are
allowed to be placed on any facility. Stickers must be designed in the same
color as the pole to which they are attached.
         (f)   In no case shall equipment block the sidewalk or pedestrian
pathway. All installations must maintain accessibility requirements and
standards.
         (g)   All newly installed equipment must be painted with graffiti-
resistant paint to match pole color and surroundings.
         (h)   Colors and materials for small wireless facilities shall be
chosen to minimize the visibility of the facility.
         (i)   Antennas attached to existing poles or Municipally-owned
infrastructure shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure.
         (j)   Any ground-mounted facility shall be painted with non-
reflective matte finish paint using color shades that are comparable or blend
with surrounding natural elements such as soil, trees, or grasslands. Any
ground-mounted facility shall be screened from the yard of the property in
front of which it is located using year-round landscaping materials. The owner
of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the landscaping materials for a
period of one year from planting.
         (k)   All disturbed pavement and landscaping shall be replaced and
areas of bare or disturbed soils must be re-vegetated. If replacement landscape
is determined to be infeasible the Village may accept mitigation funds to use
elsewhere. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the
restoration work or reseeding for a period of one year.
         (l)   No facility may display any signage or advertisements unless
expressly allowed by the Village in a written approval, recommended under FCC
regulations or required by law or permit condition. Every facility shall at all
times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner and
provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a local or
toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's operations center.
All required or permitted signage must face toward the street or otherwise
placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and structures.
   (O)   Design Standards In Special Aesthetic/Economic Purpose Zones:
      1.   Purpose: To protect and promote the Village's unique character in a
manner consistent with State and Federal laws and regulations.
      2.   Applicability: These design standards shall apply to: a) each area,
district, neighborhood or zone expressly designated in the Village's
Comprehensive Plan as having special aesthetic or economic impacts on the
welfare of the community; and b) each redevelopment area designed under the Tax
Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act or the Business District Development and
Redevelopment Act:
         (a)   Siting of small wireless facilities in special aesthetic/
economic purpose zones must respect the existing character or design ordinance
of established zone.
         (b)   Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment
measures in their applications.
         (c)   Effective camouflage so as to disguise the facility so that it
appears to be something other than a facility and is at the same time
compatible with its surroundings (for example, designed to look like a tree).
         (d)   Small wireless facilities must be designed so that the
facilities' silhouette, mass and color are masked in such a way as to be
virtually indistinguishable from their background.
   (P)   Design Standards In Historic Districts:
      1.   Purpose: To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the Village by identifying, preserving, protecting, enhancing and
encouraging the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of such areas,
properties, structures, sites and objects having a special historical interest
or value to the Village and its citizens.
      2.   Applicability: These design standards apply in any historic district
or on any historic landmark:
         (a)   Districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant
in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture, that are
listed, or are eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic
Places are to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible. Local landmarked
buildings, properties, sites, or historic districts that are so recognized by
an ordinance that meets the requirements of the certified Local Government
Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office are also to be
avoided, to the greatest extent possible.
         (b)   Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment
measures in their applications.
         (c)   Applicant must implement said Village-approved design concepts,
and the use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order to achieve
compliance with historic preservation review.
         (d)   Prior to submitting an application, where the applicant submits
an application to site facilities in a historic district, the applicant must
meet with the Village to discuss any potential design modifications appropriate
for the installation.
         (e)   When siting a facility in a historic district, wireless provider
must avoid removing, obscuring or altering any historic material or significant
architectural features. Rehabilitation and make-ready work must not destroy the
distinguishing character of the property or its environment.
         (f)   Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather
than replaced, wherever possible by means such as rust removal, calking,
limited paint removal and reapplication of paint.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-9: APPLICATION FEES:
Applications for permit pursuant to this Chapter shall be accompanied by a fee
in the amount established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-10: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in this Ordinance authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   (A)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
   (B)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or,
   (C)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the
Illinois Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public
commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this Ordinance do
not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless
facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the
Illinois Public Utilities Act.
      For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning
given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to relieve any person from any
requirement: (a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service; or, (b) to obtain any required permission to
install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than
small wireless facilities subject to this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-11: PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to
the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles, that are in
effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions
contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply
with this Ordinance.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this Ordinance for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village that
it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in
effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless
facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the wireless provider
provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-12: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals: (i) two hundred dollars ($200) per year; or, (ii) the
actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of
space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200) payable on the first day after the
first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-13: ABANDONMENT:
A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt
of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-14: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this Ordinance and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-2-15: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, commercial general liability insurance in an amount as established by
the annual fee ordinance combined single limit per occurrence for bodily
injury, personal injury, and property damage, an amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" aggregate which shall name them, the village and the village's
representative as additional insured. The Village shall be furnished
certificates of insurance issued by the companies carrying the risk, which said
certificates shall be in form and substance satisfactory to and approved by the
Village.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this Section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 3
ENCROACHMENTS AND PRIVATE USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose
7-3-2: Encroachments Prohibited
7-3-3: Permissible Encroachments
7-3-4: Right-Of-Way Encroachment License Procedures
7-3-5: Mailboxes
7-3-6: Vestibules
7-3-7: Block Parties
7-3-8: Outdoor Eating And Drinking On Public Right-Of-Way
7-3-9: Outdoor Retail Display On Public Right-Of-Way
7-3-10: Violations; Penalties
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this Chapter are intended to:
   (A)   Establish policies and procedures for the private use and encroachment
on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction;
   (B)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
   (C)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
   (D)   Assure the continued safe use of the Village's rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-2: ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Purpose: In order to protect Village, County, State and Federal
rights-of- way and the public, it is necessary for the Village to adopt
regulations governing encroachments on the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Prohibited Encroachments: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect
or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any "encroachment"
as defined in this Section, except those set forth as permissible encroachments
or those authorized by a right-of-way encroachment license, within the limits
of the Village, County, State and Federal rights-of-way.
   (C)   Definitions:
 
              Any building, fence, sign, table, chair, construction material
ENCROACHMENT: and equipment, or any other structure or object, including
              vegetation, of any kind which is placed, located, or maintained
              in, on, under or over any portion of the right-of-way.
 
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-3: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS:
   (A)   Public infrastructure.
   (B)   Utilities.
   (C)   Irrigation Systems: The Village shall be held harmless for any and all
liability including expenses, costs, and fees, arising out of or associated
with the maintenance, repair, or condition of an irrigation system placed
within the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Vegetation: Any tree or tree limb, shrub or other vegetation which is
located in or overhangs any right-of-way that does not impede or interfere with
vehicular, pedestrian, or bicyclist travel, including safe line of sight, or
otherwise negatively impact health and life safety as may be determined by the
Village.
   (E)   Mailboxes in accordance with the mailbox regulations of this Chapter.
   (F)   Vestibules in accordance with the vestibule regulations of this
Chapter.
   (G)   Block parties in accordance with the block party regulations of this
Chapter.
   (H)   Outdoor eating and drinking on public right-of-way in accordance with
the outdoor eating and drinking on public right-of-way regulations of this
Chapter.
   (I)   Outdoor retail display on public right-of-way in accordance with the
outdoor retail display on public right-of-way regulations of this Chapter.
   (J)   Other encroachments authorized in accordance with the right-of-way
encroachment license procedures of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-4: RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT LICENSE PROCEDURES:
Village right-of-way encroachment, other than requires Village approval of an
easement encroachment license. Said license authorizes the encroachment and
establishes terms and conditions.
   (A)   Application Filing: Village right-of-way encroachment license requests
may be filed by the owner of the property that is subject to the petition or by
the subject property owner's authorized agent.
   (B)   Application Filing: Village right-of-way encroachment license requests
shall be filed with the Public Works Director.
   (C)   Application Review and Report: The Public Works Director shall review
the proposed right-of-way encroachment and determine that the proposed
encroachment be approved, approved with conditions, approved with
modifications, or denied.
   (D)   Right-of-Way Encroachment License: Approved Village right-of-way
encroachments are subject to the execution of a right-of-way encroachment
license as set forth in the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
   (E)   Recording of the Right-of-Way Encroachment License: The right-of-way
encroachment license shall be recorded in the County Recorder's Office and
constitute legal notice to all concerned, as well as to any subsequent
purchasers, transferees, grantees, mortgagees, lessees and all persons claiming
or acquiring interest in the property.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-5: MAILBOXES:
When required by Federal rules and regulations, a single mailbox per
residential or commercial address may be installed upon the public right-of-way
under the jurisdiction of the Village, provided that such mailbox is installed
in compliance with the following requirements:
   (A)   The mailbox shall be installed so that the bottom of the mailbox is
between forty one inches (41") and forty five inches (45") above the roadway.
The front face of the mailbox shall be between six inches (6") and eight inches
(8") behind the back of the curb on curb and gutter streets, or between six
inches (6") and eight inches (8") behind the back edge of the shoulder of any
roadway without curbs and shall be consistent with all applicable State and
Federal regulations.
      1.   The mailbox shall be mounted on one of the following support
structures:
         (a)   Four inch (4") by four inch (4") wooden post;
         (b)   Light gauge hollow cast iron, galvanized steel or painted steel
pipe not more than two inches (2") in diameter;
         (c)   Hollow brick veneer column constructed of finishing brick
provided that the support structure shall have dimensions of no more than
twenty inches (20") by twenty four inches (24") and shall be no more than sixty
four inches (64") in height.
         (d)   Other structures, including, but not limited to, masonry, brick,
stone or rock columns with or without rebar reinforcement which are cement
filled, standard railroad rails and any cement filled containers such as milk
cans, tanks or barrels are prohibited.
      2.   The support structure shall be secured firmly in the ground. With
the exception of brick veneer columns, no such structures shall be secured to a
foundation.
      3.   Any existing mailbox/support structure encroaching on a curb or on
the shoulder in the case of a roadway without curbs, shall be corrected to meet
the setback specifications of this chapter within a reasonable period of time.
      4.   Any mailbox/support structure not in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter damaged by a Village vehicle shall be brought into compliance
with the provisions of this chapter at the time of repair/replacement at the
owner's sole expense.
      5.   Any mailbox or support structure located and constructed in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, if damaged by the Village
through the act of omission of one acting as an agent or employee of the
Village, shall be repaired or replaced by the owner; however, the Village shall
reimburse such damage not to exceed an amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". No reimbursement shall be made by the Village for damage to a
mailbox or support structure which is not in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. Damage caused by flying snow shall not be reimbursed by the
Village.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-6: VESTIBULES:
Vestibules on public rights-of-way shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Permit Required: Prior to erecting or installing a vestibule on the
public right-of-way, a temporary building permit shall be obtained from the
Village.
   (B)   For all licensed premises, certificates of insurance naming the
Village of Lisle as an additional insured and an indemnification agreement is
required. Insurance amounts shall be in accordance with
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
   (C)   The temporary building permit shall be valid from November 1st through
March 31st.
   (D)   Design: Plans shall be provided indicating the location of the
vestibule and design specifications. Vestibules shall comply with Title 4 of
this Code and shall comply with the following location requirements:
      1.   The vestibule shall be located so that a clear path of at least six
(6) contiguous feet parallel to the street is provided for passage of
pedestrians.
      2.   The vestibule shall be located directly in front of the use it
serves and shall not extend beyond the building width.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-7: BLOCK PARTIES:
   (A)   Permit Required: Any and all persons desiring to use any residential
street or adjacent right-of-way of the Village for the purpose of holding or
conducting a social gathering of residents from a given street, commonly known
as a "block party", shall be required to apply for and receive a block party
permit.
      1.   Applications for block parties must be filed with the Village a
minimum of two weeks prior to the requested block party date.
   (B)   General Regulations: By applying for or receiving any block party
permit, or by conducting, attending or participating in any block party
pursuant to such a permit, the applicant(s) for such permit accept
responsibility to ensure that the block party is conducted in accordance with
all applicable ordinances and regulations of the village, including but not
limited to the provisions of this Section, and acknowledge that the applicant
(s) may be held responsible for any violations of any applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Village, including but not limited to the provisions of this
Section, that occur during the conduct of the block party. All persons
attending any block party pursuant to a duly issued block party permit shall
likewise, by their attendance accept responsibility for complying with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the Village in connection therewith.
Without limiting or modifying the foregoing, all block parties shall
specifically be required to comply with the regulations hereinafter set forth
in this section, and all block party permits issued by the Village are issued
subject to compliance therewith:
      1.   Block parties may only be conducted on streets classified under the
Village Zoning Code as "residential streets", and shall not be held on any
village streets classified under the Village Zoning Code as arterial streets or
collector streets.
      2.   The Village shall determine the number of barricades required in
connection with any given block party, and shall deliver the barricades by the
last weekday prior to the proposed block party, excluding Village holidays.
      3.   Only Village-issued barricades shall be used to close any Village
street for the conduct of a block party, and no motor vehicles or other items
shall be used for such purpose.
      4.   No physical alteration of any type whatsoever may be made to any
Village street, right-of-way, easement or other property in connection with any
block party.
      5.   No tents, canopies, stages, inflatable play structures/devices or
other like items or structures shall be placed on any Village street, right-of-
way, easement or other property in connection with any block party.
      6.   No more than one block, measured as the distance between the two
nearest cross streets intersecting the street that is the location of a block
party, may be barricaded or closed off in connection with a block party, and
not more than one block on any residential street within the Village shall be
the subject of an active block party permit at any given time.
      7.   All garbage, refuse, litter, debris, or other materials remaining
within any Village street or upon any other Village right-of-way, easement or
property after the conclusion of the block party shall be cleaned up and
removed from the Village street or right-of-way within twenty four (24) hours
of the scheduled end time of the block party.
      8.   Barricades shall be removed and the street or right-of-way shall be
fully reopened to vehicular traffic on or before the scheduled end time of the
block party.
      9.   No block party shall exceed eight (8) hours in duration.
      10.   All block parties must conclude by ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. on the
date on which the block party is scheduled to be held.
      11.   No block party attendees shall engage in any conduct that would
constitute disorderly conduct as defined by the Lisle Village Code.
      12.   Block party applicants shall ensure that barricades used to close
off or block off a street for a block party are monitored and staffed by
volunteers at all times to move barricades as requested to permit access for
emergency vehicles, public works, and other public safety personnel of the
village or other agencies, and to permit pedestrian or vehicular access.
      13.   Open Bottle Law. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any
alcoholic liquor, as defined by law on any public way or in or about any motor
vehicle upon a public way in the Village.
      14.   All block party permit applicants shall remain in attendance at the
block party for the entirety of its scheduled duration.
      15.   No persons attending any block party shall make any loud noises or
create any disturbances that constitute a nuisance to the public not in
attendance at the block party, and the applicants for any block party permit
shall likewise ensure that any live or recorded music played in connection with
any block party is kept at a volume that does not create a nuisance for members
of the public not in attendance at the block party.
      16.   No fireplaces, fire pits or other like devices shall be placed or
operated within any Village street or right-of-way, but charcoal or propane
grills may be used upon the pavement of any Village street during a block
party.
   (C)   Suspension or Revocation: The Village Manager, Chief of Police, Public
Works Director, or Village employee designated by them are authorized to
suspend or revoke a block party permit where necessary for the preservation or
promotion of public safety, or based on violations of the conditions of the
block party permit and/or the applicable ordinances of the Village, including
but not limited to the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-8: OUTDOOR EATING AND DRINKING ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY:
An outdoor eating and drinking area on public right-of-way shall comply with
the following requirements:
   (A)   Prior to commencing outdoor eating and drinking on the public right-
of-way, a revocable license shall be obtained from the Village.
      1.   The Village Manager, Development Services Director, Public Works
Director or Chief of Police shall have the authority to suspend or revoke the
license.
   (B)   For all licensed premises, certificates of insurance naming the
Village of Lisle as an additional insured and an indemnification agreement is
required. Insurance amounts shall be in accordance with
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
   (C)   Design plans shall be provided indicating the location of the outdoor
eating and drinking area. Plans shall depict compliance with the following
design requirements:
      1.   All items placed on the public right-of-way for the operation of the
outdoor eating and drinking area shall be located so that a clear path of at
least six (6) contiguous feet parallel or two (2) separate paths of at least
three feet (3') are provided for passage of pedestrians.
      2.   All items placed on the public right-of-way for the operation of the
outdoor eating and drinking area shall be located so that a clear path of at
least three (3) contiguous feet is provided from the main building entrance.
      3.   All items placed in the public right-of-way for the operation of the
outdoor eating and drinking area shall not be located in pedestrian crosswalk
access aisles.
      4.   Tables and chairs shall be rated for outdoor use.
      5.   Umbrellas must be secured to a base or anchor.
      6.   The outdoor eating and drinking area shall comply with the Illinois
Accessibility Code.
      7.   The outdoor eating and drinking area shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the principal restaurant and shall be operated only
during the same hours as the principal restaurant. Fencing or a barrier
delineating the area may be required.
      8.   Items placed on the public right-of-way for the operation of the
outdoor eating and drinking area shall not be permanently attached or anchored.
      9.   Alcoholic beverages shall not be served or consumed outside of the
outdoor eating and drinking area.
      10.   The outdoor eating and drinking area shall be promptly bussed and
maintained. The adjacent sidewalk area shall be maintained free of trash,
litter, debris and obstructions. Outdoor eating and drinking areas without wait
staff shall provide at least one trash receptacle within the outdoor dining
area.
      11.   Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and barriers are permitted to remain on
the public right-of-way overnight during the active permit period. Umbrellas
shall be closed. No items shall be secured to public property overnight.
      12.   Smoking within the outdoor eating and drinking area is prohibited.
      13.   Outdoor lighting is permitted, subject to compliance with the
Village's building regulations.
      14.   It is the permit holder's responsibility to be aware of severe
weather, to provide evacuation directions if necessary, and secure outdoor
eating and drinking area items.
      15.   Portable outdoor gas-fired heating appliances are permitted,
subject to compliance with the Village's Building Regulations.
      16.   It is the permit holder's responsibility to ensure that outdoor
areas are cleared to facilitate snow removal. If areas are not cleared of all
obstructions, snow removal is the responsibility of the permit holder.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-9: OUTDOOR RETAIL DISPLAY ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY:
Outdoor retail display on public rights-of-way shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Prior to commencing outdoor retail display on the public right-of-way,
a revocable license shall be obtained from the Village.
      1.   The revocable license is only available to retail businesses that
operate on Main Street.
      2.   The Village Manager, Development Services Director, Public Works
Director or Chief of Police shall have the authority to suspend or revoke the
license.
   (B)   For all licensed premises, certificates of insurance naming the
Village of Lisle as an additional insured and an indemnification agreement is
required. Insurance amounts shall be in accordance with
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
   (C)   Design plans shall be provided indicating the location of the outdoor
retail display area. Plans shall depict compliance with the following design
requirements:
      1.   All items placed on the public right-of-way for the purpose of
outdoor retail display shall be located so that a clear path of at least six
(6) contiguous feet parallel to the street is provided for passage of
pedestrians.
      2.   All items placed on the public right-of-way for the purpose of
outdoor retail display shall not extend more than three feet (3') from the
building facade.
      3.   All items placed in the public right-of-way for the purpose of
outdoor retail display shall not be located in pedestrian crosswalk access
aisles.
      4.   Outdoor retail displays shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
      5.   All items placed on the public right-of-way for the purpose of
outdoor retail display shall be located so that a clear path of at least three
(3) contiguous feet is provided from the main building entrance.
      6.   The outdoor retail display area shall be located directly in front
of the use it serves and shall not extend beyond the building width.
      7.   The outdoor retail display area shall comply with the Illinois
Accessibility Code.
      8.   The outdoor retail display area shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the principal retail business and shall be operated
only during the same hours as the principal retail business.
      9.   Merchandise shall originate from the principal retail business.
      10.   Items placed on the public right-of-way for retail display shall
not be permanently attached or anchored.
      11.   The outdoor retail display shall not be stored outside overnight.
      12.   The amplification of sound is prohibited.
      13.   Decorative outdoor lighting in, above, or adjacent to the outdoor
retail display area is prohibited.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-3-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
for each and every day during which a violation continues or is permitted to
exist.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 4
VILLAGE WATERWORKS SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-4-1: Assignment Of Responsibility
7-4-2: Service To Individuals
7-4-3: Permit Required
7-4-4: Inspection Fees
7-4-5: Connection Fees
7-4-6: Water Rates
7-4-7: Rendition Of Bills
7-4-8: Meters Required; Fees
7-4-9: Location And Protection Of Meters
7-4-10: Testing And Repairing Meters
7-4-11: Temporary Disconnection And Final Billing
7-4-12: Compliance To Plumbing Regulations
7-4-13: Resale Of Water
7-4-14: Liability Of Village
7-4-15: Right Of Access
7-4-16: Connection Specifications
7-4-17: Revocation Of Permit
7-4-18: Violations; Penalties
7-4-19: Water Use Restricted
7-4-20: Discontinuance Of Water Service
7-4-21: Cross Connections
7-4-22: Record Keeping
7-4-23: Definitions
7-4-1: ASSIGNMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY:
Wherever the terms Public Works Director, Village Manager, or Development
Services Director appears, it includes his or her designee.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-2: SERVICE TO INDIVIDUALS:
No water from the Village water supply shall be turned on for service into any
premises by any person but the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall make any connection to the water system of the Village
without having first obtained a permit from the Development Services Director.
   (B)   The supply of water from the village to any and all customers or users
is governed by the rates, regulations, and other terms set forth in this code,
as from time to time amended, including the right to file liens for nonpayment
as set forth in this Chapter. A copy of this chapter properly certified by the
village clerk and filed in the recorder's office of DuPage County, Illinois,
shall be deemed notice that the supply of water by the village is governed by
said code.
   (C)   For new construction, the owner of the premises must execute an
application to have water turned on, which application shall contain terms
consented to by the owner (hereinafter "application/agreement"). Such
application/agreement shall provide that the terms set forth therein shall run
with the land and inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, all successors
in title of the subject premises. Upon review of said application/agreement,
the Public Works Director shall make a determination as to whether a water
connection permit shall be issued and, if appropriate, shall issue such a
permit.
   (D)   Whenever the user of the village water services intends to cease using
such services, due to moving or other reasons, said user must notify the
village of the day he intends to cease using water services. Notification may
be made to the village billing department by telephone or in writing, which
department shall record such notification in the ordinary course of business.
The village will then perform a final reading of the meter and bill the user
accordingly. To transfer billing of water services to a new user when no
transfer of ownership is anticipated, the new user must notify the billing
department. Regardless of any such notification, however, the owner of the
premises will remain liable for any water services used prior to his conveyance
of the title to the property.
   (E)   Whenever the owner of the premises serviced by the village water
intends to sell or otherwise convey the property, he must notify the billing
department of the date scheduled for closing. On that date, the village will
conduct a final reading and bill the owner accordingly. The proposed buyer must
also notify the village of the date he intends to begin using the village
water.
(Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995; amd. Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-4: INSPECTION FEES:
An inspection fee, as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures", for each connection or for each dwelling unit in a multi-family
structure served by the connection, whichever is greater, shall be paid to the
village at the time application for a permit is made.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-5: CONNECTION FEES:
   (A)   A fee shall be paid as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each connection.
   (B)   The established fees do not include the cost of the meter and outside
reading device which must be secured from the Village and paid for by the user.
   (C)   For connections to multiple-family residence and/or commercial units,
the connection and inspection fee shall be as stated in subsection (A) of this
section, plus an additional fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each unit more than one serviced by said connection.
   (D)   All connections of Village water mains, which mains were constructed
by or for the Village, excepting those mains constructed pursuant to the
subdivision regulations as on site improvements, shall, in addition to all
other connection fees and charges be subject to a fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per foot of lot frontage.
   (E)   The established connection fees as set forth in subsections (A) and
(C) of this section shall be increased as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for consumers located outside the corporate limits of the village.
   (F)   There shall be an additional connection fee for sprinkler systems
which fee shall be based upon the size of the water line necessary to connect
the sprinkler system to the village water system. The fee schedule shall be at
the rate established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per inch of water line size. Further, there shall be an annual
service charge for all sprinkler systems at the rate established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per sprinkler system. All sprinkler systems shall include a leak
detector meter to be installed at the owner's expense, said leak detector to be
acceptable to the village engineer.
   (G)   The provisions of this chapter may be amended from time to time upon
the approval of the corporate authorities.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, lots in the
Woodridge Estates subdivisions shall not pay the front footage fee set out in
subsection (D) of this section. In lieu of that front footage fee, lots in the
Woodridge Estates subdivisions shall pay a pro rata share of the village's cost
of construction of the water supply line and the individual services from the
main to the property line, which is established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per lot.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-6: WATER RATES:
   (A)   Water Rates: All property upon which any building has been or may
hereafter be erected, having a connection with any mains or pipes which may be
hereafter constructed and used in connection with the village water system,
shall pay the rate as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof. Single-family
users shall be billed bimonthly; all other users shall be billed monthly. The
minimum bimonthly rate to each consumer shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". The minimum monthly rate of each consumer shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per unit. Each residential living unit contained in any multi-family
structure shall be considered a separate unit for minimum billing purposes. The
rates specified herein shall be applicable to water consumed on and after June
1, 2005.
   (B)   Users Outside Corporate Limits: The rates applicable to users of the
village water system located outside the corporate limits of the village shall
be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
   (C)   Temporary Building Construction Water; Fire Hydrant Usage Permit:
      1.   During the construction of a building, before a water meter has been
installed, the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted to
temporarily use the village water supply by making application therefor, and by
paying the appropriate security deposit as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". After having received a permit for such temporary use, the
contractor may use the village water supply until a water meter has been
installed, which meter shall be installed as soon as the building is enclosed
and in no case later than three (3) days prior to the date of final inspection
for occupancy purposes.
      2.   Prior to actual construction, the permitted contractor shall notify
the village two (2) business days prior to the actual need of the temporary
water use. The village personnel will then select the nearest available fire
hydrant and connect a village fire hydrant meter, backflow prevention device,
antitamper device and valve, and activate the fire hydrant. The permitted
contractor shall be responsible for plumbing connection adaptations beyond the
hydrant meter assembly.
      3.   The permitted contractor shall pay two (2) times the village water
rate for those temporary water uses recorded on the meter.
      4.   No person or persons other than village personnel shall operate the
fire hydrant for the purpose of this section.
      5.   After the water meter is installed within the building, the
temporary hydrant usage permit shall be deemed void. The contractor shall
notify village personnel to turn off the fire hydrant, inspect the hydrant and
meter assembly for damages, and record water consumption.
      6.   In the event that the charges for water consumption are less than
the security deposit of the contractor, the village shall retain a portion of
the security deposit equal to the charges and refund to the contractor the
difference between the security deposit and the charges incurred.
      7.   In the event that the charges for water consumption are more than
the security deposit of the contractor, the village shall retain the entire
security deposit and shall bill the contractor the difference between the
charges incurred and the amount of the security deposit. Said bill shall be due
and payable by the contractor immediately upon receipt.
      8.   The provisions of this subsection (C) shall apply to and permit the
use of water for building construction only. The use of water from a fire
hydrant for any other purpose including, but not limited to, landscaping or
road construction is prohibited except to the extent and pursuant to subsection
(D) of this section.
   (D)   Temporary Construction Water; Fire Hydrant Usage Permit:
      1.   Permit Approval Requirements: Upon an application for a permit for
temporary use of the village water supply for purposes other than construction
of a building, the public works director shall determine whether or not the
application should be approved or rejected based on criteria including, but not
limited to, the following: a) availability of water to the village; b) amount
of water required; and c) availability of water to the contractor from other
sources; d) likelihood of payment by the applicant; e) previous illegal use of
village water by the applicant; f) effect of the water usage on public health,
safety, and general welfare.
      2.   Hydrants to be Approved: If the application is approved, the public
works director shall determine from which hydrants the water shall be drawn.
If, in the public works director's determination, it is more appropriate, the
water shall be delivered to a tank truck of the permittee from a hydrant on the
grounds of the village public works department.
      3.   Contractors' Charges For Water:
         (a)   Contractors acquiring water from the public works yard hydrant
shall account for all water used from that hydrant. Water shall not be taken
unless a village water meter with a backflow preventer is installed on the
hydrant.
         The contractor shall submit, on a form provided by the village, the
necessary information to bill the contractor, including the amount of water
used. Said bill shall be due and payable by the contractor immediately upon
receipt.
         The water rate shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
         (b)   Contractors taking water from hydrants other than at the public
works yard shall obtain a water meter from the public works department. Prior
to receiving the meter, and upon approval of an application, a security deposit
shall be required. The security deposit shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
         There shall also be a nonrefundable permit fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" required upon approval of the application. In addition, a meter
rental charge per week as established by the annual fee ordinance shall be
paid.
         The water rate shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
         In the event that the charges for water consumption are less than the
security deposit of the contractor, the village shall retain a portion of the
security deposit equal to the charges and refund to the contractor the
difference between the security deposit and the charges incurred.
         In the event that the charges for water consumption are more than the
security deposit of the contractor, the village shall retain the entire
security deposit and shall bill the contractor the difference between the
charges incurred and the amount of the security deposit. Said bill shall be due
and payable by the contractor immediately upon receipt.
      4.   Security Deposit Waivers: The village reserves the right to waive
security deposits and water costs for the village's own temporary construction
water uses, operational, or maintenance uses as well as temporary water uses of
other governmental taxing bodies, including, but not limited to, the Lisle/
Woodridge fire district and Lisle park district. Notwithstanding any such
waiver, the water shall be drawn from approved metered sources only.
   (E)   Water Rate Revision: The water rates shall be reviewed annually. The
rates will be included in the supplementary information to the village's
audited comprehensive annual financial report. The water rates shall be revised
periodically, as determined by the village board, to reflect a change in local
capital costs or operating, maintenance, and replacement costs.
   (F)   User Disagreement With Rates; Village Expenses: The method for
determining rates established for user charges in this section shall be made
available to a user within fourteen (14) working days of receipt of a written
request for such. Any disagreement over the village's rate determination
thereof shall be reviewed by the board of trustees within thirty (30) calendar
days after notification of such asserted disagreement.
   Any expense incurred by the village in ascertaining whether a revision in
the water rate should be made including, but not limited to, staff time, legal
fees, professional services fees, etc., shall be paid by the applicant for the
requested change within thirty (30) days after the completion of the thirty
(30) day period cited above. These expenses shall be considered as part of the
applicant's regular water bill and shall be subject to the same sanctions for
nonpayment.
(Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995; amd. Ord. 99-3096, 3-19-1999; Ord. 2004-3840, 6-7-
2004; Ord. 2005-3932, 6-20-2005; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; Ord. 2024-5097, 10-
7- 2024)
7-4-7: RENDITION OF BILLS:
   (A)   Payment Due; Liability: All bills for water used shall be rendered
bimonthly for single-family residences, and monthly for all other users, as of
the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is
billed or as soon thereafter as possible, except as otherwise provided under
subsection 7-5-6(A) of this chapter, and shall be payable not later than the
close of business on the fifteenth day after the date the bills are rendered.
If payment of the full amount of the bill is not made within said period, then
a penalty as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" of the total outstanding and unpaid amount of the bill shall be added
thereto and a late payment notice will be issued. If the bill or any portion
thereof remains unpaid as of the due date stated on the late payment notice,
then in addition to the penalty, an additional fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20,
      "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures" will be
added to the bill. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user
of the services shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of service to
any premises. In the event charges for services are not paid within thirty (30)
days after rendition of a bill for such service, such charges shall be and are
hereby declared delinquent, and thereafter such delinquency shall constitute a
lien upon the real estate for which such services are supplied. The village
finance director is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements
showing such delinquencies in the office of the recorder of deeds of DuPage
County, Illinois, and the filing of such statement shall be deemed notice of
and constitute perfection of a lien for such services.
   (B)   Nonpayment:
      1.   The water supply may be disconnected from any premises owned or
occupied by any person liable for the payment of the water bill if the bill
remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after the bill is rendered and
mailed.
      2.   When such water supply is disconnected, reconnection shall not occur
until all past due water bills, including penalties thereon are paid, together
with the payment of the fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for such reconnection. Payment of past due bills resulting in
disconnection may be made by tendering same to the village business office
during the regular business hours of said office or by depositing same in the
village hall drop box or the village police department after the regular
business hours of said office. In no event and under no circumstances may any
such payment be tendered in any form to any village employee, including, but
not limited to, public works department employees, except those persons
authorized to accept such payment.
      3.   As soon as practicable after the payment of past due water bills
according to the procedures set forth above, the village public works
department shall, during the regular operating hours of the department, take
all steps necessary to reconnect the water supply to the subject premises.
      4.   Provided, however, the foregoing notwithstanding, if any occupant,
user or owner of the premises receiving service has a bona fide dispute over
the statement, charge or penalty determined or issued by the village and
challenges same as hereafter provided, then services shall not be disconnected
until the occupant, user or owner raising said dispute shall have a reasonable
opportunity to be heard by the assistant village manager, an employee of the
village hereby designated to conduct a pretermination review of the disputed
statement, charge or penalty subsequent to notice to the occupant, user or
owner indicating to him the amount due the village, the nature of said
statement, charge or penalty and notice that his water service will be
terminated in the event that said statement, charge or penalty is not paid or
adjusted after having said dispute considered by said assistant village
manager.
      5.   In any final notice or notice of disconnection to occupant, user or
owner prior to termination of service, the occupant, user or owner shall be
notified that if he, she or it has a bona fide dispute, said person shall have
ten (10) days within which to request, in writing to the village clerk, a
hearing by the assistant village manager. If no request is made, the statement
shall become final and service may be thereafter terminated by the village.
      6.   In the event that an informal hearing is held and the assistant
village manager determines that the objection to the statement, charge or
penalty is not proper and that the statement, charge or penalty is correct, and
in the event that the occupant, user or owner wishes to have reviewed any
decision of the assistant village manager with respect to statement, charge or
penalty, the amount due or any reduction or increase in the amount due, then he
shall have the right to appeal to the village board of trustees for their
determination and review of the decision of the assistant village manager. Any
decision of the assistant village manager not appealed from within the time
hereinafter set forth shall be final.
      7.   Any request for review of the assistant village manager's decision
must be made in writing, addressed to the village president and board of
trustees and must be made within ten (10) days after any adverse decision of
the assistant village manager and by filing same with the village clerk, who
shall place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the corporate authorities, whereat said matter shall be considered. At said
hearing, the assistant village manager shall present his reasons for his
decision. The occupant, user or owner shall also be heard as to his objection
to any statement, charge or penalty and the president and board of trustees
shall then make their decision and the village clerk shall cause it to be
delivered to the occupant, user or owner within five (5) days, by personal
service or certified mail. In the event that decision upholds any
disconnection, said disconnection shall take place not less than ten (10) days
thereafter unless said termination is stayed by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-8: METERS REQUIRED; FEES:
   (A)   All premises and structures using the village water supply must be
equipped with an adequate water meter and outside reading device furnished by
the village but paid for by the applicant, customer, owner or contractor. The
minimum size for water meters shall be three-fourths inch (3/4"). All meters
two inches (2") in size or larger shall be compound meters with a bypass with a
lockable valve as required by the public works director. The meter shall be and
remain the property of the village and the charge therefor shall constitute a
rental of the meter.
   (B)   All meters larger than one inch (1") in size shall be installed by the
applicant, customer, owner or contractor. All meters one inch (1") and smaller
in size shall be installed by the village, and a charge as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for said installation shall be made by the village and paid for by
the applicant, customer, owner or contractor at the time of the application for
a water tap-on permit. The installation charge shall be in addition to all
other fees or charges to be paid by the applicant, customer, owner or
contractor pursuant to village ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-9: LOCATION AND PROTECTION OF METERS:
   (A)   Meters shall be located in any easily accessible place approved by the
public works director and protected from frost. When meters are injured by
frost or otherwise, the public works director must be notified at once. The
cost of repairing meters injured by frost shall be paid for by the persons
owning the premises.
   (B)   Where building space to house a meter is not available, an outside
meter vault may be installed when approved by the public works director. Such
meter vault shall be constructed of the size, type and kind of materials as
required and approved by the public works director and shall include shutoff
valves on each side of the meter with provision for easy removal of the meter.
In addition, a remote meter reader shall be installed in locations as directed
by the public works director and shall be of the type as approved by said
public works director.
(Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995; amd. Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-10: TESTING AND REPAIRING METERS:
   (A)   All meters one inch (1") or less in size shall be tested for accuracy
as necessary by the village public works department. The village shall also
test at the request of an owner or consumer.
   If the test is requested by the owner or the consumer, the village shall pay
for the testing, repair or replacement if: The meter is found to be over
registering the amount of water flowing through the meter, or the repair or
replacement is required due to the negligence of the village.
   If the test is requested by the owner or the consumer, the owner and
consumer shall be responsible for the cost of testing, repair or replacement
if: The meter is found to be accurate or under registering the amount of water
flowing through the meter, or the repair or replacement is required due to the
negligence of the owner or consumer.
   If the test is performed without the request of the owner or consumer the
village shall pay the cost of testing, repair or replacement. However, the
owner and consumer shall be responsible for the cost of such repair or
replacement if it is due to the negligence of the owner or consumer.
   (B)   The cost of repairing and testing for accuracy on all meters larger
than one inch (1") in size shall be paid for by the owner, and shall include
all costs of the village to remove, replace, test and repair said meter. The
public works director shall inspect and determine when a meter should be
removed for testing and repair. All meters larger than one inch (1") in size
that must be replaced shall be furnished by the village and paid for by the
owner and shall include the cost of removing and replacing the meter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-11: TEMPORARY DISCONNECTION AND FINAL BILLING:
   After proper notification to the village, the village will make a final
reading of the meter and shut off the water supply at the buffalo box and
submit a final bill to the consumer.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-12: COMPLIANCE TO PLUMBING REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Plumbing Rules: No water shall be turned on for service in premises in
which the plumbing does not comply with the Illinois Plumbing Code as amended
and adopted by the Village provided that water may be turned on for
construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Abandon Wells: No water from the village water supply shall be turned
on for service into any premises which has tapped onto the village water mains,
unless and until any and all existing wells located on the premises being
served shall have been abandoned and properly sealed according to requirements
propounded by the state and the county of DuPage health department. The public
works director may approve the turn on of village water for up to thirty (30)
days while an existing well is being sealed, as long as there is no cross
connection with the village water system.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-13: RESALE OF WATER:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
village supply to any premises other than that for which application has been
made and the meter installed, except in the case of emergency and when approved
by the village manager.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-14: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
All connections and water applied for hereunder, and all the water used
hereunder, shall be upon the express condition that the village shall not be
liable, nor shall any claim be made against it, for damages or injury caused by
reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or
appurtenances connected with said waterworks system or any part or portion of
said plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of
machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-15: RIGHT OF ACCESS:
The village and its employees shall have ready access, to the extent allowed by
law, to the premises, places or buildings where meters or water shutoff valves
are located for the purpose of reading, examining, testing, shutting off or
turning on water, and repairing the same, and examining and testing the
consumption, use and flow of water. Every consumer of said water shall take the
same upon the conditions prescribed in this section.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-16: CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All water mains and services shall comply with the Village of Lisle Design
Manual.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-17: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The Village Manager, Public Works Director or Development Services Director are
hereby authorized and empowered to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter when it has been determined that the permittee has violated the
conditions of such permit or of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-18: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   (A)   Violation Declared Nuisance: Any violation of any terms and provisions
of this chapter is hereby declared, by the corporate authorities, to be a
public nuisance.
   (B)   Fines And Penalties: Any person violating or failing to comply with
any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and on conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day that such violation or failure to comply with these provisions
exists.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-19: WATER USE RESTRICTED:
   (A)   Use Restrictions: During the period between May 15 and September 15,
inclusive, the outside use of running water from a hose or sprinkling system,
for the purpose of watering/sprinkling of lawns and gardens, shall be limited
in the following manner:
      1.   "Outside use of water", as defined hereinabove, for buildings with
the last digit in the street address being an odd number is permitted only on
the days of the month having an odd number and is restricted to the period of
time between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and between
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.;
      2.   "Outside use of water", as defined hereinabove, for buildings with
the last digit in the street address being an even number is permitted only on
the days of the month having an even number and is restricted to the period of
time between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., and between
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   (B)   Emergency Situations: In the event of a water supply emergency if it
is determined that the above referenced provisions are inadequate and
diminishing reserves of the village water supply are experienced and if the
village manager determines that the situation is likely to become dangerous to
the health and safety of the public, the village manager is hereby authorized
to issue a proclamation in the form of a public notice containing additional,
more restrictive regulations regarding the use of water. Said proclamation
shall remain in effect until the next regular village board meeting, at which
time the village board shall take action to extend or terminate the
proclamation.
   (C)   Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the restriction set
forth above:
      1.   All local government agencies;
      2.   Those permittees that obtain special hydrant usage permits from the
village;
      3.   The use of water obtained from a source other than the village
waterworks system;
      4.   The use of water from attended, handheld garden hoses; and
      5.   Watering of newly sodded or seeded lawns if located on parcels of
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or less if:
         (a)   Watering is restricted to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. but may be performed on any day;
         (b)   An application for a permit under this section is filed with the
village seven (7) days prior to the sodding or seeding and a permit has been
issued by the public works director;
         (c)   No sodding or seeding shall be installed prior to permit
issuance; and
         (d)   All permits under this subsection shall expire fourteen (14)
days after issuance and may be revoked in emergency.
      6.   The Village Board is hereby authorized to revoke the aforementioned
exemptions in times of emergency.
   (D)   Penalties: Any persons violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for the first offense, and a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for the second or succeeding offenses.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-20: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
Upon receipt by the Village of written notice and verification from the
Department of Environmental Concerns of the County of DuPage (department) that:
   (A)   A rate or charge for the sewerage service has become delinquent, and
   (B)   The department has afforded the delinquent party notice that the
party's water service will be shut off if the delinquency is not cured, and
   (C)   The department has afforded the delinquent party an opportunity to be
heard regarding all objections the delinquent party may have to the rates or
charges for said water service;
   (D)   And further, upon determination that the delinquent party is provided
water services by the village, the public works director shall cause the water
services to the premises of the delinquent party to be discontinued. Upon
written notice from the department that the delinquency has been cured, the
public works director shall restore water services to the subject premises.
   (E)   The village clerk shall charge the department with the reasonable
costs for any such discontinuance and resumption of water services.
   (F)   The current payment by the department for such costs shall be a
condition precedent to termination of any other municipal water services
requested by the department.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-21: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Cross Connections Prohibited:
      1.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited unless approved cross connection control devices or
methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper operation on a
continuing basis.
      2.   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Illinois environmental protection agency. An "approved cross connection
control device" shall be one which is approved by the regulations promulgated
from time to time by the Illinois environmental protection agency and the
Illinois pollution control board and as approved by the public works director
or his designee (hereinafter the "director").
   (B)   Cross Connection Control Required:
      1.   The director shall determine if an approved cross connection control
device is necessary for any establishment that has a connection to the village
waterworks system. The director shall give notice to the property owner or
customer that an approved cross connection control device is to be installed on
the service line from the village waterworks supply to the premises being
served by said supply. The type of device and installation method shall be as
approved by the director.
      2.   All cross connection devices and appurtenances are to be purchased,
installed, and maintained at the sole expense of the property owner or
customer.
      3.   The following establishments shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section:
         (a)   Single-family and multi-family residential dwellings, not used
for business purposes, whose water supply plumbing is plumbed in accordance
with a plumbing code at least as stringent as the Illinois state plumbing code
as from time to time amended.
   (C)   Location Of Cross Connection Control Devices:
      1.   Cross connection devices shall be installed in a location as
approved by the director.
      2.   The devices shall be located in a manner that readily facilitates
maintenance, testing, and repair and that does not create a cross connection.
Cross connection devices shall be protected from frost. Cross connection
devices shall include an isolation valve with test cocks on each side of the
cross connection control device.
   (D)   Surveys And Investigations:
      1.   The director shall cause surveys and investigations of properties
serviced by the village waterworks system to be performed every two (2) years
to determine whether potential or actual cross connections exist. The purpose
of this survey is to compile and update an inventory of devices. It must
consist of a pencil and paper collection of information, conducted by
telephone, mail or personal visit to the manager or owner of a specific
property. It is not intended to include an actual visual inspection of piping
or plumbing systems.
      2.   The director, or authorized agent shall have access as permitted by
section
7-5-15 of this chapter as amended from time to time.
   (E)   Testing And Repair:
      1.   Cross connection control devices shall be tested immediately upon
installation and tested annually thereafter by a certified cross connection
control device inspector (CCCDI). The results of each test shall be immediately
reported to the director.
      2.   Faulty devices shall be repaired or replaced within one day for an
air gap device, and within five (5) days for double check valves or reduced
pressure backflow preventers by the property owner or customer. However, if the
director finds that an unprotected connection poses an immediate hazard to the
public water supply, the director may require repair or installation in less
than the one or five (5) days specified herein, or may order disconnection of
the hazard until an approved device is properly installed and tested.
      3.   All costs to test, repair and/or replace cross connection control
devices, as well as the hiring of a CCCDI, shall be at the sole expense and
responsibility of the property owner or customer. Record of inspection,
testing, and/or repairs shall be submitted to the director. Each device shall
have a record of maintenance available on site. Said record shall have dates of
tests, inspector's name and CCCDI license number, type repairs, and test
results. Maintenance of devices shall be as recommended by the device
manufacturer. The manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on site.
   (F)   Disconnection Of Service:
      1.   The director shall be authorized to discontinue water service to any
property wherein a cross connection violation exists as herein provided.
      2.   However, water service may be discontinued only five (5) calendar
days after notice is given to the property owner or customer via regular first
class mail. Notice shall be deemed given on the day it is deposited in any main
or branch United States post office.
      3.   The director shall be authorized to discontinue service without
notice to the property owner or customer to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the village waterworks supply if the actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution poses an immediate hazard to the public
water supply.
      4.   The village shall not be held liable for any injury, damages, or
lost revenues which result from discontinuation of property owners' or
customers' water service in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (G)   Reconnection of Service: Water service shall not be restored until all
of the conditions that warranted disconnection are eliminated or corrected to
the satisfaction of the public works director, in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
   (H)   Contamination And/Or Pollution Of Water Supply: In the event that
contamination and/or pollution does occur to the village waterworks supply, the
property owner and/or the customer responsible for allowing the contaminants
and/or pollutants into the village waterworks system through an illegal cross
connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a
device which has been bypassed, shall bear all costs and expenses of
decontamination of the village waterworks system.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-22: RECORD KEEPING:
   (A)   Revenues: All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the
water system shall be credited in the water account of the water fund. All such
revenues and moneys shall be accounted for by the finance director separate and
apart from private funds not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same,
or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
village board. The finance director shall receive all such revenues from the
water system and all other funds and moneys and deposit the same in the
appropriate account. The funds shall be administered in every respect in the
manner provided by statute.
   (B)   Accounts: The finance director shall establish a proper system of
accounts and keep proper records in which complete and accurate entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual
intervals the finance director shall cause to be made an audit by a certified
public accountant to show the receipts and disbursements of the water system.
   (C)   Access To Records: The Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA)
or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents,
papers and records of the village which are applicable to the water system for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof
to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to
any state grant.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-4-23: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, certain terms or words used herein are hereby
defined and the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation of
the provisions of this title. Words used in the present tense shall include the
future tense; the singular number shall include the plural, the plural the
singular; the word "person" shall include a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation; the words "used or occupied"
include the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied"; the
word "shall" or "will" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. Any
other words used and not defined herein shall be construed as having the
commonly accepted meaning as defined in a standard dictionary.
AIR GAP:                  Prevents backflow by physically disconnecting the
                          water supply and any source of contamination.
                          Device used to prevent water from within a structure
BACKFLOW PREVENTER:       or temporary connection to flow backward through the
                          meter into the public water supply main; protects the
                          system from contamination.
BUFFALO BOX:              A vertical sleeve which provides access to a buried
                          roundway. Also called a "shutoff box".
                          A device which includes a valve, one end of which is
CORPORATION COCK OR STOP: screwed into the tapping sleeve and to the opposite
                          end is attached the water service line for an
                          individual property.
                          A connection between two (2) otherwise separate
CROSS CONNECTION:         piping systems, one containing potable water and the
                          other water or another liquid which may be
                          contaminated.
CURB COCK OR STOP:        See definition of Roundway.
                          Two (2) valves installed on either side of a device
                          such as the water meter or cross connection devices,
ISOLATION VALVES:         to allow the water service to be shut off while the
                          device in the middle is installed, tested, or
                          repaired.
                          Any and all persons, natural or artificial including
PERSON:                   any individual, firm, company, municipal, or private
                          corporation, association, society, institution,
                          enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
                          Water which is free of objectionable contamination or
POTABLE WATER:            minerals, and is considered suitable for human
                          consumption.
                          A valve located outside between the water main and
                          the structure, usually near the property line, used
ROUNDWAY:                 to start or stop flow to the building. The valve is
                          operated by means of a long key which is inserted
                          through the buffalo box to the roundway.
                          A split fitting designed to fit over an existing
                          water main to allow a connection to be made under a
SADDLE:                   tapping machine, while the main is under pressure.
                          The device is usually made of bronze or stainless
                          steel, and serves to secure the corporation stop to
                          the main.
SHUTOFF BOX:              See definition of Buffalo Box.
TAP ON:                   Connection of a service line to a water main.
                          A small cock, faucet, or valve set in a water pipe,
TEST COCK:                pump, backflow device or water jacket used to drain
                          water, test pressure, or to chlorinate the main.
 
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-5-1: Enforcement And Administration Of Chapter
7-5-2: Use Of Public Sewer Required
7-5-3: Privies, Cesspools
7-5-4: Permit Required
7-5-5: Inspection Fees
7-5-6: Connection Fees
7-5-7: Sewerage System Rates
7-5-8: Billing Procedures
7-5-9: Control Manhole, Building Drain, And Cost To Install
7-5-10: Inspection
7-5-11: Rights Of Access
7-5-12: Repairs And Maintenance
7-5-13: Grease Trap/Triple Basin Maintenance
7-5-14: Storm Water Prohibited
7-5-15: Violations; Penalties
7-5-1: ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER:
All permits provided for herein shall be issued by the Development Services
Director. The Development Services Director shall inspect all connections to
the public sewer lines and see that all provisions of this chapter are properly
administered and enforced. Said community development director shall cause to
be kept a record of measurements of all sewer connections in relation to
property lines, and he shall collect all tap-on fees and inspection fees
required herein and pay the same to the village finance director. Wherever the
term public works director, village manager, community development director or
business office manager appears, it includes his or her designee.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-2: USE OF SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED:
Every building within the village located on property to which there is a
public sanitary sewer, or which is otherwise so located as to have a public
sanitary sewer conveniently available, having plumbing fixtures installed and
maintained for human use, shall make connection to the public sanitary sewer
system. A sanitary sewer system shall be deemed available to premises used for
human occupancy, if such premises are within two hundred feet (200') of a
public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-3: PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS:
   (A)   Prohibited: Use of cesspools, septic or other sewage tanks and privies
is hereby prohibited, and no cesspool, septic tank or other sewage tank or
privy shall be constructed on property accessible to a public sewer. The use of
cesspools, septic or other sewage tanks and privies already constructed on
property to which a public sewer is or becomes accessible shall be discontinued
within two (2) months after the public sewer becomes accessible; and such
cesspools, septic or other sewage tanks and privy vaults shall be cleaned out
to within no less than twenty four inches (24") of the ground surface, and
refilled with earth, cinders, ashes or similar material.
   (B)   Public Nuisance: Any cesspool, septic or sewage tank or privy
constructed or maintained on any property in violation of the provisions of
this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall, upon five
(5) days' written notice to the owner of said premises, be abated. If the owner
fails or refuses to abate said nuisance within five (5) days after receiving
written notice thereof from the village, then the village shall abate said
nuisance and the owners of the premises shall be liable to the village for the
costs and expenses of abating the same.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall make any connections to the sanitary sewer mains of
the village without first obtaining a permit from the Development Services
Director.
   (B)   All sewer services provided by the village to any and all customers or
users is governed by the rates, regulations, and other terms set forth in this
code, as from time to time amended, including the right to file liens for
nonpayment as set forth in section
7-6-8 of this chapter.
   (C)   For new construction, the owner of the premises must execute an
application to connect to the village sewer system, which application shall
contain terms consented to by the owner (application/agreement). Such
application/agreement shall provide that the terms set forth therein shall run
with the land and inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, all successors
in title of the subject premises. Upon review of said application/agreement,
the community development director shall make a determination as to whether a
sanitary sewer connection permit shall be issued and, if appropriate, shall
issue such a permit.
   (D)   Whenever the user of the village sanitary sewer services intends to
cease using such services, due to moving or other reasons, said user must
notify the village of the day he intends to cease using said sanitary sewer
services.
   Notification may be made to the village billing department by telephone or
in writing, which department shall record such notification in the ordinary
course of business and shall bill the user accordingly. To transfer billing of
sanitary sewer services to a new user when no transfer of ownership is
anticipated, the new user must notify the billing department. Regardless of any
such notification, however, the owner of the premises will remain liable for
any sanitary sewer services used prior to his conveyance of the title to the
property.
   (E)   Whenever the owner of the premises serviced by the village sanitary
sewer intends to sell or otherwise convey the property, he must notify the
billing department of the date scheduled for closing and the village will bill
the owner accordingly. The proposed buyer must also notify the village of the
date he intends to begin using the village sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-5: INSPECTION FEES:
An inspection fee, as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures", for each connection or for each dwelling unit in a multi-family
structure served by the connection, whichever is greater, shall be paid to the
village at the time that application for a permit is made.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-6: CONNECTION FEES:
   (A)   Definitions:
 
                             That fee as determined by the department of
                             environmental concerns of the county of DuPage for
BASE COUNTY CONNECTION FEE:  connection to the county sanitary sewer system
                             pursuant to the water/wastewater use ordinance,
                             article XI, wastewater connection and permits and
                             fees.
                             Sewage having a concentration of no more than two
                             hundred twenty milligrams per liter (220 mg/l) of
DOMESTIC STRENGTH SEWAGE:    five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand and two
                             hundred sixty milligrams per liter (260 mg/l) of
                             suspended solids.
                             A commercial, institutional, industrial or, multi-
                             family housing unit which has an estimated average
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT:      discharge of three hundred fifty (350) gallons of
                             domestic strength sewage per day or a single-
                             family residential dwelling unit.
                             A single-family residence for each apartment unit
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: or each condominium unit in a multiple-unit
                             building.
 
   (B)   Connection fees: The fees for connection of the sanitary sewer drain
of a single-family dwelling unit or a residential equivalent located inside the
corporate limits of the village to the sewer mains of the village shall be as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
   The fees for connection of the sanitary sewer drain of a single-family
residential dwelling unit or a residential equivalent located outside of the
corporate limits of the village to the sewer mains of the village shall be as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
   (C)   Calculation Of Residential Equivalents For Nonresidential Dwelling
Units: The connection fees for all users located inside the village making
connection to the sewer mains of the village, other than single-family
residential dwelling units, shall be the sum determined by multiplying the
estimated average daily flow of the intended use as set forth in the projected
sewage generation by type of use as is set forth below, by the connection fee
in effect, and dividing the resulting product by three hundred fifty (350). The
above shall be the basis of an interim connection fee and shall be payable at
the time of the issuance of the building permit. The connection fee for a
commercial, industrial, or institutional building allowed to discharge liquid
waste other than domestic strength sewage shall be determined by the director
of DuPage County public works on a residential equivalent basis as established
by    
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per residential equivalent flow, plus costs determined by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per residential equivalent flow.
SEWAGE FLOW GUIDE
Apartments/ condominiums   150   GPD for 1 bedroom
                          300   GPD for 2 bedrooms
                          350   GPD for 3 bedrooms
Assembly halls             2     GPD per seat
Bar/tavern                 25    GPD per employee
                          15    GPD per customer
Bowling alley              75    GPD per bowling lane
                          100   GPD per bowling lane with food service
Churches                   3     GPD per seat (under 100 seats)
                          5     GPD per seat (over 100 seats)
Country clubs              50    GPD per member
Factories                  25    GPD per employee (no shower)
                          35    GPD per employee (with shower)
Food service operations    35    GPD per seat (not 24 hour restaurant)
                          50    GPD per seat (24 hour restaurant)
                          70    GPD per seat (24 hour along freeway)
                          50    GPD per car (curb service drive-in)
                          50    GPD per seat (vending machine restaurants)
Hospitals                  250   GPD per bed
Housing                    350   GPD per single-family dwelling unit
Institutions               125   GPD per resident
Laundries                  400   GPD per machine (coin operated)
Motels and hotels          60    GPD per room
                          100   GPD per suite
Nursing homes/rest homes   125   GPD per person
Office buildings           25    GPD per employee (minimum)
                          10    gallons per square foot (usable space)
Plaza                      350   GPD per unit within the plaza (minimum)
                          0.05  gallons per square foot per open mall space
Schools                    15    GPD per student (elementary and childcare)
                          25    GPD per student (junior high and high)
                          25    GPD per staff (in addition to students)
Service stations           1,000 GPD for first service bay
                          500   GPD for each additional bay
                          3     GPD per car user (self- service)
Shopping centers           0.05  gallons per square foot (without food service
                                 or laundries)
                          0.15  gallons per square foot (with food service or
                                 laundries)
Swimming pools             5     GPD per user (average)
                          10    GPD per user (with hot water shower)
Theaters                   5     GPD per car (drive-in)
                          5     GPD per seat (movie house)
Vacation cottages          100   GPD per cottage
Warehouses                 0.05  gallons per square foot per day
Youth and recreation camps 50    GPD per user
 
The actual, final connection fee shall be computed by multiplying the actual
average daily flow, based on three hundred sixty (360) days per year in the
first year during which the use is at an occupancy rate of eighty five percent
(85%) (base year) by the connection fee in effect at the end of the base year,
for single-family residential dwelling units, and dividing the resulting
product by three hundred fifty (350). If the actual fee is more than the
estimated fee previously advanced, the user and/or owner of the building shall
immediately pay the difference to the village.
If the estimated connection fee is greater than the actual fee, the village
shall return the overpayment to the user and/or owner upon return of the
overpayment from the county. The village shall not be held liable for payment
to the user and/or owner until and unless the village receives payment from the
county.
   (D)   Additional Fees: All connections of village sewer lines, which lines
were constructed by or for the village, excepting those sewer lines constructed
pursuant to the subdivision regulations of the village as on site improvements,
shall, in addition to all other connection fees and charges, be subject to a
fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per foot of lot frontage.
   (E)   Additions To Previous Connections: Any and all additions, remodelings,
or change of use to buildings, previously connected to the village sanitary
sewer mains shall be treated as new connections for purposes of this section,
and connection fees paid in accordance with the provisions of this section,
less any previously paid fees.
   (F)   Building Permits: The connection fees shall be paid at the time of
issuance of applicable building permits and no permit shall be issued without
said fees having been paid.
   (G)   Maximum Connection Fee: The maximum current connection fee charged by
the county of DuPage, per agreement with the village, is as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" per residential equivalent. In the event the county shall raise its
charges, all such additional charges shall be paid by the users making
connection into the sewer system and not by the village. In case of notice from
the county to the village of an increase in county charges, the user shall,
prior to acceptance by the village of said increase, deposit a sum equal to
said increase in county charges or deposit with the village an irrevocable
binding letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village and from a
financial institution acceptable to the village attorney in said amount. Said
sum or letter of credit shall be released when, if, and to the extent that the
county agrees to reduce its increase in charges.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-7: SEWERAGE SYSTEM RATES:
The rates and charges as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" may be from time to time amended, upon approval of the corporate
authorities.
The rates or charges are hereby established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for the following use and for the service supplied by the sewerage
system of the village:
Single-family residence.
Multiple-family buildings.
Rooming houses.
All other users.
Users of the village sewerage system located outside the corporate limits of
the village shall pay an increased amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures".
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-8: BILLING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   All Single-Family Users:
      1.   Charges for service shall be made bimonthly for all single- family
users of the village sanitary sewer system. The charges provided for shall be
payable bimonthly on the first day of the month immediately following the end
of the bimonthly period for which service has been supplied. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the service on such premises.
      2.   All bills for service shall be rendered as of the first day of the
month following the bimonthly period for which the service is billed, or as
soon thereafter as possible, and shall be payable not later than the close of
business on the fifteenth day after the date the bills are rendered. If payment
in full of the bill is not made within said period, then a penalty as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" in relation to the amount of the total outstanding and unpaid bill
shall be added thereto.
      3.   If the charges for services are not paid within thirty (30) days
after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed and
are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquency shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and
the village treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn
statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the county recorder of
deeds and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of
such charges for such service.
      4.   All sewerage services may be discontinued from any premises owned or
occupied by any person liable for the payment of the sewer service bill without
further notice if the rates or charges are not paid within thirty (30) days
after rendition of the bill thereof. The service shall not be reinstated until
all past due bills, including the penalties thereon, are paid in full, plus an
amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" to cover the cost of disconnection of service and reconnection of the
same.
      5.   It is hereby made the duty of the village to render bills for
service for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all
monies due thereon.
   (B)   All Users Other Than Single-Family:
      1.   Charges for service shall be made each month of the calendar year
for all users of the village sanitary sewer system other than single-family
users.
      Charges shall be payable monthly on the first day of the month
immediately following the month for which service has been supplied. The owner
of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises.
      2.   All bills for service shall be rendered as of the first day of the
month following the month for which service is billed, or as soon thereafter as
possible, and shall be payable not later than the close of business on the
fifteenth day after the date the bills are rendered. If payment in full of the
bill is not made within said period, then a penalty as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" in relation to the amount of the total outstanding and unpaid bill
shall be added thereto.
      3.   If the charges for services are not paid within thirty (30) days
after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed and
are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquency shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and
the village treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn
statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the county recorder of
deeds and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of
such charges for such service.
      4.   All water and/or all sewerage services may be disconnected from any
premises owned or occupied by any person liable for the payment of the sewer
service bill, including any premises owned or occupied by the person liable
other than the premises against which the delinquency currently exists, without
further notice if the rates or charges are not paid within thirty (30) days
after rendition of the bill therefor. The service shall not be reinstated until
all past due bills, including the penalties thereon, are paid in full, plus the
amount required by this subsection (B)4 for the cost of disconnection and
reconnection of service. For purposes of this subsection (B)4, the
disconnection/reconnection fee for water services shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures", and the disconnection/reconnection fee for sewerage service shall be
as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". As soon as practicable after the payment of all past due water and/
or sewer bills and charges, the village public works department shall, during
the regular operating hours of the department, take all steps necessary to
reconnect the water supply to the subject premises.
      5.   It is hereby made the duty of the village to render bills for
service for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all
monies due thereon.
   (C)   Disputes:
      1.   Provided, however, the foregoing notwithstanding, if any occupant,
user or owner of the premises receiving service has a bona fide dispute over
the statement, charge or penalty determined or issued by the village, and
challenges same as hereinafter provided, then services shall not be
disconnected until the occupant, user or owner raising said dispute shall have
a reasonable opportunity to be heard by the assistant village manager, an
employee of the village hereby designated to conduct a predetermination review
of the disputed statement, charge or penalty subsequent to notice to the
occupant, user or owner indicating to him the amount due the village, the
nature of said statement, charge or penalty and notice that his water service
will be terminated in the event that said statement, charge or penalty is not
paid or adjusted after having said dispute considered by said assistant village
manager.
      2.   In any final notice or notice of disconnection to occupant, user or
owner prior to termination of service, the occupant, user or owner shall be
notified that if he, she or it has a bona fide dispute, said person shall have
ten (10) days within which to request, in writing to the village clerk, a
hearing by the assistant village manager. If no request is made, the statement
shall become final and service may be thereafter terminated by the village.
      3.   In the event that an informal hearing is held and the assistant
village manager determines that the objection to the statement, charge or
penalty is not proper and that the statement, charge or penalty is correct, and
in the event that the occupant, user or owner wishes to have reviewed any
decision of the assistant village manager with respect to statement, charge or
penalty, the amount due or any reduction or increase in the amount due, then he
shall have the right to appeal to the village board of trustees for their
determination and review of the decision of the assistant village manager. Any
decision of the assistant village manager not appealed from within the time
hereinafter set forth shall be final.
      4.   Any request for review of the assistant village manager's decision
must be made in writing, addressed to the village president and board of
trustees and must be made within ten (10) days after any adverse decision of
the assistant village manager and by filing same with the village clerk, who
shall place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the corporate authorities, whereat said matter shall be considered. At said
hearing the assistant village manager shall present his reasons for his
decision. The occupant, user or owner shall also be heard as to his objection
to any statement, charge or penalty and the president and board of trustees
shall then make its decision and the village clerk shall cause it to be
delivered to the occupant, user or owner within five (5) days, by personal
service or certified mail. In the event that decision upholds any
disconnection, said disconnection shall take place not less than ten (10) days
thereafter unless said termination is stayed by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-9: CONTROL MANHOLE, BUILDING DRAIN, AND COST TO INSTALL:
   (A)   Control Manhole:
      1.   The owner of any nonresidential building in any zoning
classification discharging other than normal residential domestic sanitary
sewer waste shall be required to construct, install and maintain a control
manhole as set forth below. As used herein, the term "new nonresidential
building" shall mean a structure, or addition to a structure which requires a
building permit prior to construction for any building thereon.
      2.   Said control manhole shall be used for the purpose of inspecting and
sampling of sanitary sewer wastes and for the measurement of the sanitary
sewage flow. Continuous sampling and recording flow measurement and equipment
shall be provided when required by the village.
      3.   The control manhole shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with plans approved by the village engineer.
      4.   The control manhole shall meet the village's standard detail and
shall be precast reinforced concrete with an inside diameter of four feet (4')
for service lines ten inches (10") and smaller and five feet (5') in inside
diameter for service lines twelve inches (12") and above unless a larger
diameter or larger size is deemed necessary by the village engineer in order to
facilitate access to and installation of flow measurement sampling and
recording equipment.
   (B)   Cost Of Installation: All costs and expenses incidental to the
installation, connection, and operation of the building drain to the sewer
main, including manholes, control manholes, and necessary sampling and flow
measurement and recording equipment when required, shall be borne by the owner
of the property. The owner shall indemnify the village for any loss or damage
that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
   (C)   Location Of Control Manhole: The control manhole shall be located on
public property or if approved by the village manager and village engineer on
private property for which an easement has been provided so as to allow the
village and its employees and authorized representatives ready access at all
reasonable times to the premises, places or buildings where sanitary sewer
service is supplied for the purpose of examining and testing the operation of
building drain and sewage flow, including all manholes, control manholes and
necessary equipment and appurtenances thereof. It shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with, prevent of obstruct said village or its duly
authorized employees or representatives in performing their duties hereunder.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-10: INSPECTION:
The Development Services Department shall be notified by the person making the
connection to the public sewer line when the work is begun and when it is ready
for inspection. All such work shall be left uncovered and convenient for
examination until inspected and approved. The plumbing inspector shall examine
the work within one day after receipt of notice that the work is ready for
inspection. All defective materials and work must be replaced and corrected.
Upon satisfactory completion of the work, the plumbing inspector shall issue a
letter of certificate of approval. The Development Services Department shall be
notified twenty four (24) hours in advance by the person making the connection.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-11: RIGHTS OF ACCESS:
   (A)   The village and its employees shall have ready access, to the extent
allowed by law, to the premises, places or buildings where sewer service is
supplied for the purpose of examining and testing the operation of the sewerage
system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of determining if any
violation of the provisions of this chapter exists. Every user of said sewer
shall take the same upon the conditions prescribed in this section.
   (B)   The failure to allow such access shall be grounds for the termination
of water and sewer service, after notice and opportunity to be heard. In the
event of a notice of termination to occupant, user or owner, prior to
termination of service, the occupant, user or owner shall have ten (10) days
within which to request, in writing to the village clerk, a hearing by the
village manager or his designee. If no such request is made, water and sewer
service may be immediately terminated by the village.
   (C)   In the event that the occupant, user or owner wishes to have reviewed
any decision of the village manager or his designee with respect to termination
of service, then he shall have the right to appeal to the village board of
trustees for its determination and review of the decision of the village
manager or his designee. Any decision not appealed from within the time
hereinafter set forth shall be final.
   (D)   Any request for review of an adverse decision must be made in writing,
addressed to the village president and board of trustees and must be made
within ten (10) days after the decision and by filing same with the village
clerk, who shall place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the corporate authorities, whereas said matter shall be considered.
At said hearing the village manager or his designee shall present his reasons
for his decision. The occupant, user or owner shall also be heard. The
president and board of trustees shall then make its decision and the village
clerk shall cause it to be delivered to the occupant, user or owner within five
(5) days, by personal service or certified mail. In the event that the decision
upholds any termination, said termination shall take place not less than ten
(10) days thereafter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-12: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   All repairs and maintenance of building drains, from the building to
the village right of way, including manholes, control manholes and flow and
sampling equipment, shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the
property served. The village may, in case of emergency, repair any building
drain including said appurtenances noted, and, if this is done, the cost of
such repair work shall be repaid to the village by the owners of the property
served.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the property owner for root maintenance in
the building drain from the building to the sewer main, including the portion
of the building drain located in the right-of-way.
   (C)   If the charges incurred in performing such repair work are not paid
within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for such service, such
charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent and thereafter
such delinquency shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such
service is supplied, and the village finance director is hereby authorized and
directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of
the recorder of deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, and the filing of such
statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of such charges for such service.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-13: GREASE TRAP/TRIPLE BASIN MAINTENANCE:
All grease, oil and sand traps required by this code shall be regularly cleaned
and maintained by and at the expense of the owners of the property served. Such
grease, oil and sand traps shall be cleaned whenever they are full to more than
three-fourths (3/4) of their capacity. Additionally, special cleaning may be
ordered by the public works director in the event that inadequate maintenance
of grease traps is causing problems to the village sanitary sewer system.
Failure to maintain a grease, oil, or sand trap in accordance with this code
shall be considered a nuisance and a violation of this code subject to the
special repair provisions of section 7-6-13 of this chapter and subject to the
violations and penalties set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-14: STORM WATER PROHIBITED:
No customer or owner or occupant of premises receiving sewer service shall
discharge, cause to be discharged, allow to be discharged or permit to be
discharged any storm water, surface water, roof runoff, surface drainage,
ground water drainage, footing drainage, window well drainage, driveway
drainage, garage floor drainage, patio drainage, downspout drainage, crawl
space drainage, nonsanitary basement floor drainage, nonsanitary sump pump
drainage, cooling water, unapproved industrial process water, or any other
nonsanitary sewage drainage into the sanitary sewer or into the building sewer
service connection so as to reach said sanitary sewer; no customer or owner or
occupant of premises receiving sewer service shall connect, cause to be
connected, allow to be connected or remain connected or permit to be connected
or remain connected, and no premises receiving sewer service shall have
connected, any sump pump or other pumping device for draining window wells,
footings, patios, garages, driveways, downspouts, crawl spaces or other
nonsanitary drainage areas, or any footing, window well, driveway, patio,
garage, downspout or other nonsanitary sewage drain to the sanitary sewer or to
any building sanitary sewer service line which connects to said sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-5-15: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Each person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be fined,
upon conviction thereof, as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each time that he shall so violate such provision.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Minimum Public Improvements Required
7-6-2: Design Standards
7-6-3: Oversize Design
7-6-4: Extension Of Public Improvements
7-6-5: Permit Required
7-6-6: Permit Fees
7-6-7: Construction Security
7-6-8: Certificate Of Insurance
7-6-9: Acceptance Of Public Improvements
7-6-10: Guarantee Of Completed Public Improvements
7-6-11: Violations; Penalties
7-6-1: MINIMUM PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
All development within the Village's corporate boundary shall include, at the
developer's expense, the following public improvements, when deemed necessary
by the Village Engineer.
   (A)   Street pavement, including combination curb and gutter.
   (B)   Public sidewalks.
   (C)   Water supply and distribution system, including mains and service
stubs.
   (D)   Sanitary sewer system, including mains and service stubs.
   (E)   Storm water sewers.
   (F)   Street lighting facilities.
   (G)   Fire hydrants.
   (H)   Street signs.
   (I)   Culverts.
   (J)   Parkway landscaping.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-2: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All public improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the Village of Lisle Design Manual.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-3: OVERSIZE DESIGN:
In the event that the Village determines it is necessary due to overall
planning for future connections or development, public improvements shall be
constructed larger than necessary to serve the immediate property adequately.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-4:      EXTENSION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
All public improvements shall extend to the boundary of the development or lot
in which they serve. (Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, modify, extend, or replace any public
improvement without having first secured a permit and approval therefor from
the Development Services Department in accordance with the permit procedures
set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-6: PERMIT FEES:
Permit fees shall be as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" of the Lisle Village Code.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-7: CONSTRUCTION SECURITY:
   (A)   Prior to issuance of a permit authorizing the construction of public
improvements, the developer shall submit to the Village, construction security
to guarantee completion of public improvements. Such construction security
shall be one hundred ten percent (110%) of the engineer's probable estimate of
cost. Such construction security shall be in one of the following forms:
      1.   A cash security deposit, together with an agreement for the
disposition thereof, in form and substance as set forth in the Village of Lisle
Design Manual.
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit in form and substance as set forth
in the Village of Lisle Design Manual. The letter of credit must be an original
copy. All letters of credit shall be valid for a minimum of a one-year term,
and the permit applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the letter of
credit at all times during the construction of the public improvements.
      3.   A performance bond in form and substance as set forth in the Village
of Lisle Design Manual. The performance bond must be an original copy. All
performance bonds shall be valid for a minimum of a one-year term, and the
permit applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the performance bond at
all times during the construction of the public improvements.
      4.   In the event the construction security is insufficient to fund any
charges, costs or expenses described in this section, including collection
costs and attorney fees, the developer shall be responsible for such
deficiency. The developer shall cause such deficiency to be paid to the Village
upon thirty (30) days notice. In the event such payment is not timely made, the
Village may institute appropriate proceedings to collect such amounts, plus all
costs associated with such collection, including attorney fees.
   (B)   The Development Services Director, with concurrence of the Village
Engineer, may reduce the public improvement construction security as each
division of the required land improvements are initially accepted. Land
improvements shall be divided into the following categories, as applicable:
      1.   Sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances;
      2.   Water mains and appurtenances;
      3.   Storm sewer mains, drainage ways, and storm water management
facilities;
      4.   Streets and parkway grading and seeding/sodding;
      5.   Miscellaneous improvements (landscaping, street traffic signs,
street lights, pedestrian paths, traffic signals, etc.).
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-8: CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE:
Any person performing work under this chapter shall take out and maintain
during the construction of the public improvement, commercial general liability
insurance in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance combined
single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property
damage, an amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" aggregate which shall name him, the village and the village's
representative as additional insured and insure them against liability and
property damages which may arise from construction of this project. The village
shall be furnished certificates of insurance issued by the companies carrying
the risk, which said certificates shall be in form and substance satisfactory
to and approved by the village.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-9: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Except as provided herein, all public improvements to be transferred
to the Village must be properly completed before acceptance by the Village.
Where, in the sole discretion of the Village, it is determined that it is in
the best interest of the Village that completion of parkway restoration and/or
sidewalks be delayed to prevent damage during subsequent construction activity,
the Village may accept all properly completed public improvements, retaining a
portion of the construction security to ensure proper completion of the parkway
restoration and/or sidewalks.
   (B)   Upon completion of the public improvements required under the
provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance, the Owner shall file with the Village
all of the following:
      1.   Certification by an Illinois registered professional engineer, to
the effect that all such public improvements have been completed substantially
in accordance with the final plans and specifications approved by the Village;
      2.   Record (as-built) drawings in the form and manner as established by
the Village of Lisle Design Manual;
      3.   Appropriate bills of sale, Contractor's Affidavit, and lien waivers
for those required public improvements to be transferred to the Village. The
Contractor's Affidavit and Lien Waivers shall be in accordance with the
Illinois Mechanics Lien Act;
      4.   Guarantee of completed public improvements as required under this
chapter;
      5.   Storm sewer cleaning and televising report;
      6.   Sanitary sewer televising report;
      7.   Any other documents determined as appropriate by the Village
Engineer.
   (C)   In accepting public improvements, the Village shall release or refund
to the depositor thereof the construction security, or such part thereof
applicable to the accepted public improvements. Provided, the Village may
authorize retention or deduction therefrom for the following:
      1.   An amount equal to any extraordinary costs incurred by the Village;
and/or
      2.   An amount necessary to secure completion of any uncompleted parkway
restoration or sidewalks; and/or
      3.   An amount necessary to fund the guarantee of completed public
improvements as required under this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-10: GUARANTEE OF COMPLETED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   The developer shall guarantee the public improvements for a period of
18 months from the date the Village accepts such improvements. During such
eighteen (18)-month period, the owner shall be obligated, upon written notice
from the Village as provided herein, to repair or reconstruct any public
improvement or portion thereof which may deteriorate, fail or otherwise cease
to meet the standard established by the engineer's certificate or record
drawings.
   (B)   The Village shall provide written notice to the Owner of deterioration
of public improvements, specifying a time period in which such deterioration is
to be remedied and the Owner shall perform the necessary repair or
reconstruction at his/her own expense, within the time specified.
   (C)   In the event that it is determined by the Village that failure of the
Owner to restore existing public improvements will result in imminent hazard to
life or property within the subdivision or in areas adjacent thereto the
Village may, without prior notice to the Owner, perform or have performed on
its behalf any restoration work reasonably necessary to prevent such hazards.
Within thirty (30) days thereafter, the Owner shall be notified in writing by
the Village of the performance of such work and of the cost thereof. Within
thirty (30) days from notification from the Village of the work performed and
the cost of the work, Owner shall reimburse the Village for the full amount
incurred by the Village.
   (D)   As a condition of, and prior to, acceptance of any public improvement,
the Owner shall submit to the office of the Village Engineer, guarantee
security to secure the performance of the obligations imposed by this Section.
The guarantee security shall be in the amount of twenty percent (20%) of the
total cost of the public improvements, which shall expire no earlier than
eighteen (18) months after acceptance of such public improvements by the
Village Council. Such guarantee security shall be in one of the following
forms:
      1.   A cash security deposit, together with an agreement for the
disposition thereof, in form and substance as set forth in the Village of Lisle
Design Manual.
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit in form and substance as set forth
in the Village of Lisle Engineering Design Manual and Details. The letter of
credit must be an original copy. All letters of credit shall be valid for a
minimum of a one-year term, and the permit applicant shall be responsible for
maintaining the letter of credit at all times during the construction of the
public improvements.
      3.   A performance bond in form and substance as set forth in the Village
of Lisle Design Manual. The performance bond must be an original copy. All
performance bonds shall be valid for a minimum of a one-year term, and the
permit applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the performance bond at
all times during the construction of the public improvements.
   (E)   In the event the guarantee security is insufficient to fund any
charges, costs or expenses described in this section, including collection
costs and attorney fees, the Owner shall be responsible for such deficiency.
The Owner shall cause such deficiency to be paid to the Village upon thirty
(30) days notice. In the event such payment is not timely made, the Village may
institute appropriate proceedings to collect such amounts, plus all costs
associated with such collection, including attorney fees.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-6-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined an amount as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures" for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 7
SEX OFFENDERS PROHIBITED IN VILLAGE PARKS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Recitals
7-7-2: Definitions
7-7-3: Prohibition Of Sex Offenders In Village Parks
7-7-4: Loitering Near Village Parks
7-7-5: Residing Near Village Parks
7-7-6: Residing Near Child Sex Victims
7-7-7: Penalties
7-7-1: RECITALS:
   (A)   Protection of children in the village of Lisle is a priority of the
village;
   (B)   Under the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
9.3, it is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly be present in any
public park building or on real property comprising any public park when
persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present, and knowingly loiter or
reside within five hundred feet (500') of a playground or loiter five hundred
feet (500') from a public park; and
   (C)   The Board of Trustees has determined that in order to protect children
in village parks, it is necessary to designate all park property as off limits
to any person who has been convicted of a child sex crime under Illinois law
and to place similar restrictions on loitering and residing near park property
and residing next to a sex offender's victim.
(Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
 
                 Any person who:
                 (A)   Has been charged under Illinois law, the Illinois code of criminal procedure
                 of 1963 or any substantially similar federal law or the law of another state, with a
                 sex offense set forth in this section or the attempt to commit an included sex
                 offense, and:
                    1.   Is convicted of such offense or an attempt to commit such offense; or
                    2.   Is found not guilty by reason of insanity of such offense or an attempt to
                 commit such offense; or
                    3.   Is found not guilty by reason of insanity pursuant to subsection (c) of
                 section 104-25 of the code of criminal procedure of 1963 1 of such offense or an
                 attempt to commit such offense; or
                    4.   Is the subject of a finding not resulting in an acquittal at a hearing
                 conducted pursuant to subsection (a) of section 104-25 of the code of criminal
                 procedure of 1963 2 for the alleged commission or attempted commission of such
                 offense; or
CHILD SEX           5.   Is found not guilty by reason of insanity following a hearing conducted
OFFENDER:        pursuant to a federal law or the law of another state substantially similar to
                 subsection (c) of section 104-25 of the code of criminal procedure of 1963 3 of such
                 offense or of the attempted commission of such offense; or
                    6.   Is the subject of a finding not resulting in an acquittal at a hearing
                 conducted pursuant to a federal law or the law of another state substantially
                 similar to subsection (a) of section 104-25 of the code of criminal procedure of
                 1963 4 for the alleged violation or attempted commission of such offense; or
                 (B)   Is certified as a sexually dangerous person pursuant to the Illinois sexually
                 dangerous persons act 5 or any substantially similar federal law or the law of
                 another state, when any conduct giving rise to such certification is committed or
                 attempted against a person less than eighteen (18) years of age; or
                 (C)   Is subject to the provisions of section 2 of the interstate agreements on
                 sexually dangerous persons act 6 . Convictions that result from or are connected
                 with the same act, or result from offenses committed at the same time, shall be
                 counted for the purpose of this section as one conviction. Any conviction set aside
                 pursuant to law is not a conviction for purposes of this section.
                 A conviction for an offense of federal law or the law of another state that is
                 substantially equivalent to any offense listed in subsections (A) and (E)1 of the
EXTRATERRITORIAL definition of Sex Offense shall constitute a conviction for the purpose of this
CONVICTIONS:     section. A finding or adjudication as a sexually dangerous person under any federal
                 law or the law of another state that is substantially equivalent to the sexually
                 dangerous persons act 1 shall constitute an adjudication for the purposes of this
                 section.
                 (A)   Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining
                 in or around public park property; or
LOITER:          (B)   Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining
                 in or around public park property, for the purpose of committing or attempting to
                 commit a sex offense.
                 (A)   A violation of any of the following Sections of the Criminal Code of 1961 or
                 the Criminal Code of 2012: 10-4 (forcible detention), 10-7 (aiding or abetting child
                 abduction under Section 10-5(b)(10)), 10-5(b)(10) (child luring), 11-1.40 (predatory
                 criminal sexual assault of a child), 11-6 (indecent solicitation of a child), 11-6.5
                 (indecent solicitation of an adult), 11-9.1 (sexual exploitation of a child), 11-9.2
                 (custodial sexual misconduct), 11-9.5 (sexual misconduct with a person with a
                 disability), 11-11 (sexual relations within families), 11-14.3(a)(1) (promoting
                 prostitution by advancing prostitution), 11-14.3(a)(2)(A) (promoting prostitution by
                 profiting from prostitution by compelling a person to be a prostitute), 11-14.3(a)
                 (2)(C) (promoting prostitution by profiting from prostitution by means other than as
                 described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of Section
                 11-14.3), 11-14.4 (promoting juvenile prostitution), 11-18.1 (patronizing a juvenile
                 prostitute), 11-20.1 (child pornography), 11-20.1B (aggravated child pornography),
                 11-21 (harmful material), 11-25 (grooming), 11-26 (traveling to meet a minor or
                 traveling to meet a child), 12-33 (ritualized abuse of a child), 11-20 (obscenity)
                 (when that offense was committed in any school, on real property comprising any
                 school, in any conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a school to transport
                 students to or from school or a school related activity, or in a public park), 11-30
                 (public indecency) (when committed in a school, on real property comprising a
                 school, in any conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a school to transport
                 students to or from school or a school related activity, or in a public park). This
                 includes an attempt to commit any of these offenses.
                 (B)   A violation of any of the following Sections of the Criminal Code of 1961 or
                 the Criminal Code of 2012, when the victim is a person under 18 years of age: 11-
                 1.20 (criminal sexual assault), 11-1.30 (aggravated criminal sexual assault), 11-
                 1.50 (criminal sexual abuse), 11-1.60 (aggravated criminal sexual abuse). This
                 includes an attempt to commit any of these offenses.
                 (C)   A violation of any of the following Sections of the Criminal Code of 1961 or
                 the Criminal Code of 2012, when the victim is a person under 18 years of age and the
                 defendant is not a parent of the victim: 10-1 (kidnapping), 10-2 (aggravated
                 kidnapping), 10-3 (unlawful restraint), 10-3.1 (aggravated unlawful restraint), 11-
                 9.1(A) (permitting sexual abuse of a child). This includes an attempt to commit any
SEX OFFENSE:     of these offenses.
                 (D)   A violation of any former law of this state substantially equivalent to any
                 offense listed above.
                 (E)   For purposes of section
                 7-7-5 of this chapter, the term "SEX OFFENSE" means:
                    1.   A violation of any of the following Sections of the Criminal Code of 1961 or
                 the Criminal Code of 2012: 10-5(b)(10) (child luring), 10-7 (aiding or abetting
                 child abduction under Section 10-5(b)(10)), 11-1.40 (predatory criminal sexual
                 assault of a child), 11-6 (indecent solicitation of a child), 11-6.5 (indecent
                 solicitation of an adult), 11-9.2 (custodial sexual misconduct), 11-9.5 (sexual
                 misconduct with a person with a disability), 11-11 (sexual relations within
                 families), 11-14.3(a)(1) (promoting prostitution by advancing prostitution), 11-14.3
                 (a)(2)(A) (promoting prostitution by profiting from prostitution by compelling a
                 person to be a prostitute), 11-14.3(a)(2)(C) (promoting prostitution by profiting
                 from prostitution by means other than as described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of
                 paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of Section 11-14.3), 11-14.4 (promoting juvenile
                 prostitution), 11-18.1 (patronizing a juvenile prostitute), 11-20.1 (child
                 pornography), 11-20.1B (aggravated child pornography), 11-25 (grooming), 11-26
                 (traveling to meet a minor or traveling to meet a child), or 12-33 (ritualized abuse
                 of a child), or an attempt to commit any of these offenses.
                    2.   A violation of any of the following Sections of the Criminal Code of 1961 or
                 the Criminal Code of 2012, when the victim is a person under 18 years of age: 11-
                 1.20 (criminal sexual assault), 11-1.30 (aggravated criminal sexual assault), 11-
                 1.60 (aggravated criminal sexual abuse), and subsection (a) of Section 11-1.50
                 (criminal sexual abuse), or an attempt to commit any of these offenses.
                    3.   A violation of any of the following Sections of the Criminal Code of 1961 or
                 the Criminal Code of 2012, when the victim is a person under 18 years of age and the
                 defendant is not a parent of the victim: 10-1 (kidnapping), 10-2 (aggravated
                 kidnapping), 10-3 (unlawful restraint), 10-3.1 (aggravated unlawful restraint), 11-
                 9.1(A) (permitting sexual abuse of a child), or an attempt to commit any of these
                 offenses.
                    4.   A violation of any former law of this state substantially equivalent to any
                 offense listed above.
                 All parks and associated buildings on real property comprising any public park,
VILLAGE PARK:    playgrounds, forest preserves or conservation areas under the jurisdiction of the
                 state or a unit of local government and within the corporate limits of the village
                 of Lisle as of the effective date of this chapter.
 
(Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-7-3: PROHIBITION OF SEX OFFENDERS IN VILLAGE PARKS:
It is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly be within five hundred
feet (500') of any village park when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are
present in the village park, and to approach, contact or communicate with a
person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless the child sex offender is a
parent or guardian of a person under eighteen (18) years of age present in the
village park.
(Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-7-4: LOITERING NEAR VILLAGE PARKS:
It is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly loiter on a public way
within five hundred feet (500') of a village park while persons under the age
of eighteen (18) are present in the village park, and to approach, contact or
communicate with a person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless the child
sex offender is a parent or guardian of a person under eighteen (18) years of
age present in the village park.
(Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-7-5: RESIDING NEAR VILLAGE PARKS:
It is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly reside within five hundred
feet (500') of a village park or a facility providing programs or services
exclusively directed toward persons under eighteen (18) years of age. Nothing
in this section prohibits a child sex offender from residing within five
hundred feet (500') of a village park if the property is owned by the child sex
offender and was purchased before the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-7-6: RESIDING NEAR CHILD SEX VICTIMS:
It is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly reside within five hundred
feet (500') of the victim of his or her sex offense. Nothing in this section
prohibits a child sex offender from residing within five hundred feet (500') of
the victim if the property in which the child sex offender resides is owned by
the child sex offender and was purchased before the effective date of this
chapter. However, this section does not apply if the victim of the sex offense
is twenty one (21) years of age or older.
(Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-5097, 10-7-2024)
7-7-7: PENALTIES:
Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to fines as established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, "Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures". A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense for each day such violation continues. The imposition of any
penalties prescribed under this chapter neither limits nor prohibits any other
civil, criminal, or quasi-criminal, legal or equitable remedies available to
the village for activities that constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-4109, 5-7-2007; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021; Ord. 2024-5097, 10-
7-2024)
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Pollution Of Waterways Prohibited
8-1-2: The Smoke Free Illinois Act
8-1-3: Intentionally Feeding Wild Animals Prohibited
8-1-1: POLLUTION OF WATERWAYS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to deposit or dump in any
waterway located within the village any grass clippings, brush, tree limbs or
stumps, topsoil, sand, or clay or other yard waste; motor oil, paint, paint
thinner, fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, pharmaceuticals, or hazardous
wastes; soap or detergents; or cans, bottles, glass, wooden or paper boxes,
crates, old metals or alloys, stone, ashes, brick, tires, garbage and the like.
The term "waterways" shall include rivers, creeks, streams, or wetlands;
inlets, catch basins, or other parts of the storm sewer system; or ditches or
swales.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2008-4220,
8-4-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
8-1-2: THE SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, the below terms shall have the
following ascribed meanings:
      ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product" excludes
cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms are
defined in section 1 of the prevention of tobacco use by minors and sale and
distribution of tobacco products act 1  and any product approved by the United
States food and drug administration as a nontobacco product for sale as a
tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
      BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more
than ten percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on
the premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs,
cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
      EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a nonprofit entity.
      EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
      ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed
or partially enclosed with: 1) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways,
or 2) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
      ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion,
stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice
rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
      GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
      GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of
gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
      HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment
of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
      PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during
the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to
places of employment, including a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms;
conference and class rooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas.
A private residence or home based business, unless used to provide licensed
childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the
premises, is not a "place of employment", nor are enclosed laboratories, not
open to the public, in an accredited university or government facility where
the activity of smoking is exclusively conducted for the purpose of medical or
scientific health related research.
      PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: 1) has been in active
and continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective
date of this amendatory act of the 95th general assembly, whether incorporated
or not, 2) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof
used exclusively for club purposes at all times, 3) is operated solely for a
recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic
purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and 4) only sells alcoholic beverages
incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club"
means an organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive
committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has
established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has
been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club
under 26 USC 501.
      PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
      PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to
the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, the village of
Lisle, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged
for admission, including a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does not include a
private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed
childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A
"public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail
stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters,
libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities,
nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas,
meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling
places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and
facilities, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail
service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket
areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies,
bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel,
resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation
that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
      RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the
restaurant.
      RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than
eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco,
plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for
burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other
products is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" includes an enclosed
workplace that manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco
products, when, as a necessary and integral part of the process of making,
manufacturing, importing, or distributing a tobacco product for the eventual
retail sale of that tobacco or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or
smoked, or a lighted tobacco product is tested, provided that the involved
business entity: 1) maintains a specially designated area or areas within the
workplace for the purpose of the heating, burning, smoking, or lighting
activities, and does not create a facility that permits smoking throughout; 2)
satisfies the eighty percent (80%) requirement related to gross sales; and 3)
delivers tobacco products to consumers, retail establishments, or other
wholesale establishments as part of its business. "Retail tobacco store" does
not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial
establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant
license.
      SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or
burning cigarette, cigar, pipe, hookah pipe, pipe weed, or other lighted
tobacco product in any manner or in any form; or the use of any alternative
nicotine product causing the user to exhale any smoke, vapor, or other
substance other than those produced by unenhanced human exhalation. (Ord. 2007-
4168, 12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2011-4364, 1-17-2011; Ord. 2016-4650, 5-2-2016)
   (B)   Smoking Prohibited In Public Places And Places Of Employment:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place or
place of employment within the village of Lisle.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place designated
as a "no smoking area", as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit smoking in
any enclosed area in any place of employment.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in
control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in
said public place.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in
control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove ashtrays, as
provided in subsection (E) of this section.
   (C)   Exemptions: The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this section
shall not apply to:
      1.   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this section. Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where
smoking is permitted. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be
changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms.
      2.   Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or
government vehicles.
      3.   Private residences or dwelling places except when used as a
childcare, adult daycare, healthcare facility, or any other home based business
open to the public.
      4.   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is
permitted.
      5.   Retail tobacco stores as defined in subsection (A) of this section,
provided that smoke generated by smoking on the premises of the tobacco store
does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is otherwise prohibited.
Retail tobacco stores claiming an exemption shall annually file an affidavit
with the Illinois department of public health stating the percentage of its
gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale of
loose tobacco, plants, herbs, cigars, cigarettes, and related smoking
accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after January 1,
2008, may only qualify for the exemption if located in a freestanding structure
occupied solely by the tobacco store.
   (D)   Designation Of Other No Smoking Areas: Notwithstanding any other
provision of this section, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator,
manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment
may designate a nonenclosed area of said public place or place of employment,
including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited, provided
that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs
prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsection (E) of this section.
   (E)   Responsibilities Of Proprietors: Each owner, lessee, occupant,
employer or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment
shall be responsible for all the following:
      1.   Post conspicuous signs no smaller than five inches by seven inches
(5" x 7") in enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public place,
place of employment or the building wherein they are located, as the case may
be, bearing the text "no smoking" or the international "no smoking" symbol,
which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a
circle with a bar across it. Such signs shall also be posted outside of the
main entrance to the public place or place of employment and shall contain the
telephone numbers of the designated enforcement authorities noted in this
section, in addition to the telephone number and website designated by the
Illinois department of public health for registering complaints.
      2.   Remove ash trays or other similar containers intended for the
deposit of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products from
public places.
      3.   Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited
to refrain from smoking, and if the person continues to smoke, request the
person to leave.
      4.   Notify employees regarding the requirements of this section. (Ord.
2007-4168, 12-17-2007)
      5.   Owners, lessees, occupants, employers or other persons in control of
retail tobacco stores, as defined in this section, must prohibit the entrance
of persons under the age of eighteen (18) onto the premises of such
establishments. Further, any such owner, lessee, occupant, employer, or person
in control of a retail tobacco store must post a sign informing the public of
this age restriction at each entrance to any such establishment stating the
following:
   PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE ARE PROHIBITED BY VILLAGE ORDINANCE FROM
ENTERING THIS PLACE OF BUSINESS
   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 2010-4354, 12-6-2010)
   (F)   Enforcement:
      1.   This section shall be enforced by the village of Lisle police
department.
      2.   Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given to all
applicants for a business license in the village of Lisle.
      3.   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section
may initiate enforcement by contacting the village of Lisle police department.
      4.   An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator, or employee of an
establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons violating this
section of the appropriate provisions thereof and request that the violator
cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues to smoke,
request the person to leave. (Ord. 2007-4168, 12-17-2007)
      5.   The citations issued pursuant to this section shall conspicuously
include the following:
         (a)   The name of the offense and its statutory reference;
         (b)   The nature and elements of the violation;
         (c)   The date and location of the violation;
         (d)   The name of the enforcing agency;
         (e)   The name of the violator;
         (f)   The amount of the imposed fine and the location where the
violator can pay the fine without objection;
         (g)   The address and phone number of the village where the violator
can request a hearing before the department of public health to contest the
imposition of the fine imposed by the citation;
         (h)   The time period in which to pay the fine or to request a hearing
to contest the imposition of the fine imposed by the citation; and
         (i)   The verified signature of the person issuing the citation.
      6.   One copy of the citation shall be provided to the violator, one copy
shall be retained by the village, and one copy shall be provided to any entity
authorized by the village to receive fines on the village's behalf.
      7.   Any person may register a complaint with the department of public
health, a state certified local public health department, or the village police
department for a violation of this act.
      8.   The department of public health shall afford a violator the
opportunity to pay the fine without objection or to contest the citation in
accordance with the Illinois administrative procedure act.
      9.   Upon receipt of a request for hearing to contest the imposition of a
fine imposed by a citation, the village shall immediately forward a copy of the
citation and notice of the request for hearing to the department of public
health for initiation of a hearing conducted in accordance with the Illinois
administrative procedure act and the rules established thereto by the
department applicable to contested cases. Parties to the hearing shall be the
village and the violator.
The department shall notify the violator in writing of the time, place, and
location of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted at the nearest regional
office of the department or in a location contracted by the department in the
county where the citation was issued.
      10.   Fines imposed under this section may be collected in accordance
with all methods otherwise available to the village or the department, except
that there shall be no collection efforts during the pendency of a hearing
before the department.
   (G)   Penalties:
      1.   Any person who shall violate subsection (B)1 or (B)2 of this section
shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. Each day in which a violation of subsection (B)1 or (B)2 of this
section occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
      2.   Any person who shall violate subsection (B)3 or (B)4 of this section
shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. Each day in which a violation of subsection (B)3 or (B)4 of this
section occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
      3.   Any person who shall violate subsection (B)5 of this section shall,
on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. Each day during which a violation of subsection (B)5 of this section
continues beyond the specified time for correction shall constitute a separate
punishable offense, although owners, operators, managers or other controllers
of public places and places of employment shall be given a reasonable time to
come into compliance with subsection (B)5 of this section following issuance of
a notice of violation, but such period shall not, in any event, exceed one
week.
      4.   In addition to the fines established by this subsection, violation
of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls
a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or
revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on
which the violation occurred.
      5.   One-half (1/2) of any fine imposed under this section shall be
distributed to the department of public health and one-half (1/2) of any fine
under this section shall be retained by the village.
      6.   Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be abated by an action in the circuit court for injunctive
relief, or other means provided for by law, and the village may take action to
recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. (Ord. 2011-4364, 1-17-2011; amd.
Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 675/1.
8-1-3: INTENTIONALLY FEEDING WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to intentionally feed,
shelter or otherwise harbor any wild animals within the village.
For purposes of this section, wild animals include, but are not limited to,
raccoons, geese, ducks, deer, skunks, coyotes, squirrels, possum and fox.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2007-4160,
12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND HAZARDOUS WASTE
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Prohibited Acts
8-2-3: Collection And Removal; Lien
8-2-4: Resident Requirements
8-2-5: Hazardous Waste
8-2-6: Compost Piles
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMPOST PILE: A pile or collection of organic materials maintained for
noncommercial, private, home gardening use, expressly constructed for the
purpose of obtaining decomposed organic matter and consisting of one or more of
the following materials: leaves, grass clippings, garden debris, excluding
branches and shrubs, and manure.
HDPE: High density polyethylene.
HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.
LDPE: Low density polyethylene.
PET: Polyethylene terephtyalate.
RECYCLABLES: Brown kraft paper bags, paper magazines and catalogs, paper
telephone books, corrugated cardboard, newspaper and newspaper inserts, colored
HDPE and HDPE plastic milk or water jugs, tin cans, steel cans, bimetal cans,
PET plastic beverage containers, clear, brown or green glass bottles or jars,
aluminum cans, aluminum foil and aluminum formed containers, junk mail, 6-pack
rings, aerosol cans, juice boxes, wet strength carrier stock, mixed papers, 12-
pack rings #4, paint cans, frozen food packages, chipboard, polystyrene #6,
envelopes and any other items the village decides to recycle in the future.
TOTER: A wheeled container in sizes ranging from fifty (50) to ninety (90)
gallons, with cover, requiring a semiautomatic lifting mechanism for
collection, and approved by and/or supplied and billed to the resident directly
by the scavenger for a monthly charge.
WASTE: Garbage, refuse, rubbish, litter, and recyclables, including, but not
limited to, the following general and specific items:
   (A)   Items subject to decay, including, but not limited to, putrescible
animal and vegetable wastes resulting from handling, preparing, cooking and
consumption of food; waste that attracts insects or rodents and vermin; dead
animals; and any items subject to rapid decay, putrefaction and generation of
noxious gases or odors; however, this definition expressly excludes compost
piles.
   (B)   Paper products, including, but not limited to, paper, newspapers,
magazines, books, cartons, wrappings and cigarettes.
   (C)   Wood products, including, but not limited to, boxes, barrels,
excelsior and straw; however, neatly stacked firewood limited in amount to one
and one-half (11/2) cords is permitted.
   (D)   Metal products and household items, including, but not limited to,
nails, metal scraps and shavings, cans, machinery, abandoned or inoperable
vehicles, used pipe and fittings, appliances, refrigerators, furniture,
furnishings, fixtures and bedding.
   (E)   Yard leavings, including, but not limited to, downed trees, downed
shrubs, loose branches.
   (F)   Construction material (on a lot where no active building permit is in
force), including, but not limited to, concrete, bricks, blocks, shingles,
siding, aluminum trim and mud and debris on public or private streets,
sidewalks or pathways created by construction traffic.
   (G)   Textile products, including, but not limited to, rags, shoes, and
articles of clothing.
   (H)   Anything creating a danger or nuisance to the public health, safety
and welfare, including, but not limited to, ashes and cinders and any of the
items mentioned above. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2499, 4-18-1994)
8-2-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   (A)   Burning, Burying Or Accumulating Waste: It shall be unlawful, and
shall constitute a nuisance, for any person to burn or bury waste within the
village, to permit waste to accumulate in any manner so as to create a nuisance
and to attract flies, vermin or rats, or to permit any waste to accumulate for
more than seven (7) days. However, properly installed gas incinerators or
similar equipment that has been inspected and approved by the building
commissioner or health inspector, and which does not constitute a health
hazard, may be used for the burning of waste, and properly installed kitchen
disposal units may be used for the disposal of waste into sewer lines within
the village. This subsection shall not apply to those items contained within
the definition of "compost pile" in section
8-2-1 of this chapter.
   (B)   Deposits In Streets: Except recyclables which are regulated by
subsection (E) of this section, no waste of any kind shall be deposited in any
street, alley or public way, excepting waste wrapped in tightly closed and tied
plastic bags or placed in a toter and maintained in good order and in an
inconspicuous place so as not to create a nuisance to neighbors, by the owner
or occupant of each residential or commercial unit in the village and placed
for pick up by a scavenger service; and no such waste shall be so placed that
it can be blown or scattered by the wind.
   (C)   Deposit On One's Own Property Or The Property Of Another: It shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit waste on his or her own property
or on the property of another without consent of the owner, or to deposit waste
on the property of a public entity without the consent of the public entity;
for purposes of this subsection, "property" shall include both real and
personal property.
   (D)   The Placement Of Handbills On Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any
person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or
upon any vehicle.
   (E)   Deposits Of Recyclables In Streets On One's Own Property Or The
Property Of Another: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit
recyclables in any street, alley, public way, on his or her own property or
property of another. However, any person may place recyclables in his or her
own recycling bins or other means of containment approved by the village, from
time to time. Further, the recyclables shall be maintained in good order and in
an inconspicuous place so as not to create a nuisance to neighbors and no such
refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown or scattered by the wind. In
addition, all recyclables shall be placed for pick up on the day of collection
by the scavenger service. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
   (F)   Windblown Material: No waste of any kind shall be deposited in such a
manner so that it can be blown or scattered by the wind.
   (G)   Presumption Of Responsibility: Whenever any waste has been deposited
in violation of any ordinance prohibiting said deposit, the person whose name
appears as an addressee on said waste shall be prima facie responsible for such
violation and subject to the penalty therefor. (Ord. 93-2352, 1-18-1993)
   (H)   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-
20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
8-2-3: COLLECTION AND REMOVAL; LIEN:
   (A)   As it is hereby declared to be illegal for the owners of real estate
to permit the accumulation of waste on public or private property, as set forth
under section
8-2-2 of this chapter, if the owner of such real estate, after reasonable
notice, refuses or neglects to remove such waste, the village manager of the
village may direct that said waste be removed and that the costs of said
collection and removal be assessed to and collected from the owner of the real
estate in question.
   (B)   The cost of collection and removal of waste shall be a lien upon the
real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except
tax liens, if the village, or the person performing the service by authority of
the village in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the office of the
recorder of deeds of DuPage County. The notice shall consist of a sworn
statement setting out:
      1.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      2.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      3.   The date or dates when such costs and expense was incurred by the
village. However, the lien of the village shall not be valid as to any
purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to
removal of waste and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the
village shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other
lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of
such notice. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of
mortgages or mechanics' liens. An action to foreclose this lien shall be
commenced within two (2) years after the date of filing notice of lien. (Ord.
92-2342, 12-7-1992)
8-2-4: RESIDENT REQUIREMENTS:
The owner or occupant of any multi-family unit receiving scavenger service
shall maintain clean waste collection containers and areas. All segregated
waste, including, but not limited to, recyclables shall be placed in covered
containers. The owner or occupant of any unit receiving single-family
residential scavenger service shall:
   (A)   Place all waste, except yard leavings, either in plastic bags of
thirty three (33) gallons or less or in a toter which the resident may rent
from the scavenger. Plastic bags may be placed inside a plastic or metal
container;
   (B)   Not place more than sixty (60) pounds in any one plastic bag which has
been placed for pick up by the scavenger service;
   (C)   Affix a sticker approved by the village and purchased by the resident
from the scavenger, to the plastic bag, toter or container or to any item of
nonrecyclable waste too large to fit into a thirty three (33) gallon plastic
bag;
   (D)   Place recyclable materials in bins provided by the village and place
those bins at the curbside for pick up by the scavenger service. However, if
recyclable materials are not segregated from the nonrecyclable waste, they
shall be placed in plastic bags as other waste. When placing waste, recyclables
and other materials at curbside for pick up by the scavenger, the resident
shall place all such materials as close to the roadway as possible without
interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles, pedestrians or snow
plowing operations. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
   (E)   Not place any material in bins for recyclable material pick up except
as follows:
      1.   Paper Products: The following products shall be kept separate from
nonpaper recyclables. Paper products may be commingled and unbound if placed in
a paper products only recycling container next to their nonpaper products
recycling bin.
         (a)   Brown kraft paper bags folded with all receipts and other
packaging removed.
         (b)   Paper magazines and catalogs with all nonpaper inserts such as
plastic records and cloth samples removed.
         (c)   Paper telephone books with covers.
         (d)   Corrugated cardboard free of any food debris, packaging
materials (i.e., Styrofoam, wood chipboard, bubble wrap) and excessive tape,
flattened and cut into pieces no larger than three feet by three feet (3' x
3').
         (e)   Junk mail.
         (f)   Mixed papers.
         (g)   Chipboard.
         (h)   Envelopes.
         (i)   Wet strength carrier stock.
         (j)   Frozen food packages.
         (k)   Newspapers, either commingled in the paper products only
container or bundled with string or bagged in kraft paper bags (grocery) and
placed next to the container.
      2.   Nonpaper Products: The following nonpaper products, none of which
shall be containers greater than two (2) gallons in size, shall be kept
separate from paper products and shall be commingled in a LEAP recycling bin.
         (a)   Colored HDPE plastic narrow necked containers marked #2 rinsed
free of visible debris with caps or lids removed, crushed and placed in the
nonpaper recycling bin.
         (b)   Tin cans, steel cans and bimetal cans rinsed free of visible
food debris and when applicable, all labels removed, flattened and placed
commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (c)   PET plastic beverage containers rinsed free of visible food
debris with caps or lids removed, crushed and placed commingled in the nonpaper
recycling bin.
         (d)   Clear, brown or green glass bottles or jars rinsed free of
visible food debris and with caps or lids removed and placed commingled in the
nonpaper recycling bin.
         (e)   Aluminum cans rinsed free of visible food debris, crushed and
placed commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (f)   Aluminum foil and aluminum formed containers rinsed free of
visible food debris, crushed and placed commingled in the nonpaper recycling
bin.
         (g)   HDPE plastic milk or HDPE plastic water jugs rinsed free of
visible food debris and with caps or lids removed, crushed and placed
commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (h)   (1) Polystyrene #6 plastic meat and produce trays rinsed free of
visible food debris and placed commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
            (2)   Polystyrene white packaging grade only clearly marked #6
commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
            (3)   Polystyrene clear grade packaging clearly marked #6
commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
            (4)   Polystyrene foam packaging peanuts, bagged in a clear plastic
bag and commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
            (5)   Polystyrene #6 foam drinking cups and yogurt containers if
clearly marked #6 and commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (i)   Steel aerosol cans completely emptied of all contents with
plastic caps removed and commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (j)   LDPE #4 soft 6-pack and 12-pack carriers and rigid containers
commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (k)   HDPE #2 brittle 6-pack and 12-pack carriers commingled in the
nonpaper recycling bin.
         (l)   Steel only completely emptied paint cans with lids removed and
commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (m)   Gable top cartons and small juice boxes, with cellophane and
straws removed, commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (n)   Polypropylene (PP) #5 rigid containers rinsed free of visible
food debris commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (o)   Polyvinylchloride #3 rigid containers rinsed free of visible
food debris, commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
         (p)   #7 other rigid containers rinsed free of visible food debris,
commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin. (Ord. 95-2654, 6-5-1995)
   (F)   Place all grass clippings, leaves and prunings of small diameter,
green stemmed shrub and plant stalks, if the owner or occupant desires
scavenger pick up of said materials, in biodegradable thirty (30) gallon kraft
paper bags or other village approved bags which are specifically provided by
the scavenger service through retailers for said materials. A sticker approved
by the village shall be affixed by the owner or occupant to the bag when placed
at the curbside for pick up. Said material may also be placed at curbside for
pick up in a toter rented from the scavenger service.
   (G)   Place all brown stemmed branches and shrub prunings with large
diameter stems or trunks, individually not to exceed five feet (5') in length
and two inches (2") in diameter, in bundles tied with biodegradable natural
fiber twine. Said bundles shall not exceed sixty (60) pounds in weight or
eighteen inches (18") in diameter and shall have affixed to it a sticker
approved by the village when placed at curbside for pick up by the scavenger
service.
   (H)   Not place material referenced in subsections (F) and (G) of this
section, at curbside for pick up except during April 15 through December 15 of
each year unless otherwise approved by the village manager.
   (I)   Not place any waste, recyclables, yard leavings, refuse or containers
nearer to the street than the front of the residence, except during the period
of time between four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day prior to garbage pick up and
eleven fifty- nine (11:59) P.M. the day of garbage pick up. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-
7-1992; amd. Ord. 2023-5001, 3-20-2023)
8-2-5: HAZARDOUS WASTE:
The term "hazardous waste" as used in this code shall mean a solid waste, or
combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
   (A)   Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
   (B)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or
otherwise managed. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
8-2-6: COMPOST PILES:
   (A)   Compostable materials such as grass trimmings, wood waste, leaves,
weeds and other garden refuse may be placed in a compost pile; provided, that
it is enclosed in a fence, box or other barrier or container equal in height to
the compost pile and in a manner to prevent material from being windblown. Said
fence or box shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area and shall
not exceed five feet (5') in height. The container shall be set back from the
lot line equal to the setback for accessory buildings and shall not be located
in the front yard or on a drainage or utility easement. The depositing of
garbage; pet waste, meat scraps or other materials that may attract animals or
vermin to the compost pile or which may produce an obnoxious odor shall be
prohibited.
   (B)   Any compost pile shall be maintained in accordance with Illinois
department of energy and natural resources pamphlet entitled "A Homeowner's
Guide To Recycling Yard Wastes" (reference numbers LENR/RN-89103 and STA-9-50M-
8-89) as hereafter may be amended, from time to time, which is incorporated
herein by reference and forms a part hereof. In the event of a conflict between
said pamphlet and the provisions of this code, the code shall supersede the
pamphlet and shall govern the maintenance of compost piles to the extent of the
conflict. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
CHAPTER 3
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-3-1: Open Burning Prohibited; Exceptions
8-3-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to burn or cause the burning at any location within the
village, of any paper, cardboard, leaves, twigs, branches, wood, grass, grass
clippings or other refuse from farming or gardening, or other combustible
materials of any nature whatsoever, except as follows:
   (A)   Burning any combustible materials wholly within a building in a
fireplace or other equipment or facility designed and constructed for such
purpose, provided that any refuse burning incinerator installed in any
residence building shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Illinois
air pollution control board, as the same may from time to time be in effect 1 .
(Ord. 93-2372, 3-15-1993)
   (B)   Burning is permitted in an outdoor fireplace or cooking unit, but only
if:
      1.   The fuel used is primarily charcoal, propane gas or dry, seasoned
wood;
      2.   The fireplace is raised above ground level;
      3.   The fireplace is constructed of noncombustible brick, stone or metal
materials, and is commercially designed for outdoor fires or cooking;
      4.   The fireplace, if moveable, is placed on a noncombustible surface
during use;
      5.   The fireplace is directly attended at all times during use; and
      6.   The fire shall be entirely extinguished prior to leaving the
fireplace unattended. (Ord. 97-2847, 2-17-1997)
   (C)   Burning combustible materials in a high temperature incinerator
providing complete combustion and complying with the rules and regulations of
the Illinois air pollution control board as the same may from time to time be
in effect.
   (D)   Burning of a bonfire in connection with a secondary school event;
provided, however, that such bonfire is approved and sanctioned by the
secondary school authorities and complies with all rules and regulations of the
Illinois air pollution control board and the state as from time to time may be
in effect.
Further, any such bonfire under this subsection shall be allowed only after the
grant of a permit or approval of the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 93-2372, 3-15-1993)
   (E)   Controlled open burning of landscape areas is permitted, in
nonresidential areas of the village but only if:
      1.   A waiver is granted by the village president and board of trustees
pursuant to ordinance; and
      2.   The petitioner has complied with all requirements and conditions as
stated in "Village Of Lisle, Policies And Procedures, Requesting Granting Of A
Waiver From The Village Code Open Burning Prohibitions February 7, 1995", as
amended from time to time. (Ord. 98-2960, 2-16-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/8 et seq.
CHAPTER 4
WEEDS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Purpose
8-4-2: Definitions
8-4-3: Noxious Weeds
8-4-4: Exotic Weeds
8-4-5: Nuisance Declared
8-4-6: Native Illinois Prairie Grasses
8-4-7: Abatement
8-4-8: Lien
8-4-9: Foreclosure Of Lien
8-4-10: Penalty
8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lisle hereby determine that,
under certain circumstances as set forth herein, the presence of tall grass,
tall weeds, noxious weeds, and exotic weeds creates blight and constitutes a
nuisance. It is recognized that such blight lowers property values, leads to
deteriorating housing conditions, undermines the quality of neighborhood life,
and adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the community. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
EXOTIC WEED: In accordance with the Illinois Exotic Weeds Act, exotic weeds are
plants not native to North America which, when planted either spread
vegetatively or naturalize and degrade natural communities, reduce the value of
fish and wildlife habitat, or threaten an Illinois endangered or threatened
species.
NATIVE ILLINOIS PRAIRIE GRASSES: Illinois native plant species as designated by
the United States Department of Agriculture Illinois Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
NOXIOUS WEED: In accordance with the Illinois Noxious Weed Law, a noxious weed
is any plant which is determined by the Director, the Dean of the College of
Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences of the University of Illinois
and the Director of the Agricultural Experiment Station at the University of
Illinois, to be injurious to public health, crops, livestock, land or other
property. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-3: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or
parcel of land to allow for the presence of noxious weeds. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-
19-2018)
8-4-4: EXOTIC WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or
parcel of land to allow for the presence of exotic weeds. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-
19-2018)
8-4-5: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   (A)   All weeds, turf grasses, annual plants, vegetation, and plant growth
in excess of eight inches (8") in height is hereby declared a nuisance; and it
shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or
parcel of land to allow for the presence of weeds, turf grasses, annual plants,
vegetation, and plant growth in excess of eight inches (8") in height.
      1.   This subsection (A) does not apply to the following:
         (a)   Trees and shrubs;
         (b)   Cultivated flowers;
         (c)   Vines attached to trees and shrubs, fences, or walls;
         (d)   Areas used for scientific and educational purposes through
accredited programs;
         (e)   Areas of public open space or open space governed by a
homeowners' association;
         (f)   Areas within conservation easements;
         (g)   Areas that contain documented State or Federally listed
threatened and/or endangered species;
         (h)   Buffers associated with lakes, ponds, and wetlands;
         (i)   Buffers associated with channels, creeks, streams, and rivers;
         (j)   Golf courses;
         (k)   Heavily wooded property;
         (l)   Legal farms, agricultural uses, and gardens;
         (m)   Rain gardens;
         (n)   Regulatory mitigation areas including stormwater management
facilities; or
         (o)   Native Illinois prairie grasses.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot,
tract, or parcel of land abutting right-of-way to allow for the presence of
weeds, turf grasses, annual plants, vegetation, and plant growth in excess of
eight inches (8") in height in the area between the edge of pavement or curb
and their property line.
      1.   This subsection (B) does not apply to the following:
         (a)   Trees and shrubs;
         (b)   Cultivated flowers;
         (c)   Vines attached to trees and shrubs, fences, or walls;
         (d)   Areas that contain documented State or Federally listed
threatened and/or endangered species;
         (e)   Buffers associated with lakes, ponds, and wetlands;
         (f)   Buffers associated with channels, creeks, streams, and rivers;
         (g)   Rain gardens;
         (h)   Regulatory mitigation areas including stormwater management
facilities. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-6: NATIVE ILLINOIS PRAIRIE GRASSES:
   (A)   Nuisance Declared: The Village hereby declares that it shall be a
nuisance if native Illinois prairie grasses are allowed to grow uncontrolled,
without limitation, and without proper management/maintenance; and it shall be
unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or parcel of land
to allow for the presence of native Illinois prairie grasses within five feet
(5') of all lot lines. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-7: ABATEMENT:
   (A)   The Village shall have the right to abate by cutting, pulling, plowing
under, chemically spraying or otherwise destroying any existing noxious weeds,
exotic weeds, weeds, turf grasses, annual plants, vegetation, plant growth, and
native Illinois prairie grasses which violate the provisions of this chapter.
If the Village chooses to abate, the Village shall first serve a notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail upon the owner of
record at the address shown on the County tax rolls. Said notice shall:
      1.   Demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days after the
date of mailing; and
      2.   Provide that upon failure to abate the nuisance, the Village may
proceed to abate the nuisance at the owner's expense and issue a citation if
deemed appropriate.
   (B)   If the nuisance is not abated within ten (10) days after notice has
been mailed, the Village may proceed to abate the nuisance, or cause such
nuisance to be abated, keeping an account of the expense of abatement, and any
such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the owner.
   (C)   Any property owner found to be in violation of this chapter shall
receive only one notice in a calendar year. This notice shall serve as notice
for subsequent violations in that same calendar year. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-
2018)
8-4-8: LIEN:
   (A)   All costs incurred by the Village for abatement pursuant to this
chapter, shall be a lien upon the property as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-20-6 and 5/11-20-7. This cost shall be a lien upon the real
estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax
liens; provided, that within sixty (60) days after such cost or expense is
incurred, the Village or person performing on behalf of the Village, in his or
its own name files a notice of lien in the Office of the County Recorder of
Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; 2) the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service; and 3) the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the Village. However, such lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement
service and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the Village
shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose
rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice.
Upon payment of the cost and expense (including costs and expenses of releasing
the lien) by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice
of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing notice of lien.
   (B)   The cost of abating weeds and grasses shall not be a lien on the real
estate affected unless a notice is personally served on, or sent by certified
mail to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the
property for the last preceding year. The notice shall be delivered or sent
after the abatement of weeds and grasses on the property. The notice shall
state the substance of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7 and this
section, and shall identify the property by common description, and the
location of the weeds and grasses abated. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-9: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
   (A)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed or abatement charges shall
be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in
the name of the Village.
   (B)   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute
such proceedings, in the name of the Village, in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters, against any property for which a bill for weed and grass
abatement has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. (Ord.
2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which such nuisance remains unabated. (Ord. 2018-4797,
11-19-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 5
TREE NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Purpose
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Nuisance Declared
8-5-4: Inspection And Sampling
8-5-5: Abatement
8-5-6: Lien
8-5-7: Foreclosure Of Lien
8-5-8: Penalty
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lisle hereby determine that,
under certain circumstances as set forth herein, the presence of dead, dying,
diseased, or infested trees creates blight and constitutes a nuisance. It is
recognized that such blight lowers property values, leads to deteriorating
housing conditions, undermines the quality of neighborhood life, and adversely
affects the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
community. (Ord. 2021-4934, 11-15-2021)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
TREE: A woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and
      numerous branches. (Ord. 2021-4934, 11-15-2021)
 
8-5-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   (A)   All trees that are dead or dying are hereby declared a nuisance; and
it shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or
parcel of land to allow for the presence of a dead or dying tree.
   (B)   All trees that are diseased or infested with the following are hereby
declared a nuisance; and it shall be unlawful for any person owning or
controlling any lot, tract, or parcel of land to allow the presence of diseased
or infested trees:
      1.   Dutch elm disease
      2.   Elm yellows disease (formerly called Phloem necrosis)
      3.   Oak wilt
      4.   Pine wilt
      5.   Exhibiting an infestation of the emerald ash borer (Agrilus
planipennis Fairmaire)
      6.   Any other infectious disease
      7.   Parts thereof in a dead or dying condition which serve as a breeding
place for the European elm bark beetle, Scolytus multistristus or other disease
spreading insect, bug or vector. (Ord. 2021-4934, 11-15-2021)
8-5-4: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
   (A)   Village employees, officers, agents, and consultants are authorized to
enter upon private property, subject to applicable law, for purposes of:
      1.   Inspecting trees on any such property having the appearance of or
suspected of having:
         (a)   Dutch elm disease,
         (b)   Elm yellows disease (formerly called Phloem necrosis),
         (c)   Oak wilt,
         (d)   Pine wilt,
         (e)   Any other infectious disease,
         (f)   Exhibiting an infestation of the emerald ash borer (Agrilus
planipennis Fairmaire),
         (g)   That appears dead or dying, regardless of cause,
         (h)   Parts thereof in a dead or dying condition which serve as a
breeding place for the European elm bark beetle, Scolytus multistristus or
other disease spreading insect, bug or vector, or
      2.   Taking samples as required to determine whether a tree is diseased
or infested. (Ord. 2021-4934, 11-15-2021)
8-5-5: ABATEMENT:
   (A)   The owner of record of a property on which there is any dead, dying,
diseased, or infested tree must remove any such tree from the Village within
ten (10) days of notification.
      1.   All dead, dying, diseased, or infested trees must be legally
disposed of in compliance with state and federal regulations. It is unlawful
for the owner, occupant, or agent of any property in the Village to permit any
tree, portion thereof, including logs, infected with an infectious disease to
remain on his or her property or to be retained for any use. Chipping of tree
materials will be permitted provided that any material that is chipped must not
exceed one square inch of final chip surface.
   (B)   The Village shall have the right to abate trees which violate the
provisions of this Chapter. If the Village chooses to abate, the Village shall
first serve by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail
upon the owner of record at the address shown on the County tax rolls. (Ord.
2021-4934, 11-15-2021)
8-5-6: LIEN:
   (A)   All costs incurred by the Village for abatement pursuant to this
chapter, shall be a lien upon the property as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-20-6 and 5/11-20-7. This cost shall be a lien upon the real
estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax
liens; provided, that within sixty (60) days after such cost or expense is
incurred, the Village or person performing on behalf of the Village, in his or
its own name files a notice of lien in the Office of the County Recorder of
Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; 2) the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service; and 3) the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the Village. However, such lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement
service and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the Village
shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose
rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice.
Upon payment of the cost and expense (including costs and expenses of releasing
the lien) by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice
of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing notice of lien. (Ord. 2021-4934, 11-15-2021)
8-5-7: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
   (A)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid tree abatement charges shall be
sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied
to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the
Village.
   (B)   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute
such proceedings, in the name of the Village, in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters, against any property for which a bill for tree abatement has
remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. 2021-4934,
11-15-2021)
8-5-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such nuisance
remains unabated. (Ord. 2021-4934, 11-15-2021)
CHAPTER 6
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: General Provisions
8-6-4: Administration
8-6-5: Discharge Prohibitions
8-6-6: Industrial Activity Discharges
8-6-7: Compliance Monitoring
8-6-8: Violations, Enforcement, And Penalties
8-6-9: Suspension Of MS4 Access
8-6-10: Appeals
8-6-11: Miscellaneous Provisions
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of DuPage County, and protect and enhance water
quality in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the federal water pollution
control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.) through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of discharges other than those
occurring as a direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the storm drainage system in
order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) phase II permit process. Other purposes of this
chapter include:
      1.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 and the storm
drainage system by nonstormwater discharges; and
      2.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4 and the
storm drainage system.
   (B)   The purposes of this chapter are consistent with the plan and advance
the following objectives of the plan:
      1.   Protect and enhance the quality, quantity, and availability of
surface and ground water resources.
      2.   Preserve and enhance existing aquatic and riparian environments and
encourage restoration of degraded areas.
      3.   Promote equitable, acceptable, and legal measures for stormwater
management.
The purposes of this chapter shall be implemented by its provisions. (Ord.
2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
      1.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and
      2.   Words used in the singular number include the plural number and
words used in the plural number include the singular number; and
      3.   The words "shall", "will", and "must" are mandatory, not permissive;
and
      4.   The phrase "director" refers to the individual responsible for the
enforcement.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically indicated.
Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common
dictionary definition.
      BUILDING: A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly
aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building" includes
manufactured homes and includes both the aboveground and the belowground
portions of the structure.
      CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The federal water pollution control act (33 USC
section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
      COMMITTEE: The stormwater committee of the village of Lisle.
      COMMUNITY: Any municipality, or the unincorporated county, within DuPage
County acting as a unit of local government.
      COUNTY: The county of DuPage, Illinois.
      DEPARTMENT: The village of Lisle community development department.
      DIRECTOR: The village of Lisle community development director or his or
her designee.
      DIVISION: The DuPage County stormwater management division.
      DRAIN: Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid.
      FACILITY: Something that is built, installed, or established to serve a
particular purpose.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material which may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment.
      ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following:
      1.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but
not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the community, or
      2.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community.
      ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the
storm drainage system, except as exempted in subsection
8-6-5(A)3 of this chapter.
      INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to an industrial NPDES stormwater
permit, as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
      LINE: A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two
(2) or more points.
      MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, and storm sewers) owned or operated by a governmental entity and
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used
for collecting or conveying sewage.
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit
issued by Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
      NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that
is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt in the tributary
drainage basin.
      NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Illinois environmental protection agency notice
of intent to participate in coverage under the general permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity.
      PARCEL: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
      PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, public or private
corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, or any
other legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers, and assigns
of such entity.
      pH NEUTRAL: pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 standard units.
      PLAN: The DuPage County stormwater management plan, adopted by the DuPage
County board in September 1989, as amended from time to time.
      POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants
may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate
metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
      PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
      RUNOFF: The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow within
a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of that
basin.
      SEWAGE: Polluted stormwater, wastewater, or other refuse liquids usually
conveyed by sewers.
      SEWER: An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water (as
from rainfall), including sanitation, stormwater, and/or combined sewers.
      SEWERAGE: A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage.
      STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A facility by which stormwater is collected and/or
conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
      STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage from any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
      STRUCTURE: Anything that is erected or constructed. The term "structure"
includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams,
sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, freestanding signs, parking lots,
driveways, roads, sidewalks, carports, and concrete patios.
      WASTEWATER: Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless treated
by a wastewater treatment facility.
      WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: As defined in the CWA, "waters of the United
States" applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries, coastal
waters, and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally "waters of the United
States". Generally, those waters include the following:
      1.   All interstate waters;
      2.   Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign commerce;
      3.   Tributaries of the above;
      4.   Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and
      5.   Wetlands adjacent to all the above. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all water entering the
storm drainage system from any developed or undeveloped lands within the
jurisdiction of the village of Lisle, unless explicitly exempted by subsection
8-6-5(A)3 of this chapter, including any amendments or revisions thereto.
   (B)   Interpretation:
      1.   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare and the environment of the
residents of the village of Lisle, and to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter and enabling legislation.
      2.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed
by any other applicable statute, law, chapter, regulation, or rule, the
provision that is most restrictive or imposes the higher standards or
requirements shall apply.
      3.   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be cumulative
of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other chapters, laws, codes,
and regulations, in existence or which may be passed governing any subject
matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this
chapter shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the
provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with
each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest
application. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   Full Participant Community: The village of Lisle shall promulgate and
enforce this chapter in partnership with DuPage County, as a full participant
community under DuPage County's illicit discharge detection and elimination
ordinance. Duties of a full participant community include:
      1.   Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for full participation
in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program.
      2.   Provide DuPage County stormwater management division with a current
storm sewer atlas. An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to this
division annually.
      3.   Provide assistance to the division in acquiring access to the storm
drainage system as mutually deemed necessary.
      4.   Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of
this chapter when necessary per section
8-6-8 of this chapter.
      5.   Provide the division with documentation of any enforcement action or
prosecution from the previous year for inclusion in the IEPA annual facility
inspection report.
   (B)   Responsibility For Administration: The department shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the department may be delegated in writing by the director
to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest, or in the employ, of
the department as representatives, contractors, designees and/or assigns.
   (C)   Duties Of Director: The duties and functions of the director shall
include:
      1.   Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of this
chapter, as applicable; and
      2.   Supervising the execution of this chapter.
   (D)   Representative Capacity: In all cases when any action is taken by the
director, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, such action shall be taken in the name of and on behalf of the
village of Lisle, and neither the director nor his or her designee, in so
acting for the village of Lisle shall be rendered personally liable. (Ord.
2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-5: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   Prohibition Of Illicit Discharges:
      1.   No person shall place, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or
allow others under their control to place, drain, or otherwise discharge into
the storm drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than normal stormwater unless specifically exempted in
subsection (A)3 of this section.
      2.   The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage system
shall be prohibited:
         (a)   Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation or
snowmelt within the drainage area of the MS4.
         (b)   Discharges from an illicit connection.
      3.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established herein, provided, they do not cause an adverse effect on water
quality as determined by the director:
         (a)   Discharges caused by governmental public works and stormwater
management units as part of their standard operations in compliance with all
applicable regulations.
         (b)   Discharges required by law or authorized by permit, including
any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the USEPA and/or
IEPA.
         (c)   Water line and fire hydrant flushing.
         (d)   Landscape irrigation water.
         (e)   Rising groundwaters.
         (f)   Groundwater infiltration.
         (g)   Pumped groundwater.
         (h)   Discharges from potable water sources.
         (i)   Foundation drains.
         (j)   Air conditioning condensate.
         (k)   Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation).
         (l)   Springs.
         (m)   Water from crawl space pumps.
         (n)   Footing drains.
         (o)   Storm sewer cleaning water.
         (p)   Water from outdoor individual residential car wash.
         (q)   Routine external building washdown which does not use
detergents.
         (r)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
         (s)   Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges.
         (t)   Residual street wash water.
         (u)   Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
         (v)   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges.
         (w)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed).
         (x)   Discharges associated with dye testing of water line, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however, this activity
shall not take place until the discharger, or tester, has provided notification
to the department at least two (2) full business days prior to the test date,
unless an emergency situation does not allow time for such notification.
         (y)   Other discharges approved by the department as being
substantially like any of the discharge types enumerated in this subsection
(A)3.
   (B)   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.
      4.   Connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and
redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management system or the
sanitary sewer system upon approval of the department and the appropriate
sanitary treatment facility.
      5.   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or MS4,
shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of
written notice of violation from the department requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the
location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the
outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, MS4,
sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified. Results of these
investigations are to be documented and provided to the department. (Ord. 2009-
4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-6: INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
   (A)   Submission Of Notice Of Intent (NOI) To The Department:
      1.   Any person operating a facility subject to the IEPA's general permit
to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy
of the notice of intent (NOI) to the department at the same time the operator
submits the original notice of intent to the IEPA as applicable.
      2.   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the department
either in person or by mailing it to:
         Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
         Community Development Department
         Village of Lisle
         925 Burlington Ave.
         Lisle, IL 60532-1838
      3.   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that
is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the department. (Ord.
2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-7: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
   (A)   Notification Of Spills:
      1.   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible for
emergency response for a property, has information of any known or suspected
spill of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage system, said person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such spill.
         (a)   In the event of such a spill, said person shall immediately
notify local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance with Illinois
emergency management agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations.
         (b)   Said person shall notify the department of the spill in person
or by phone, facsimile, or e-mail no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the department within three (3) business days of the
phone notice.
         (c)   If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on site written record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five (5) years.
      2.   Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined in
subsection (A)1 of this section, shall exempt the notifying parties from
applicable fines set forth in subsection
8-6-8(F) of this chapter.
      3.   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this chapter.
      4.   Notwithstanding the language of subsection (A)2 of this section, a
party causing a spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall not
be relieved of liability for damages resulting from such act. (Ord. 2009-4280,
10-19-2009)
8-6-8: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Enforcement; Violations:
      1.   The director shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter. The village of Lisle may enter into
agreements with other governmental units for the purpose of implementing this
chapter.
      2.   A person violates this chapter when that person:
         (a)   Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this
chapter; or
         (b)   Disobeys, neglects, or fails to carry out or comply with any
provision of this chapter or of any order or notice issued by the director; or
         (c)   Allows any condition or act that violates any provision of this
chapter to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed, or under the
control of such person; or
         (d)   Directs, orders, permits, or allows a second person to do any
act expressly prohibited by any provision of this chapter, or to maintain or
continue unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this
chapter on property owned, leased, managed or under the control of the first
person.
   (B)   Notice To Correct Violations; Director May Take Action:
      1.   The director may issue a notice of violation ordering a person to
take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or to
cease and desist from any action conducted in violation of this chapter.
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of violation and/or
order to cease and desist shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
         (a)   The director shall set forth the form and content of any notices
issued under this chapter.
         (b)   The director may issue a warning of violation ordering a person
to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If a
person fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a warning, the director
may, thereafter, issue a notice of violation.
         (c)   The director may issue a warning of violation and disburse
educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the discharge
of pollutants.
      2.   If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this section,
the director may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence any legal
proceeding authorized by this chapter, under the law or equity, necessary to
enforce any provision of this chapter and/or to protect public health and
safety. Any legal action brought under this chapter shall be in the name of the
village of Lisle.
   (C)   Emergency Cease And Desist Orders:
      1.   The department may obtain an emergency order in the event of the
following:
         (a)   Any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past
violations are likely to recur; and
         (b)   That the person's violation has caused or contributed to an
actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an
imminent threat of violation is present.
      2.   The department may issue the emergency order to the violator
directing that the violator:
         (a)   Immediately cease and desist all such violations;
         (b)   Immediately comply with all requirements of this chapter; and
         (c)   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      3.   Any person notified of an emergency order under this subsection
shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In
the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
emergency order, the department may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the
United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including
immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other
municipal utility services. The department may allow the person to recommence
its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the department
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination
proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person
that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes
of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the department within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the
emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a
bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
violator.
   (D)   Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance: Any condition caused or permitted
to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
threat to public health and safety and is declared and deemed a public
nuisance.
   (E)   Nuisance Abatement: Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any
premises, the director may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination
that the nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety.
      1.   In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the
director, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the
director may direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or
equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate, and/or remedy said
situation. The director may take such action without having to first issue a
notice of violation to the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for,
such premises where the nuisance is located, or waiting for such person(s) to
abate or remove such nuisance as previously ordered by the director.
      2.   In all other cases, the director may notify, in writing, the person
(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance
is located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance within
such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or refusal of such
person(s) to comply with the notice, the director may direct that appropriate
proceeding commence to compel the abatement, or removal, of such a nuisance in
any manner allowed by law, equity, or this chapter and/or authorizing the
department to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance. The person(s) having
control of such premises, in addition to the other remedies provided by this
chapter, shall be liable to the department for any costs incurred by the
department to effect such abatement, or removal, including reasonable attorney
fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (F)   Fines: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which such nuisance remains unabated.
   (G)   Remedies Not Exclusive: The remedies listed in this chapter are not
exclusive of any other remedy available under this chapter or under any
applicable federal, state, or local law and do not supersede or limit, any and
all other penalties provided by law. The director may seek, at his discretion,
cumulative remedies. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-
2021)
8-6-9: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   (A)   Suspension Of MS4 Access Due To Detection Of Illicit Discharges:
      1.   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The department shall notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the department for a
reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without
the prior approval of the department.
      2.   In emergency situations, the department may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent
and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States.
If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, or to
minimize danger to public health and safety. The department shall obtain an
emergency court order authorizing such termination. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-
2009)
8-6-10: APPEALS:
   (A)   Right To Appeal:
      1.   Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the
director. The director may delegate the hearing of appeals to the stormwater
committee of the village of Lisle in the manner provided for below.
      2.   Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or determination by
the director, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of this
chapter may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the director
shall be made within seven (7) days of the decision contested, excepting an
appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or penalty in
which cases such an appeal shall be brought before said amount becomes thirty
(30) days past due.
         (a)   The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved
notifies the director, in writing, of the intent to appeal the decision of the
director. Such notice shall contain a short, clear statement stating the
following:
            (1)   Identifying the decision of the director which such person is
appealing and how this chapter has been misread, misinterpreted, or misapplied
in this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved believes the
director to have relied upon.
            (2)   The name and a mailing address, e-mail address, and a
telephone number of the person making the request, which contact information
shall be used for giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the
request shall attach all written materials on which he or she intends to rely
upon in support of the request.
         (b)   The director may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief
sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner
provided in subsection (A)2(c) of this section.
         (c)   Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not granted
by the director in accordance with subsection (A)2(b) of this section, the
director shall set a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no fewer
than fourteen (14) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date that the
director receives such notice of appeal unless the director and party
requesting the hearing agree to a different schedule. The director shall notify
the person making the appeal of the date of such hearing.
         (d)   At the hearing, the person making the appeal may appear in
person or represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The decision
concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to the person
making the appeal, and shall state a finding upon which the decision is based.
      3.   The stormwater committee shall have the authority to reverse,
modify, or affirm any decision, ruling, or determination by the director made
pursuant to this chapter upon appeal. The stormwater committee shall not act in
a manner that would violate or in any way conflict with any federal or state
standard or requirement. The stormwater committee or village board may adopt
such additional rules and procedures as it deems appropriate for performing
such matters.
      4.   The decision of the stormwater committee shall be final.
   (B)   Enforcement Measures After Appeal: If the violation has not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, within seven (7) days of the decision of the
director or stormwater committee upholding the decision of the department, then
representatives of the department are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In no case shall
an appeal stay or bar the village of Lisle from commencing a legal action
seeking emergency relief. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-11: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Ultimate responsibility: The standards set forth herein and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this
chapter does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that
there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of
pollutants. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
TITLE 9
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
9-1-1: Composition Of The Department
9-1-2: Appointments; Term Of Chief
9-1-3: Rank
9-1-4: Divisions Of Department
9-1-5: Remuneration Of Members
9-1-6: Duties Of Chief And Department Members
9-1-7: Requirements Of Department Members
9-1-8: Serving Process
9-1-9: Rules And Regulations
9-1-10: Police Pension Fund
9-1-11: Police Sergeants' Use Of Village Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 2025-5181, 11-
3-2025)
9-1-1: COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT:
The police department of the village shall consist of one chief of police, one
(1) deputy chief, two (2) police commanders, seven (7) sergeants, and not less
than twenty eight (28) nor more than thirty six (36) patrol officers as the
corporate authorities may determine from time to time, excluding any chief,
deputy chief, police commander, sergeant, or patrol officer on disability leave
or disability pension. (Ord. 2014-4518, 1-13-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-5181, 11-3-
2025)
9-1-2: APPOINTMENTS; TERM OF CHIEF:
   (A)   Chief Of Police:
      1.   Henceforth, all appointments to the position of chief of police,
temporary and permanent, within the village, shall be made by the president
subject to the advice and consent of a majority of the trustees then holding
office.
      2.   All such temporary appointments are to remain in force until regular
appointments may be made under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1, but
never to exceed sixty (60) days, and no temporary appointment of any one person
to the position of chief of police shall be made more than twice in any one
calendar year.
      3.   All other procedures and actions pertaining to temporary and
permanent appointment of chief of police shall otherwise be according to the
statute in such cases made and provided. (Ord. 78-779, 6-13-1978)
   (B)   Other Appointments:
      1.   All other appointments to or promotions within the department shall
be made by the board of fire and police commissioners as may be provided by
law. However, the board shall not assign or appoint persons to any nonrank,
appointed positions that may be established unless the board of trustees shall
expressly grant such authority to the board.
As a prequalification standard, a refundable deposit in a reasonable amount
established from time to time by the board of fire and police commissioners,
shall be required at the time an application for testing is provided to a
potential applicant. The deposit shall be refunded at the time an applicant
takes the initial test. No refund will be made to any applicant who does not
participate in the testing process.
      2.   If a member of the department is appointed chief of police prior to
being eligible to retire on pension, he shall be considered as on furlough from
the rank he held immediately prior to his appointment as chief. If he resigns
as chief or is discharged as chief prior to attaining eligibility to retire on
pension, he shall revert to and be established in such prior rank, and
thereafter be entitled to all the benefits and emoluments of such prior rank,
without regard as to whether a vacancy then exists in such rank. (Ord. 96-2759,
4-1-1996)
   (C)   Term: The chief of police shall serve for such term as may be provided
by law, and may be removed in the manner provided for the removal of village
officers. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965)
9-1-3: RANK:
The chief of police shall be head of the department and have supervision over
all officers and members thereof. Following him in rank shall be the deputy
chief, police commanders, sergeants and patrolmen in order of seniority in each
group. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965; amd. Ord. 2025-5181, 11-3-2025)
9-1-4: DIVISIONS OF DEPARTMENT:
With the approval of the corporate authorities, the chief of police may
establish or set up divisions or units within the department, assigning such
policemen to such divisions or units and designating such duties therefor as
may be deemed necessary. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965)
9-1-5: REMUNERATION OF MEMBERS:
The salaries of the various members and officers of the police department shall
be as set forth from time to time in the salary structure ordinances of the
village. (Ord. 2014-4538, 7-21-2014)
9-1-6: DUTIES OF CHIEF AND DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
   (A)   Duties Of Chief Of Police:
      1.   The chief of police shall perform all duties as chief of police as
set forth in village ordinances, village police department rules and
regulations, police department policy and procedure manuals and as directed by
the village manager and as from time to time assigned by the village manager.
The chief of police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning
the activities of the police department as may be required by statute, by
village ordinance, by the corporate authorities or by the village manager. The
chief of police shall be responsible for the performance by the police
department of its functions; all members of the police department both sworn
and nonsworn shall serve subject to all orders of the chief of police.
      2.   The chief of police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or
stolen property located in the village.
   (B)   Duties Of Members: It shall be the duty of all members of the police
department, subject to all village ordinances, village procedures and policies,
police department rules and regulations, police department procedures and
policies, board of fire and police commissioners rules and regulations and the
board of fire and police commissioners policies and procedures, to enforce all
village, county, state and federal laws and to preserve order and prevent
violations of law. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
9-1-7: REQUIREMENTS OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
   (A)   Conduct Of Members: All members of the police department shall conduct
themselves in a proper and law abiding manner and shall serve subject to the
terms and provisions of applicable village ordinances, village procedures and
policies, police department rules and regulations, police department procedures
and policies, board of fire and police commissioners rules and regulations and
board of fire and police commissioners policies and procedures. Each member of
the department shall obey the orders and directions of his supervisor. (Ord.
195, 10-19-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
   (B)   Witness Fees: Every member of the police department shall appear as
witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an
ordinance or of any state or federal law. No such member shall retain any
witness fee for service as witness in any action or suit to which the village
is a party; any fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the chief
who shall deposit the same with the village treasurer.
   (C)   Rewards: The chief of police, for meritorious service rendered by any
member of the police force in the due discharge of his duty, may permit such
member to retain for his own benefit, so far as he may be permitted by law, any
reward or present tendered to him therefor, and it shall be cause of removal
for any member of the force to receive any such reward or present without
notice thereof to the chief of police and without his permission. (Ord. 195,
10-19-1965)
   (D)   Residency: Six (6) months after completing the eighteen (18) month
employment probationary period, every member of the police department shall
reside: 1) within fifty (50) miles of the corporate limits of the village; and
2) within the state of Illinois. (Ord. 89-2015, 12-18-1989)
9-1-8: SERVING PROCESS:
No member of the police department, except the chief, shall serve any process
except on command of said chief of the police department. (Ord. 195, 10-19-
1965)
9-1-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he
shall deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the mayor and board of
trustees, shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may
cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or
carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or
desirable for the better efficiency of the department. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965)
9-1-10: POLICE PENSION FUND:
There shall be a police pension fund of the village which shall be maintained
separate from all other funds and monies of the village and which shall be
administered in accordance with the provisions set out under title 2, chapter
7, "Police Pension Fund Board Of Trustees", of this code, and the applicable
provisions of the Illinois statutes.
The board of trustees of the village shall, annually, levy a tax upon all
taxable property of the village at the rate on the dollar which will produce an
amount which, when added to the deductions from the salaries or wages of
policemen, and receipts available from all other sources, will equal a sum
sufficient to meet the annual requirements of the police pension fund. The
annual requirements to be provided by such tax levy shall be equal to the
reserve prescribed by 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-127, and as the same
may hereafter be altered or amended. The tax shall be levied and collected in
like manner with general taxes of the village and shall be in addition to all
other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon all property within
the village, and shall be in addition to the amount authorized to be levied for
general purposes, as provided in the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 194, 10-7-
1965)
9-1-11: POLICE SERGEANTS' USE OF VILLAGE VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-5181, 11-3-2025)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
9-2-1: Purpose
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-3: Administration
9-2-4: Authority Of Community Service Officers And Police Officers
9-2-5: Impounding Animals
9-2-6: Record Of Impounded Animals
9-2-7: Notice To Owner Of Impoundment
9-2-8: Redemption Of Impounded Animals
9-2-9: Disposition Of Animals Not Redeemed
9-2-10: Impounded Animals; Interference
9-2-11: Penalty
9-2-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the Village to protect animals from neglect and abuse, to
protect residents from annoyance and injury to persons and animals, to assist
in providing housing for animals in the custody of the Village, to cover the
cost of caring for animals and to establish a program to discourage the
excessive multiplication of animals. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
specified in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the
Animal Control Act 1 . (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
9-2-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The Village Manager is responsible for the administration of this chapter.
Powers delegated to the Village Manager may be delegated by him to other
appropriate Village departments as he may deem expedient for the effectuation
of this chapter. The Village Manager shall establish such animal control
centers as are necessary to effectuate this chapter. The Village may contract
for the services of a licensed veterinarian to provide an animal control
center. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-4: AUTHORITY OF COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICERS AND POLICE OFFICERS:
Community service officers and/or police officers shall enforce animal
regulations. A community service officer shall have authority to issue
citations for violations of this chapter; shall wear a uniform; and shall carry
proper identification. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-5: IMPOUNDING ANIMALS:
A community service officer or police officer may impound in an animal control
center any dog, cat, or other animal found running at large; any abandoned
animal; any dangerous animal that has acted in a threatening or terrorizing
manner or who has bitten or attempted to bite a person or animal; any vicious
dog; or any animal maintained in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-4801,
12-17-2018)
9-2-6: RECORD OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A record shall be made of all impounded animals, entering the breed, color and
sex, rabies tag number, if known, and the name and address of the owner or
keeper, if known. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-7: NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDMENT:
If ownership of an impounded animal can be determined, the owner shall be
notified immediately by telephone or other means if possible, and also by
written notice. Such notification shall include the procedure to regain custody
of the animal. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-8: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
   (A)   An animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter, except for
vicious dogs, may be redeemed by the owner within seven (7) days after the
impounding thereof upon the payment of the following fees:
      1.   An amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” per animal for every day or portion thereof in which the animal is
impounded.
      2.   A percentage, as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines,
Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”, of any and all fees pertaining
to service necessary to impound the animal.
      3.   A percentage, as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines,
Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”, of any and all costs expended
in impounding of the animal.
      4.   A percentage, as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines,
Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”, of any and all fees for
medical services for the impounded animal.
      5.   Any fines for violations of any provision of this chapter as
established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and
Regulatory Measures” for each day during or on which such violation occurs or
continues.
   (B)   Any impounded dog or cat not inoculated against rabies shall be
inoculated prior to redemption.
   (C)   Vicious animals shall be impounded by or turned over immediately to
DuPage County Animal Services. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-
4921, 9-20-2021)
9-2-9: DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS NOT REDEEMED:
Any animal, except vicious dogs, not redeemed or in the process of being
redeemed, as provided herein, within seven (7) days after notice being sent to
its owner, shall be turned over to DuPage County Animal Services. (Ord. 2018-
4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-10: IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; INTERFERENCE:
No unauthorized person shall interfere with the impounding of, or shall
release, any animal that has been impounded by the Village. (Ord. 2018-4801,
12-17-2018)
9-2-11: PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined an
amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues. Any person
violating any provision of this chapter involving a dangerous dog shall be
subject to more serious fines than those found to have violated a similar
provision involving a nondangerous dog, with such fines being established and
set forth in Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and
Regulatory Measures”. The procedure set forth in section
9-4-22 of this title may be used to settle and compromise a violation of those
animal offenses set forth therein.
   (B)   Upon a finding or plea of guilty to a violation of this chapter, the
Village may assess all or a portion of the costs incurred to respond to
violations against the violator. Costs that are assessed shall be based on the
Village's actual response costs, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Time required by the Village staff to coordinate response and to
respond;
      2.   Time spent traveling and providing administrative support;
      3.   Equipment and supplies; and
      4.   Contractual support, if any, incurred by the Village.
   (C)   Upon receipt from the Village of a cost assessment, the violator may
within seven (7) days of receipt thereof file a written appeal of the amount of
the assessment with the Village Manager. The Village Manager's determination
shall be final. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL OWNER'S DUTIES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Adoption Of State Law By Reference, Definitions
9-3-2: Animal Care
9-3-3: Miscellaneous Offenses
9-3-4: Responsibility For Removal Of Excreta
9-3-5: Unlawful To Run At Large
9-3-6: Prohibited Animals
9-3-7: Number Of Dogs And Cats
9-3-8: Nuisance Defined
9-3-9: Unauthorized Removal Of Collars, Tags And Muzzles; Exceptions
9-3-10: Diseased Animals
9-3-11: Ground Feeding Of Animals Prohibited
9-3-12: Leg Hold Traps Prohibited
9-3-13: Beekeeping
9-3-14: Keeping Of Backyard Chickens
9-3-15: Penalty
9-3-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE, DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Every owner of an animal in the Village shall comply with the Animal
Control Act of the State of Illinois, 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et
seq., and the Humane Care for Animals Act 1 , the provisions of which are
adopted by reference.
   (B)   As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
terms specified in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the
Animal Control Act 2 . (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.
2 2. 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
9-3-2: ANIMAL CARE:
Each owner shall provide for each of his animals:
   (A)   Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water;
   (B)   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
   (C)   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
   (D)   Humane care and treatment. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-3: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
No owner shall permit or suffer his animal to:
   (A)   Molest persons or vehicles by chasing or barking or biting;
   (B)   Attack or attempt to attack other animals;
   (C)   Damage property other than that of the owner;
   (D)   Bark, whine or howl excessively;
   (E)   Create noxious or offensive odors. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF EXCRETA:
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for immediate removal and
sanitary disposition of any excreta deposited by his animal(s) anywhere in the
Village. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-5: UNLAWFUL TO RUN AT LARGE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat to run at large. For the
purposes of this section, any dog or cat not upon the premises of its owner or
such other person having custody, possession or control over any such dog or
cat, which is not on a leash and under the control of a person physically able
to control it, shall be deemed to be running at large.
   (B)   It shall be considered a separate offense for an owner to knowingly
allow a dangerous dog to run at large, whereby said action results in injury to
a person or animal.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any
person violating any provision of this section shall be fined in amounts as
established by the annual fee ordinance for the first offense, for the second
offense, and for each offense after the second offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed during or on which such violation occurs or
continues. Dangerous dogs found running at large in violation of this section
will be subject to a fine greater than that of nondangerous dogs found in
violation, with said fines being set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (D)   Any animal illegally running at large in the Village shall be
impounded in the animal control center. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-3-6: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to house, keep, or maintain livestock or exotic animals,
within the Village, except in zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions,
educational institutions, veterinary hospitals, animal shelters, or as
otherwise provided in this chapter or within the Village's Zoning Code.
Livestock and exotic animals shall be defined as follows:
 
           Meaning any animal that is not normally domesticated in the United
EXOTIC:    States or is wild by nature, whether bred in the wild or captivity
           and also their hybrids with domestic species.
           Meaning breeds of animals primarily raised for commercial purposes
           on agricultural property, in out- buildings or open spaces separate
           from residences. Typical animals include, but are not limited to
LIVESTOCK: fowl, poultry, except for chickens (Gallus domesticus) as provided
           for herein, bison, cattle, pigs, swine, sheep, goats, horses,
           donkeys, equidae, camelids, and ratites. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-
           2018; amd. Ord. 2022-4950, 3-21-2022)
 
9-3-7: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS:
   (A)   No person shall house, keep, or maintain more than four (4) dogs or
cats, or any combination thereof, over the age of four (4) months within the
Village, with the following limitations and exceptions:
      1.   Residential dwelling units within a multi-family building, as
defined by the Village's Building Code, shall be limited to not more than one
dog and one cat over the age of four (4) months.
      2.   Limitations on the number of dogs and cats shall not apply to
zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, educational institutions,
veterinary hospitals, animal shelters, or as otherwise provided in this chapter
or within the Village's Zoning Code. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-8: NUISANCE DEFINED:
Any animal that repeatedly violates the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a nuisance and said animal may be destroyed in a humane fashion.
(Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-9: UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF COLLARS, TAGS AND MUZZLES; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer, community
service officer, licensed veterinarian or owner, to remove the collar, license
tag or muzzle from any dog or cat within the limits of the Village without the
consent of the owner of such animal. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-10: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of other animals or man may be affected. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-
2018)
9-3-11: GROUND FEEDING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
Ground feeding of animals and/or birds, including but not limited to cats,
squirrels, chipmunks, rats, mice, rabbits, raccoons, opossum, skunk, deer,
ducks, geese is prohibited. "Ground feeding" means to spread, cast, deposit or
dump food, including birdseed, corn, bread pieces, food scraps, animal chow or
any like or similar substance on any public or private property in the Village.
Above-ground bird feeders shall be permitted as long as all feed is placed in a
container or feeder designed for the specific purpose of feeding birds. (Ord.
2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-12: LEG HOLD TRAPS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale, import, transport,
set or otherwise use or possess any leg hold animal trap or similar device with
spring activated jaws of the type used for the trapping of furbearing animals.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale, transfer, possession,
setting or use of standard household mouse or rat traps for the purpose of
controlling mice and rats; nor shall this section apply to the possession or
use of leg hold traps for display or exhibition purposes. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-
17-2018)
9-3-13: BEEKEEPING:
   (A)   Definitions:
      BEE: Any stage of the common domestic honeybee, Apis mellifera.
      BEEKEEPING: The keeping of one or more colonies of honeybees on one's own
property.
      COLONY: A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb,
honey, pollen, and brood.
      HIVE: A man-made receptacle or container inhabited by a colony of bees.
   (B)   Regulations And Restrictions: Beekeeping shall comply with the
following regulations and restrictions:
      1.   Property: Beekeeping is prohibited on multi-family property.
      2.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area for beekeeping shall be one- half (1/
2) acre.
      3.   Yard Location: Beekeeping is prohibited in all front, side, and
street yard areas.
      4.   Number Of Colonies: Lots having less than two (2) acres of lot area
shall not have more than two (2) colonies. Lots having two (2) to ten (10)
acres of lot area shall not have more than four (4) colonies. Lots having over
ten (10) acres of lot area shall not have more than ten (10) colonies.
      5.   Setbacks: No colony shall be kept closer than ten feet (10') from
any lot line.
      6.   Fencing Or Flyways: The owner shall establish and maintain a flyway
barrier at least six feet (6') in height consisting of a solid wall, fence,
dense vegetation or combination thereof. The flyway barrier shall be parallel
to the property line, located only upon such property line as is closest to the
colony, and extend ten feet (10') beyond the colony in each direction so that
all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet (6') above the
ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the hive. In instances
where more than one hive is kept, a flyway shall be installed and maintained
per hive. This flyway barrier requirement shall not apply if the setback
between any colony and the closest lot line is twenty five feet (25') or more.
      7.   General Maintenance: Each owner shall ensure that no bee comb or
other materials are left upon the grounds of the property where a hive is
maintained. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly
be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other
beeproof enclosure.
      8.   Queens: In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually
aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due
provocation, or exhibits an unusual disposition toward swarming, it shall be
the duty of the beekeeper to requeen the colony. Queens shall be selected from
stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics.
      9.   Noncommercial Use: No commercial use or retail sales of bees, honey,
honeycomb or other bee products or beekeeping products shall be permitted from
any residential property.
      10.   Water: Each beekeeper shall ensure a convenient source of water is
available to the bees at all times during the year so the bees will not
congregate at swimming pools, pet watering bowls, birdbaths, or other water
sources where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact.
      11.   Registration: The beekeeper must register the colonies and maintain
valid registration with the Illinois Department of Agriculture or as otherwise
required by the State of Illinois.
      12.   Compliance: All beekeepers shall be in compliance with the Illinois
Bees and Apiaries Act, including, but not limited to having all hives
accessible for State inspectors to check on a routine basis on their practice
and schedule or as needed.
      13.   Permit Required: Beekeeping shall require a permit from the
Village. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-14: KEEPING OF BACKYARD CHICKENS:
The keeping of chickens shall comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   No person shall house, keep, or maintain chickens on any property
within the Village, without first obtaining a permit from the Village.
   (B)   Roosters are prohibited.
   (C)   No person shall house, keep, or maintain more than four (4) hens on
any lot, tract, or parcel of land.
   (D)   All hens shall be confined in a pen, coop, building, or other
confinement enclosure at all times.
      1.   Confinement enclosures are prohibited within all front, street, or
side yard areas.
      2.   Confinement enclosures shall be located ten feet (10') from all
property lines.
   (E)   All feed shall be maintained in rodent-proof containers.
(F)   All confinement enclosures and yards shall be kept clean and sanitary.
(Ord. 2022-4950, 3-21-2022)
9-3-15: PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined an
amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues. Any person
violating any provision of this chapter involving a dangerous dog shall be
subject to more serious fines than those found to have violated a similar
provision involving a nondangerous dog, with such fines being established and
set forth in Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and
Regulatory Measures”. The procedure set forth in section
9-4-22 of this title may be used to settle and compromise a violation of those
animal offenses set forth therein.
   (B)   Upon a finding or plea of guilty to a violation of this chapter, the
Village may assess all or a portion of the costs incurred to respond to
violations against the violator. Costs that are assessed shall be based on the
Village's actual response costs, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Time required by the Village staff to coordinate response and to
respond;
      2.   Time spent traveling and providing administrative support;
      3.   Equipment and supplies; and
      4.   Contractual support, if any, incurred by the Village.
   (C)   Upon receipt from the Village of a cost assessment, the violator may
within seven (7) days of receipt thereof file a written appeal of the amount of
the assessment with the Village Manager. The Village Manager's determination
shall be final. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021;
Ord. 2022-4950, 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
9-4-1: Actions Prohibited
9-4-2: Disorderly Conduct
9-4-3: Discriminatory Actions
9-4-4: Open Bottle Law
9-4-5: Destroy, Damage Property; Graffiti
9-4-6: Removal Of Earth
9-4-7: Posting Advertisements
9-4-8: Sports Arenas; Throwing Dangerous Objects In
9-4-9: Signal Boxes; False Alarms
9-4-10: Trespass
9-4-11: Public Nuisances
9-4-12: Disturb Lawful Assemblies
9-4-13: Weapons
9-4-14: Offenses Involving Motor Vehicles
9-4-15: Conceal Identity
9-4-16: Burglar Tools, Possession Of
9-4-17: Signatures Forged On Petitions
9-4-18: Benefits, Name Of Beneficiary On Promotional Materials
9-4-19: Responsibility For Underage Consumption Of Alcohol And Attempted
Unlawful Purchase
9-4-20: Penalty, Sections
9-4-1 Through
9-4-19
9-4-21: Vandalism
9-4-22: Claims For Certain Offenses; Procedures
9-4-23: Snow Deposit On Streets
9-4-24: Curfew
9-4-25: Offenses Relating To Drugs
9-4-26: Offenses Regarding Public Officials
9-4-27: School Curfew
9-4-28: Property Damage
9-4-29: Retail Theft
9-4-30: Theft
9-4-31: Laser Pointers
9-4-1: ACTIONS PROHIBITED:
The specific conduct, demeanor, states of behavior and actions hereinafter
described are hereby declared to be illegal and prohibited. (Ord. 719, 11-15-
1977)
9-4-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Disorderly conduct shall be unlawful. A person commits disorderly conduct when
he or she knowingly:
   (A)   Breach Of The Peace:
      1.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid
in making a breach of peace; or
      2.   Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture
or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger
of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or
      3.   Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or
activity likely to produce a breach of the peace where there is an imminent
threat of violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to
protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that
said conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be
time; or
      4.   Shouts or causes or makes other loud and tumultuous noises to the
disturbance of any locality or neighborhood; or
      5.   Makes or causes to be made any noise or sounds of such volume or of
such a nature as to cause annoyance to residents of the village; or disturbs
the peace by the making of any unnecessary noise.
   (B)   Fail To Obey Peace Officer: Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal
by a person known by him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three
(3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate
vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
   (C)   Unlawful Assemblages:
      1.   Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace; or
      2.   Is in or remains in any crowd, body or assembly of persons
collected, gathered or being together for unlawful purposes, or for the purpose
of annoying or disturbing any person, pedestrian or traveler.
   (D)   Riot, Affray, Assault:
      1.   Causes or engages in or encourages any riot, affray, or other like
diversion, which tends to, or constitutes, a breach of the peace; or
      2.   Starts a fight, or to fight, or to commit any assault or battery in
any public place in the village.
   (E)   Disturb Lawful Assemblages:
      1.   Disturbs any orderly public assembly of any kind; or
      2.   Loiters or lingers about any door or entrance of any church, hall or
other room or building used for public assembly after being ordered away by any
person in charge of such church, hall, room or building.
   (F)   Congregation Of Disorderly Persons; Premises: Causes or permits any
roadhouse, shop, building or place of any description (while having the control
thereof) to become the gathering place of any disorderly persons, or permits
therein any tumultuous disturbance or party to the annoyance of the
neighborhood.
   (G)   Disorderly Conduct Relating To Alcoholic Liquor And Drugs:
      1.   Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of
alcohol, narcotics or other drug, not therapeutically administered, to the
degree that he or she may endanger himself or herself or other persons or
property, or annoy persons in his or her vicinity; or
      2.   Is drunk or in a state of intoxication, or is a person who shall be
drinking, selling or giving away any fermented cider, hard cider, ale, porter,
beer, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, bitters or other intoxicating liquors in any
quantity upon any highway, street, thoroughfare or other public place within
the village or shall be drunk or be in a state of intoxication in any private
house or place, to the annoyance of any citizen.
   (H)   Disorderly Conduct Involving Weapons:
      1.   Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of
law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance
or other dangerous weapon, or conceals said weapon on or about the person or
vehicle; or
      2.   Keeps concealed about one's person any weapon of a deadly nature; or
(Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
      3.   Fires or discharges any gun, pistol, fowling piece or other firearm,
or any air gun or toy pistol on which percussion caps are used, within the
village, unless authorized by the village board following recommendation by the
police chief; or (Ord. 2005-3927, 5-16-2005)
      4.   Sells, loans or furnishes to any minor any gun, pistol or any other
dangerous weapon. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
   (I)   Fireworks:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to discharge, fire or give any exhibition of
fireworks or pyrotechnics within the village without having first secured a
permit therefor from the village board. Prior to the village board's approval
the fireworks plan shall be reviewed and a recommendation received from the
chief of the Lisle-Woodridge fire protection district, or the chief's designee.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to store, sell or offer for sale any fireworks
or pyrotechnics in the village, either at wholesale or retail; provided that
the storage of such materials for use in an exhibition for which a permit has
been granted shall not be construed as a violation of this subsection. (Ord.
2006-4047, 8-7-2006)
   (J)   Obstruction To Public And Private Properties:
      1.   Annoys or causes injury to passersby on any street or sidewalk or
other walk in any street or other public place by placing any obstruction upon
or across the same, or by throwing missiles of any kind, or by jeering at or
deriding in any other manner with intent to annoy and cause discomfort or
inconvenience to any person in the lawful and orderly pursuit of his or her
business or pleasure in such street or public place.
      2.   Obstructs or encumbers or lounges in, on or about any street corner,
or sidewalk, church, clubhouse, hallway or other public building or place after
being requested by a policeman or other village officer to move on.
   (K)   Injure, Damage Public Or Private Properties:
      1.   Breaks or injures street or public lights, lamps or lighting
apparatus;
      2.   Defaces, destroys, alters, or mutilates, steals, obstructs or
withholds any books, documents, papers, accounts or property of the village;
      3.   Interferes with, removes, destroys, or in any manner causes injury
to any property belonging to the village or to any person, and located in any
street, alley or other public place in the village, unless duly authorized by
the owner of such property;
      4.   Throws, places or deposits in any street, alley or other public
place any wastepaper, brick, bottle, stone, glass or other rubbish, decayed
vegetables or fruit or other garbage refuse of any kind. However, deposits made
for purpose of pick up and immediate removal, when placed and contained in a
compact fashion by the village or its agent according to direction or custom,
shall not be punishable so long as said deposit is not made for a period in
excess of twenty four (24) hours or is moved or removed from said areas
promptly upon request of the village or any person inconvenienced thereby;
      5.   Cuts, injures or destroys any tree, vine, shrub or other plant in,
or cuts or removes any sod or earth from, any street, alley, park or other
public place, without due authority;
      6.   Throws or leaves any peel, rind or other paring or remnant of fruit
on any sidewalk;
      7.   Throws stones, missiles, nails or tacks, ice, glass, broken crockery
or china, iron or metal scraps or other article or thing by which persons or
animals may be injured, or vehicles damaged, or endangered; or throws or casts
any stone or other missile at any building, railroad cars or other public or
private property within the village, or at or upon any person, or abets all of
the same;
      8.   Dumps or deposits or causes to be dumped or deposited any grass,
leaves, branches, or any other things in the roadway or gutter of any public
street in the village.
   (L)   Picketing; Demonstrations:
      1.   Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any primary or secondary school building while the school is in
session and one-half (1/2) hour before the school is in session and one-half
(1/2) hour after the school session has been concluded; provided, that this
subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any school involved in a
labor dispute; or
      2.   Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship while
services are being conducted and one-half (1/2) hour before services are to be
conducted and one-half (1/2) hour after services have been concluded; provided,
that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any church,
temple, synagogue or other place of worship involved in a labor dispute.
   (M)   Aid Or Abet Escape: Aids or abets the rescue or escape of any person
under arrest or under pursuit for the purpose of being arrested.
   (N)   Disorderly Conduct Involving Animals:
      1.   Engages in or encourages cockfighting;
      2.   Cruelly beats or otherwise inhumanely abuses or maltreats any
domestic or other animal;
      3.   Induces or encourages dogfighting or street fighting. (Ord. 719, 11-
15-1977)
   (O)   Gambling: Gambles or keeps a gambling place in violation of the
provisions of this subsection.
      1.   A person gambles when he:
         (a)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of
value, unless excepted in subsection (O)2 of this section; or
         (b)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any
political nomination, appointment or election; or
         (c)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling
device; or
         (d)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the course of a bet or
wager; or
         (e)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment or election; or
         (f)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or
transfers any ticket or share for any lottery; or
         (g)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
other similar device; or
         (h)   Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or
share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except
for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by
and conducted in accordance with the ordinances of the village or the laws of
Illinois or any other state or foreign government; or
         (i)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the ordinances of the village or the laws of
Illinois or any other state; or
         (j)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that nothing in this subsection (O)1(j)
prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting
of sporting events or contests.
      2.   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be
convicted of gambling therefor:
         (a)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of
chance including, without limitation, contracts of indemnity or guaranty and
life or health or accident insurance;
         (b)   Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual
contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed,
strength or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such
contest;
         (c)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law;
         (d)   The game commonly known as "bingo", when conducted in accordance
with the "bingo license and tax act", approved July 22, 1971, as amended;
         (e)   Lotteries when conducted by the state of Illinois in accordance
with the "Illinois lottery law", approved December 14, 1973, as amended;
         (f)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation and promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this subsection (O)2(f), an antique
slot machine is one manufactured twenty five (25) years ago or earlier;
         (g)   Raffles when conducted in accordance with title 3, chapter 14 of
this code;
         (h)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with the
"charitable games act";
         (i)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under the Illinois pull
tabs and jar games act; or
      3.   For the purpose of this subsection (O), the terms of "gambling
device", "lottery", and "policy game" shall have the meanings as set forth in
the Illinois criminal code, section 28-2.
      4.   A "gambling place" is any real estate, vehicle, boat or any other
property whatsoever used for the purpose of gambling other than those gambling
activities authorized by the law of the state of Illinois or the ordinance of
the village. No person shall knowingly permit any premises or property owned or
occupied by him or under his control to be used as a gambling place. Such
premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be proceeded
against as such. (Ord. 92-2295, 7-20-1992)
   (P)   Obscenity:
      1.   Urinates or deposits human or animal excrement upon the streets or
alleys or public grounds of the village;
      2.   Writes, draws, carves, makes or shows any lewd, indecent or obscene
word, sentence, design, picture or figure on any place open to public access or
view;
      3.   Appears in a public place in a state of nudity or in an indecent or
lewd dress. No person shall make any indecent exposure of his person or be
guilty of any indecent act or behavior or exhibit or perform any indecent,
immoral or lewd play or representation.
   (Q)   House Of Ill Fame; Inmates Of, Keepers: No person shall keep or
maintain or be an inmate of or in any way contribute to the support of any
house of ill fame or assignation.
      Any person found in any house of ill fame or assignation shall be
considered an inmate within the meaning of this subsection.
      Every house of ill fame or house of assignation where men and/or women
resort for the purpose of prostitution is declared to be a nuisance.
   (R)   Signs And Advertising Matter 1 :
      1.   Except as permitted in the sign ordinance of the village, no person
shall hang or suspend a sign from any building to hang over any sidewalk or
street within the village.
      2.   No person shall distribute handbills, circulars, dodgers, pamphlets,
cards, pictures or any advertising matter of any kind whatsoever, by placing
the same in or upon any motor vehicle standing or parked in the public streets
of the village.
   (S)   Uninvited Solicitations: No person shall engage in solicitations upon
any premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located
thereon after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such
premises or residence.
   (T)   Solicit, "Thumb" Rides: No person shall stand or loiter upon any
sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or public highway or grounds within the limits
of the village for the purpose of "thumbing", requesting, asking or soliciting
a ride from the operator of any motor vehicle.
   (U)   Abandoned Refrigerators, Containers: It shall be unlawful to abandon
any refrigerator, freezer or icebox or other device having an automatic lock on
a compartment large enough to enclose a human being in any place accessible to
children without first removing the doors of such refrigerator, freezer or
icebox.
   (V)   Maintain Fire Hazards: No person shall permit or store any combustible
refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard or store or throw away any
refuse of any kind in an alley, street or public way in the village.
   Accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter or
combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be permitted to
remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or open space or upon
any public street, sidewalk, easement or alley abutting thereon. All weeds,
grass, vines or other growth, when the same endangers property or is liable to
be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property, including all weeds, grass, vines or other growth 1 growing in or
upon any public street, sidewalk, easement or alley abutting said property.
However, deposits made for purpose of pick up and immediate removal, when
placed and contained in a compact fashion, by the village or its agent
according to direction or custom 2 , shall not be punishable so long as said
deposit is not made for a period in excess of twenty four (24) hours or is
moved or removed from said areas promptly upon request of the village or any
person inconvenienced thereby. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 4 of this code for the sign code.
1 1. See also title 8, chapter 4 of this code.
2 2. See title 8, chapter 2 of this code relating to garbage and rubbish
  collections.
9-4-3: DISCRIMINATORY ACTIONS:
It is unlawful to create a clear and present danger of a riot or assault,
battery or other unlawful trespass against any person or group of persons
because of his or her or their race, religion, color, national origin, or
ancestry, or to create a clear and present danger of arson, vandalism,
defacement or other unlawful trespass against property because of the race,
religion, color, national origin, or ancestry of the owner, possessor, or
authorized user or users of said property, or, in the case of a cemetery, of
the decedent buried therein.
The term "person", as used in this section, shall include one or more
individuals, copartnerships, corporations, firms, organizations, associations,
leagues or other bodies. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-4: OPEN BOTTLE LAW:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor, as
defined by law on any public way or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public
way in the village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or
have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about the passenger area of any motor
vehicle upon any public way in the village except in the original package and
with the seal unbroken. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or possess alcoholic
liquor in an open container in any common area of a multi-family residential
development, except in those common areas on the property so designated in
writing by an owner, manager or management company, homeowners' or condominium
association, or other entity having control over said common areas.
For the purpose of this subsection the following definitions shall apply:
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: As defined in section
3-2-1 of this code.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any residential development within the
R-4 zoning district with more than two (2) dwelling units.
   OPEN CONTAINER: Any container other than the original package with the seal
unbroken. (Ord. 97-2851, 3-3-1997)
9-4-5: DESTROY, DAMAGE PROPERTY; GRAFFITI:
   (A)   Cemeteries; Places Of Worship: It is unlawful for any person to
wilfully deface, mar, injure, destroy or remove any vault, tomb, monument,
gravestone, memorial of the dead, church, synagogue, or any other structure
consisting of a place of worship of any religion, sect or group or any part of
any contents thereof, or any fence, tree, shrub or plant appurtenant thereto.
   (B)   Public Or Village Property: It is unlawful for any person to cut,
injure, mark or deface any public building, sewer, water pipe, hydrant or other
village property, or any tree, grass, shrub or walk in any public way or public
park. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit ordinary maintenance
of parkway areas and sidewalks by adjacent property owners.
   (C)   Telegraph Poles: It is unlawful for any person to scratch, stencil or
post placards or bills on any of the poles used for wires of the police and
fire alarm telegraph, or in any other manner deface or injure the same.
   (D)   Graffiti Prohibited:
      1.   Graffiti Defined: For the purpose of this section "graffiti" shall
be defined as any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram,
sketch, picture, letter or any other inscription or drawing.
      2.   Graffiti Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to place graffiti
upon the surface of any structure or wall that is publicly or privately owned
without the permission of the owner of the property. It shall be an affirmative
defense to the alleged violation of the foregoing provision if such activity
was undertaken with the prior written consent of the owner of the property,
demonstrating that the owner was aware of the content and method of the
graffiti to be placed on the structure or wall; however, no owner of property
shall place or give permission to place on any property, real or personal,
which is in public view any graffiti which incites violence by reference to
gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity by referring to
sexual activity or contains defamatory material about a public or private
person.
      3.   Removal Of Graffiti: The village hereby declares "graffiti", as
defined in subsection (D)1 of this section to be a nuisance and as a nuisance,
subject to abatement as provided herein:
         (a)   Upon written notification by the village, the owner of property
upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the graffiti within
ten (10) working days from the date of the notice.
         (b)   The village, upon notification of graffiti placed upon any
village property, shall remove the graffiti within ten (10) working days from
the date of the notification. The village also may remove graffiti from the
exterior of private property if owners comply with the following conditions:
            (1)   Owners must inform the village of the presence of such
graffiti and of their inability to remove it;
            (2)   Owners must prepay the village for the cost of the removal;
and
            (3)   Owners must sign a statement authorizing removal by the
village and must sign a release holding the village harmless from any claims or
suits brought for damages pursuant to any chemicals or from the actions taken
by the village or its employees to remove the graffiti.
If property owners do not request such removal as specified herein or do not
remove the graffiti within the time specified, they shall be subject to the
penalties listed in subsection (D)4 of this section.
         (c)   An extension of the time in which graffiti must be removed may
be granted by the chief of police upon application of the property owner to the
police department and a showing of cause. Cause shall include, but not be
limited to: abnormal weather conditions, availability of chemicals, or physical
limitations of the owner. In no case shall an extension be granted which would
extend the removal deadline more than thirty (30) days beyond the initial
notification referred to in subsection (D)3(a) of this section. (Ord. 92-2298,
8-3-1992)
      4.   Penalties: Upon a finding of guilty for violation of subsection (D)2
of this section, there shall be imposed a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. Upon a finding of guilty for a violation of subsection (D)3 of this
section, there shall be imposed a fine as established by Title 1, Chapter 20,
“Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”. Additionally,
the court may require that the party guilty of violating the provisions of
subsection (D)2 of this section make full and complete restitution to the
village and/or the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the removal
of the graffiti and/or restoration of the structure or wall to its previous
condition. In addition, the court may order as further penalty, community
service in the form of time to be spent in cleaning property that has been
defaced by graffiti in any location in the village. (Ord. 98-2948, 1-19-1998;
amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-4-6: REMOVAL OF EARTH:
No person shall dig, cut, or remove any sod or earth from any public way or
other public place within the village without a permit from the village
manager, or from any premises not his own without the consent of the owner
thereof. Further, no person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any
property adjoining or contiguous to a public way in such a manner as to leave
said property in an unsafe or unsanitary condition or in such condition as will
constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-7: POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS:
No person shall post, stick, stamp, tack, paint or otherwise fix, or cause the
same to be done by another person, any notice, placard, bill, handbill, sign,
poster, card, advertisement or other device calculated to attract the attention
of the public, upon any building or part thereof, wall or part thereof, or
window, without first obtaining the written consent of the owner, agent, lessee
or occupant of such premises or structure; provided, however, that no person
shall paste, post or fasten any handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of
any kind, or cause the same to be done, which exceeds twelve (12) square feet
in area without first obtaining a permit so to do in accordance with the
provisions of the sign ordinance relating to billboards and signboards; and
provided, further, that this section shall not apply to advertising matter upon
billboards owned or controlled by private individuals. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-8: SPORT ARENAS; THROWING DANGEROUS OBJECTS IN:
No person shall throw, drop or place upon any baseball park, athletic field or
other place where games are played, any bottle or other glass receptacle or any
broken bottle or other broken instrument or thing or refuse. (Ord. 719, 11-15-
1977)
9-4-9: SIGNAL BOXES; FALSE ALARMS:
   (A)   No person, unless duly authorized, shall open or use any signal box,
unless it be to give an alarm of fire or to communicate with the police on
necessary business, nor break, cut, injure, deface, derange, or in any manner
meddle or interfere with any signal box or the fire alarm or police telegraph
wires or with any municipal electric wires, poles, conduits or apparatus.
   (B)   Whoever, without reasonable cause, by outcry or otherwise, makes or
circulates, or causes to be made or circulated, any false alarm of fire, shall
be fined not to exceed the maximum sum prescribed herein. (Ord. 719, 11-15-
1977)
9-4-10: TRESPASS:
Trespass shall be unlawful. A person commits trespass when he knowingly:
   (A)   Enters the property or any part thereof of another when, immediately
prior to such entry, he receives notice, either oral or written, from the owner
or occupant that such entry is forbidden; or
   (B)   Remains upon the property or any part thereof of another, after
receiving notice, either oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart;
or
   (C)   Enters upon property open to the public, or any part thereof, and
remains thereon with a malicious and mischievous intent after receiving notice,
either oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart; or
   (D)   Wilfully defaces, mars, injures or destroys any building or part of
any building or any property of another with paint, tar, acid, grease, oil or
other such substance which would detrimentally alter the outer face or
substance of such building or any property of another, or any fence, tree,
shrub or plant appurtenant thereto. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-11: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The maintenance of a public nuisance shall be unlawful. Every common, ill
governed, or disorderly house, room, or other premises kept for the
encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking, fornication or other misbehavior,
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the keeper and all persons
connected with the maintenance thereof, and all persons patronizing or
frequenting the same, shall be fined not to exceed the maximum sum prescribed
herein. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-12: DISTURB LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
Any person who shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly met for
religious worship by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior or
profane discourse within the place of worship, or so near to the same as to
disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting, shall be fined not to exceed
the maximum sum prescribed herein. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-13: WEAPONS:
   (A)   Possession, Discharge And Use:
      1.   The provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, specifically 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24, subsection 24-1(a)(1) through (5), 24-1(a)
(10), 24-1(a)(11), or 24-1(a)(13) as now existing or hereafter amended, except
for those provisions which by their nature can have no application to the
Village, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter with
the same force and effect as if set forth at length herein.
      2.   No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm
within the village except upon premises used by a duly licensed shooting
gallery, gun club or rifle club.
      3.   No cannon or piece of artillery shall be discharged or fired off in
any public way or other public place within the village except upon the express
permission of the village.
      4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to sheriffs, or
members of the police force, or other peace officers engaged in the discharge
of their official duties, or to any person summoned by any of such officers to
assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, while such person so summoned
is engaged in assisting such officer.
      5.   No person shall sell, offer for sale, keep, possess, loan or give to
any person any knife, the blade of which is released by a spring mechanism,
including knives known as "switchblades", any blackjack, slingshot, sand club,
sandbag, metal knuckles or bludgeons. No person shall sell, offer for sale,
loan or give to any person eighteen (18) years of age or under, any type or
kind of knife, any blade of which is two inches (2") in length or longer.
      6.   No person shall carry or possess any knife, the blade of which is
released by a spring mechanism, including knives known as "switchblades", any
blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbag, metal knuckles or bludgeons. No
person eighteen (18) years of age or under shall carry or possess any knife,
the blade of which is two inches (2") in length or longer.
      7.   No person shall carry or possess with intent to use same unlawfully
against another a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, stiletto or other
dangerous or deadly weapon.
      8.   No person shall carry concealed on or about his person a pistol,
revolver, derringer or other firearm or dagger, dirk, stiletto, bowie knife,
commando knife, any blade of which is released by a spring mechanism, including
knives known as "switchblades" or any other type or kind of knife, any blade of
which is more than two and one-half inches (2 1/2") in length, ordinary razor
or other dangerous weapon except that no person eighteen (18) years of age or
under shall carry concealed on or about his person any knife, the blade of
which is two inches (2") in length or longer. This provision shall not apply,
however, to the following officers while engaged in the discharge of their
official duties: sheriffs, policemen or other duly constituted police officers,
or to persons lawfully summoned by an officer to assist in making arrests or
preserving the peace, while so engaged in assisting such officer.
      9.   No person shall at any time display, discharge or set off from or
across any street, sidewalk, road, highway or public land, or any public place
within the village or have in his possession for such purpose any toy firearm.
A toy firearm is any device that resembles a firearm or device capable of
discharging projectiles, but cannot discharge a projectile other than water. No
person shall at any time discharge or set off any air rifle, toy cannon, or any
gun that discharges projectiles either by air, spring, explosive, substance or
any other force any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun,
paintball gun, pellet gun, or any implement that is not a firearm.
      10.   The provisions of this ordinance regarding firearms shall not apply
to any person in compliance with the Firearm Concealed Carry Act (430 ILCS 66).
   (B)   Gun Free School Zones:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any individual knowingly to possess a
firearm at a place that the individual knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is a school zone.
      2.   Subsection (B)1 of this section shall not apply to the possession of
a firearm:
         (a)   On private property not part of school grounds;
         (b)   If the individual possessing the firearm is duly licensed to do
so pursuant to all applicable state and local laws;
         (c)   Which is:
            (1)   Not loaded; and
            (2)   In a locked container or a locked firearms rack which is atop
a motor vehicle;
         (d)   By an individual for use in a program approved by a school in
the school zone;
         (e)   By an individual in accordance with a contract entered into
between a school in the school zone and the individual or an employer of the
individual;
         (f)   By a law enforcement officer acting in his or her official
capacity; or
         (g)   That is unloaded and is possessed by an individual while
traversing school premises for the purpose of gaining access to public or
private lands open to hunting, if the entry on school premises is authorized by
school authorities.
      3.   For the purposes of this subsection (B), the term "school" means any
public, private or parochial institution as defined in section
5-1-7 of this code. The term "school zone" means in, on the grounds of, or
within one thousand feet (1,000') of a public, private or parochial school.
      4.   The village shall post signs around school zones warning of the
prohibition of the possession or discharge of firearms in a school zone. (Ord.
92-2309, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 2022-4977, 9-19-2022)
9-4-14: OFFENSES INVOLVING MOTOR VEHICLES:
   (A)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked,
nor shall any person accelerate a moving vehicle unless or until such movement
can be made and is made with reasonable safety and without unnecessary noise of
the engine or squealing or screeching of the tires on the pavement.
   (B)   Every motor vehicle driven or operated in the village shall at all
times be equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant
operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No
such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass or
similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in
a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle above that
emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle, and such original
muffler shall comply with all the requirements of this section. (Ord. 719, 11-
15-1977)
9-4-15: CONCEAL IDENTITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to appear in public in
any mask, cap, cowl, hood, or other thing concealing the identity of the
wearer; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to
persons attending or taking part in carnivals, masked balls, public shows,
entertainments or celebrations in the village, or under permission of the
proper authorities of said village, nor to any person holding a written permit
issued by the mayor, nor to minors who go about the village "trick-or-
treating", without accompanying malicious conduct. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-16: BURGLAR TOOLS, POSSESSION OF:
A person possesses burglary tools when he possesses any tool, key, instrument,
device or any explosive suitable for use in breaking into any building, house
trailer, watercraft, aircraft, vehicle, railroad car, or any depository
designed for the safekeeping of property, or any part thereof, with intent to
enter any such place and with intent to commit therein a felony or theft.
A person convicted of the possession of burglary tools shall be fined not to
exceed the maximum sum prescribed herein. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-17: SIGNATURES FORGED ON PETITIONS:
Whenever it may be necessary, in order to procure a license, permit, grant or
privilege of any kind, or to obtain a referendum vote on a proposition, to
secure signatures to a petition for the same under the provisions of any law or
ordinance affecting the whole or any part of the village, it shall be unlawful
for any person, individual, or any firm or corporation by its members, officers
or agents, to forge the signature or procure the forging of the signature to
the same of any person who is by law qualified to sign such petition, or to
sign or procure the signing of a fictitious name to such petition, or to
procure the signature to the same of the person qualified to sign such petition
by payment of money or other valuable thing to the person so signing. The
signing or procuring of each false or fraudulent name to such petition shall be
regarded as a distinct and separate offense. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-18: BENEFITS, NAME OF BENEFICIARY ON PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS:
No person shall use any ticket, poster, placard, badge or other advertisement
in the promotion of any dance, bazaar, picnic, game, theater or other
entertainment or performance purporting to be given for charitable purposes
unless the names of the persons or organizations intended to be benefited by
the receipts from such entertainment or performance are stated on such ticket,
poster, placard, badge or other advertisement. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-19: RESPONSIBILITY FOR UNDERAGE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL AND ATTEMPTED
UNLAWFUL PURCHASE:
   (A)   Unlawful Possession And Consumption By Persons Underage:
      1.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall consume,
purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his
or her possession within the village; provided the possession and dispensing,
or consumption by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, of alcoholic
liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, the consumption
by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, under the direct
supervision and approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such underage
person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, or the possession and
delivery of alcoholic liquors in the course of a person's employment when
otherwise authorized by this code or by the Illinois municipal code is not
prohibited.
      2.   No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of twenty one (21) years, except as otherwise allowed in this code and the
Illinois municipal code.
   (B)   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or
guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any minor child of which he or she may
be the parent or guardian to violate any provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Responsibility Of The Owner Or Occupant Of Premises: No person shall
knowingly permit a gathering at a residence which he or she occupies of two (2)
or more persons where any one or more of the person(s) is under twenty one (21)
years of age and the following factors also apply:
      1.   The person occupying the residence knows that any such person under
the age of twenty one (21) is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic
beverage; and
      2.   The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under
twenty one (21) is not otherwise permitted by this act.
For the purposes of this subsection where the residence has an owner and a
tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
   (D)   False Identification:
      1.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface any identification card
issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties; or use
the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information.
      2.   No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged or defaced identification
card or by the use of an identification card of another person.
      3.   No person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
   (E)   Hotel And Motel Room Rental: No person shall rent a hotel or motel
room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with the
knowledge that such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor
by a person or persons under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 92-2239,
1-20-1992)
   (F)   Possession; Presence Of Alcohol Within Body: For the purpose of this
section, "possession" shall include, but not be limited to, the presence of any
amount of alcohol within the body of a person. (Ord. 95-2616, 2-20-1995)
9-4-20: PENALTY, SECTIONS 9-4-1 THROUGH 9-4-19:
   (A)   Any person found to have violated any provision of sections
9-4-1 through
9-4-18 of this chapter, shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense.
   (B)   Any person found to have violated any provision of section
9-4-19 of this chapter shall be fined as established by Title 1, Chapter 20,
“Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures” for each offense.
(Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-4-21: VANDALISM:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
      LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor
by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act.
      MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but not yet
nineteen (19) years of age.
   (B)   Damage To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully,
maliciously or negligently break, deface, injure or destroy any property within
the village, whether such property is owned by the state, county, village or
any other governmental body or owned by any private person.
   (C)   Parents' Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to
exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have
committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the
parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the
events described in subsections (C)1, (C)2 and (C)3 of this section:
      1.   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property or
shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt in violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
      2.   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the
police department of the village, following said adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction; and
      3.   If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set
forth in subsection (C)2 of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to
be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute, as described in subsection
(C)1 of this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any
ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (C)1 of this section.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of
this section shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. (Ord. 661, 11-16-1976; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-
2021)
9-4-22: CLAIMS FOR CERTAIN OFFENSES; PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Whenever any person is accused of any offense hereinafter enumerated,
the police officer so accusing may, in lieu of instituting a prosecution for
the alleged offense, issue to the alleged violator a citation, unless the
alleged offense involves serious injury to a person or animal as defined in
section
9-2-2 of this title, whereby the police officer shall institute a prosecution
for the alleged offense.
   (B)   Any person receiving a citation may settle and compromise the claim
against him for such offense by paying to the village the sum provided for
herein for such offense within the time specified in the citation which shall
not be less than forty eight (48) hours nor more than ten (10) days from the
date on which the offense was committed.
   (C)   All such payments shall be made either by mailing a check or money
order for the required amount, in the self-addressed envelope provided, or by
paying the same in person at the police station or at the village hall during
regular business hours. If paid in person the copy of the citation must
accompany payment.
   (D)   The citation will be in the following form:
Failure to pay the fine within the time specified on the citation shall be
cause for the filing of a complaint against you in the Circuit Court of DuPage
County, and the issuance of a warrant for your arrest.
   (E)   The amount at which the claim may be settled, pursuant to the
citation, for the following offenses, shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”:
      1.   Parking alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such parking would obstruct traffic.
      2.   Parking within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      3.   Bicycle riding on sidewalk in business district.
      4.   Double parking.
      5.   Overtime hourly parking.
      6.   Parking in excess of the maximum time limit in the central business
district.
      7.   Parking in front of a driveway.
      8.   Parking in reserved lot without paying rental fee.
      9.   Parking on a crosswalk.
      10.   Parking on any street between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. without special permission. (Special permission for
overnight parking for blacktop, seal coating driveway, special meetings or
parties, out of town guests, may be granted by the police department.)
      11.   Parking on sidewalk.
      12.   Parking upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
      13.   Parking within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
      14.   Parking within thirty feet (30') of the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway.
      15.   Parking within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any
fire station.
      16.   Overtime parking on expired meters.
      17.   Parking in space designated with signs prohibiting parking.
      18.   Parking not entirely within the limits of a single striped parking
space.
      19.   Parking on private property without consent.
      19a.   Failure to obtain an animal license.
      20.   Failure to display animal license.
      21.   Open burning.
      22.   Parking in area prohibited during or after snowfall.
      23.   Permitting an animal to bark, whine or howl excessively.
      24.   Permitting an animal to create noxious or offensive odors.
      25.   Permitting animal to run at large.
      25a.   Permitting a dangerous dog to run at large.
      25b.   Knowingly permitting a dangerous dog to run at large.
      25c.   Permitting a vicious dog within the corporate limits of the
village.
      26.   Unlawful accumulation of garbage and debris.
      27.   Permitting animal to run at large - second violation within twelve
(12) month period.
      28.   Parking in space designated for handicapped person.
   (F)   In the event that the owner or operator of a vehicle fails to make the
applicable payment referred to in subsection (E) of this section within the ten
(10) day period set forth in subsection (B) of this section, the said fine
shall be increased as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
In the event of the failure of an owner or operator of a vehicle in violation
of the foregoing to make such payment as referred to above within ten (10)
days, the chief of police shall direct a "final notice" to such owner setting
forth the date, time and place of said violation and advising that said owner
may, within ten (10) days after receipt of said "final notice", pay to the
village, at the Lisle police station, the sums established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, in full satisfaction of such violation and further advising that
failure to make said payment shall be a cause for the issuance of a "notice to
appear" for the registered owner. The maximum fine for violations set forth in
this section shall be as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines,
Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”.
   (G)   The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is
registered in the name of the alleged violator shall be considered prima facie
proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of the
alleged offense. (Ord. 2007-4098, 3-5-2007; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-4-23: SNOW DEPOSIT ON STREETS:
   (A)   Unlawful Actions; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person to
remove any snow or ice from any private property and deposit the same upon any
public street or alley or any part thereof if such deposit is a bulk deposit
which presents an obstacle to vehicle traffic on said street or alley. This
section shall not apply to:
      1.   A bona fide snow removal operation if the resulting bulk deposit is
immediately removed after the snow removal operation;
      2.   The village when using the center of a cul-de-sac for the deposit of
snow or ice.
   (B)   Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of
this section shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. (Ord. 82-1072, 10-19-1982; amd. Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-
1996; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-4-24: CURFEW:
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to
be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway
at the following times unless one of those exceptions listed in subsection (B)
of this section applies:
      1.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Sunday; and
      3.   Between one minute after eleven o'clock (11:01) P.M. on Sunday to
Thursday, inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person less than seventeen (17)
years of age who is involved in the following activities:
      1.   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible companion of at least seventeen (17) years of age who is approved
by the parent or legal guardian;
      2.   Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state
authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
      3.   Attending or traveling to or from an official school, religious or
civic activity;
      4.   Attending or traveling to or from any assembly activity for which a
permit has been lawfully issued;
      5.   Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or
property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage; or
      6.   Any activity which involves the exercise of the minor's first
amendment rights.
   (C)   Before issuing any citation pursuant to this section, the citing
officer shall reasonably determine if the person is involved in any activity as
considered under subsection (B) of this section. If the officer determines that
the person is involved in such an activity, then no citation shall be issued.
If the officer, however, has reasonable belief that the person is not involved
in such activity as considered under subsection (B) of this section, then the
officer shall issue a citation pursuant to this subsection.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a minor in his custody or control to violate subsection (A) of
this section.
   (E)   A person violating this section shall be issued a citation and fined
as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2004-3828, 5-3-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-4-25: OFFENSES RELATING TO DRUGS:
   (A)   Inhaling, Drinking Or Possessing Certain Substances: No person shall
inhale, breathe, or drink, or possess with the intent to inhale, any compound
liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone,
toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl acetone, trichloroethane, isopropanol,
methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other
substance for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation,
dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner to change, distort
or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes. For the purpose of this
section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated
condition. In addition, for the purpose of this section, the possession of any
item altered so as to facilitate the inhalation of such substance, or the
possession of any other item or device designed to enable the inhalation of
such substance shall create a rebuttable presumption of intent to inhale said
substance. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
      1.   Any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or
substances pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician,
surgeon, dentist or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
      2.   Any person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise in any manner
uses any narcotic, dangerous drug, or other material or substance or
combination thereof, which material or substance or combination thereof is
defined by, and the use of which, is prohibited or regulated by any law of this
state.
   (B)   Sale Of Certain Substances: No person shall knowingly sell or offer
for sale, deliver or give away to any person any substances containing any of
the following volatile solvents, where the seller, offerer or deliverer knows
or has reason to believe that the substance will be used for the purpose of
inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational
behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or
mental processes: toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl
acetate, methyl ethyl acetone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl
ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance for
the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness,
paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb
the audio, visual or mental processes.
   (C)   Offenses Relating To Cannabis:
      1.   Findings: The board of trustees is advised that there is a
widespread illegal use of cannabis within the village and further finds that
the adoption of a local ordinance governing said illegal use of cannabis will
be helpful for the effective control and elimination of the unlawful use of
this drug.
      2.   Cannabis Defined: "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other
substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis
sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any
part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring
or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly
by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the
mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made
from the seeds of such plant, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted
therefrom), fiber, oil, cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is
incapable of germination.
      3.   Unlawful Possession Of Cannabis: A person commits the offense of
unlawful possession of cannabis by possessing any amount of cannabis or any
substance containing cannabis:
         a.   If the person is under twenty-one (21) years, unless they are a
registered medical cannabis patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act;
         b.   If the person possesses any amount of cannabis or any substance
containing cannabis in excess of the limits set forth for Illinois residents
and non-residents under 410 ILCS 705/10-10;
         c.   If the person has a valid medical cannabis prescription but
possesses more than five (5) cannabis plants;
         d.   If the person possesses any cannabis plants without a valid
medical prescription or valid State cannabis business license;
         e.   If the person possesses any amount of cannabis or any substance
containing cannabis in a “public place;”
         f.   If the person possesses any amount of cannabis or any substance
containing cannabis in a motor vehicle on or about the public way, unless the
cannabis is reasonably secured, sealed, and inaccessible in the vehicle;
         g.   If the person possesses any amount of cannabis or any substance
containing cannabis in a motor vehicle on property that the person does not own
or lease, unless the cannabis is reasonably secured, sealed, and inaccessible
in the vehicle; or
         h.   If the person is in violation of any other limitation set forth
under 410 ILCS 705/10-35 unless permitted or authorized to do so pursuant to
the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.), the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.) or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), as amended.
      4.   Unlawful Use Of Cannabis: A person commits the offense of unlawful
use of cannabis by using cannabis or any substance containing cannabis:
         a.   In a “public place” as defined by 410 ILCS 705/10-35;
         b.   In any motor vehicle on or about any public way;
         c.   If the user is under twenty-one (21) years of age, except where
the user was authorized by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act; or
         d.   In violation of any limitation set forth under 410 ILCS 705/10-35
unless permitted or authorized to do so pursuant to the Cannabis Control Act
(720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.), the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/
1 et seq.) or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program (410 ILCS 130/
1 et seq.), as amended.
      5.   Other Cannabis Offenses: Any possession, consumption, use, purchase,
sale, transportation, manufacture or cultivation, of cannabis, which is not
authorized by Illinois Law, is a violation of this section.
      6.   Permissible Presumption: There shall be a permissible presumption
that cannabis or cannabis products were not lawfully acquired, if the cannabis
or cannabis product lacks: packaging specific to that product, packaging for
retail sale in Illinois, price stickers, bar codes, purchase receipts, or other
evidence of tax payment showing conformance with the Illinois Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.), or the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
   (D)   Drug Paraphernalia:
      1.   For the purpose of this section, drug paraphernalia shall have the
same definition as provided by the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720
ILCS 600/1 et seq.).
      2.   It shall be a violation of this section to possess, use, purchase,
sell or manufacture, any item of drug paraphernalia, unless done in a manner
authorized by the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act.
      3.   For the purpose of this section, cannabis paraphernalia shall have
the same definition as provided by the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
(410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.).
      4.   It shall be a violation of this section to possess, use, purchase,
sell, or manufacture, any item of cannabis paraphernalia, unless done in a
manner that conforms with the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (410
ILCS 705/1 et seq.), or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program (410
ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
      5.   Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. Each day that a violation exists and each separate occurrence shall
constitute separate offenses.
   (E)   Responsibility Of Parents And Owners Of Residences:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer
or permit any person under eighteen (18) years of age, of which he or she may
be the parent or guardian, to violate any provision of this section. (Ord.
2001-3321, 7-2-2001; amd. Ord. 2020-4857, 1-20-2020; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-4-26: OFFENSES REGARDING PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
   (A)   Impersonation:
      1.   No person, other than a member of the police department, shall
assume to act as a policeman in any capacity within the village.
No person shall impersonate any of the members of the police department, or
shall maliciously or with intent to deceive, use or imitate any of the signs,
signals or devices adopted and used by the police department, or shall wear in
public the uniform adopted as the police uniform, after having been removed or
suspended.
      2.   No person shall impersonate without lawful authority any village
officer or employee.
   (B)   Interfering With Officers: No person shall interfere with or hinder
any officer or employee of the village while engaged in the duties of his
office or employment.
   (C)   Resisting Or Obstructing Village Official: A person who knowingly
resists or obstructs the performance by one known to the person to be an
officer or employee of the village of any authorized act within his official
capacity shall be guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-
2001)
9-4-27: SCHOOL CURFEW:
   (A)   Established: It shall be unlawful for any person less than eighteen
(18) years old who is enrolled in any public, private or parochial school to be
present at, in or upon, within the corporate limits of the village, any public
assembly, building, place, street or highway, other than school, during any
time when school is in session during the regular school term, unless that
person is:
      1.   Traveling to or from school by the most direct available route; or
      2.   Engaged in school related activities with prior approval of school
authorities or as otherwise authorized by written school policy; or
      3.   Engaged in personal business, including, but not limited to,
employment, medical care or religious activities, with prior written notice
thereof from a parent or legal guardian addressed to school authorities.
      4.   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other
adult having lawful custody or supervision of such person.
      5.   Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or
property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage.
   (B)   Investigatory Detention: Any police officer may stop and detain a
person whom the police officer reasonably suspects to be violating this section
for the purposes of verifying the detained person's identity, age, school
enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall
immediately inform the detained person of the reason for the detention and that
the detained person will be released on verification of authorization to be
absent from school. If the detained person refuses to provide the police
officer with the necessary information, or if authorization to be absent from
school cannot be verified within fifteen (15) minutes after the detention, then
the detained person shall be taken to school authorities, if practicable, or to
a parent, legal guardian or other responsible person having lawful custody or
supervision of such person.
   (C)   First And Subsequent Violations: The first incident of violation of
school curfew shall be handled by the school authorities according to the
policy and procedure of the school in which the minor is enrolled. The incident
shall be documented and retained by the school district and the village. Any
subsequent violations of this section will result in the minor and/or parent or
legal guardian receiving a citation for the offense.
   (D)   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion to knowingly permit a person in his or
her custody or control to violate subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 2007-
4090, 2-5-2007)
9-4-28: PROPERTY DAMAGE:
   (A)   Definitions: The following words shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them when used in this section:
      PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
      PROPERTY: Any real or tangible personal property.
   (B)   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Knowingly damage any property of another without his consent; or
      2.   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive damage property of
another; or
      3.   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his consent;
or
      4.   Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his consent;
or
      5.   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, without
his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or the building; or
      6.   Damage any property with intent to defraud an insurer; or
      7.   Knowingly shoot a firearm at any portion of a train; or
      8.   Knowingly damage the property of another without his consent by
defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint or
other similar substance; or
      9.   Wilfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with or destroy
or deface any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire engine, or other public
or private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus pertaining to such
equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper authorization.
(Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001)
9-4-29: RETAIL THEFT:
   (A)   Retail Theft Defined: A person commits the offense of retail theft
when he or she knowingly:
      1.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
price of such merchandise; or
      2.   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag or marking
indicative of value or any other markings which aid in determining value
affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a
retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise
personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with
the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
      3.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which
such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
      4.   Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise; or
      5.   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart.
   (B)   Presumptions: If any person:
      1.   Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings
unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
      2.   Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving
payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, such
person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such
merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of
depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such
merchandise without paying the full retail price of such merchandise.
   (C)   Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a
person has committed retail theft may detain such person on or off the premises
of a retail mercantile establishment in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
      1.   To request identification;
      2.   To verify such identification;
      3.   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his
possession unpurchased merchandise, and to make reasonable investigation of the
ownership of such merchandise;
      4.   To inform a peace officer of the detention of that person and
surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer;
      5.   In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents,
guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of
this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a
retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
   (D)   Affirmative Defense: A detention as permitted in this section does not
constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it render the merchant
liable to the person so detained. (Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001)
9-4-30: THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit theft.
   (A)   A person commits theft when he knowingly:
      1.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
or
      2.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
      3.   Obtains by threat control over the property of the owner; or
      4.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have
been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen, and
         (a)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit
of the property; or
         (b)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner
as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
         (c)   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit; or
      5.   Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody of any law
enforcement agency which is explicitly represented to him by any law
enforcement officer or any individual acting in behalf of a law enforcement
agency as being stolen.
   (B)   A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits
theft when he:
      1.   Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows or is aware of,
or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner, and
      2.   Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the
owner, and
      3.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property.
   (C)   A person commits theft from a coin operated machine when he knowingly
and without authority and with intent to commit a theft from such machine,
opens, breaks into, tampers with, or damages a coin operated machine.
As used hereinabove, the term "coin operated machine" shall include any
automatic vending machine or any part thereof, parking meter, coin telephone,
coin laundry machine, coin dry cleaning machine, amusement machine, music
machine, vending machine dispensing goods or services, money changer.
   (D)   It shall be prima facie evidence that a person "knowingly obtains or
exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner" when a lessee of the
personal property of another fails to return it to the owner within thirty (30)
days after written demand from the owner for its return. A notice in writing,
given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, addressed and mailed, by
registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by him and shown on the
leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand.
   (E)   It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the offender
has an interest therein, when the owner also has an interest to which the
offender is not entitled. (Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001)
9-4-31: LASER POINTERS:
   (A)   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed herein:
      LASER POINTER: Any device that emits light amplified by the stimulated
emission of radiation or other energy that is visible to the human eye.
      PERSON: Any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, organization
or other legal entity.
      PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, including, but not limited to, any street, highway,
sidewalk, right of way, parking lot, plaza, place of amusement, park,
playground, restaurant and any hallway, lobby and other portion of an
apartment, condominium, townhouse, or hotel building or complex not
constituting a room or dwelling designated for actual residence.
      SCHOOL PREMISES: Any building, grounds, or facilities, or any portion
thereof, owned, occupied by, or under the custody or control of public or
private institutions for the primary purpose of providing educational or
recreational instruction to students, and any vehicles owned, operated or
leased by or on behalf of such institutions that are used to transport such
students or the personnel of such institutions.
   (B)   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell or offer to give
or sell a laser pointer to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to purchase a laser pointer.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to possess a laser pointer while upon school premises; provided, however,
that nothing in this section shall preclude the temporary transfer on school
premises of a laser pointer to, or possession of a laser pointer on school
premises by, a person under the age of eighteen (18) years for a valid
instructional, school related or employment purpose, where such laser pointer
is provided by the school and used under the supervision of a school staff
person, other authorized instructor, employee or employer's agent.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to possess a laser pointer in any public place; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall preclude the temporary transfer in a public place
of a laser pointer from an employer to, or possession in a public place of an
employer's laser pointer by, a person under the age of eighteen (18) years,
during such person's hours of employment, for a valid employment purpose, where
such employer's laser pointer is used under the supervision of the employer or
employer's agent.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to direct light from a laser
pointer so as to cause a laser beam, sight or "dot" to be placed upon any
person, building, vehicle, or other object.
   (C)   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal
guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any child, of which he or she may be the
parent or legal guardian, to violate any provision of this section.
   (D)   Exemptions: The following persons are exempt from the provisions of
this section:
      1.   Persons eighteen (18) years of age and older who use such laser
pointers to conduct educational or instructional presentations.
      2.   Survey, construction, and medical workers eighteen (18) years of age
and older who require such laser pointers to perform their job tasks.
      3.   Law enforcement officers who may use laser sighting devices and
laser equipped firearms in the performance of their duties.
   (E)   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
(Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 5
LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Declaration
9-5-3: Curfew Authorized
9-5-4: Orders Authorized
9-5-5: Duration
9-5-6: Notice
9-5-7: Violations
9-5-8: Effect On Other Ordinances
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
           A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or
           motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises
CURFEW:    within the corporate limits of the village except officials of any governmental
           unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil
           emergency.
           A.   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
           violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute
           by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law; or
           B.   Any natural disaster, epidemic, or man-made calamity, including outbreak of
EMERGENCY: disease, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion, or
           eminent threat of any of those events within the corporate limits of the
           village, resulting in or threatening the death or injury of persons or the
           destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
           taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 273, 7-2-1968;
           amd. 1979 Code; Ord. 2020-4865, 4-6-2020)
 
9-5-2: DECLARATION:
Whenever an emergency, as defined in section
9-5-1 exists, the mayor is authorized to declare the existence of a local state
of emergency by means of a written declaration of the mayor, under oath,
setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency, describing the nature
of the emergency and declaring that a local state of emergency exists in
accordance with the definitions set forth in this section. This declaration
must be filed with the municipal clerk as soon as practicable after issuance.
(Ord. 89-1874, 7-24-1989; amd. Ord. 2020-4865, 4-6-2020)
9-5-3: CURFEW AUTHORIZED:
After proclamation of a local state of emergency by the mayor, he or she may
order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or
to the village as a whole, as he or she deems reasonable and advisable, and
applicable during such hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary
in the interest of the public safety and welfare. (Ord. 273, 7-2-1968; amd.
1979 Code; Ord. 2020-4865, 4-6-2020)
9-5-4: ORDERS AUTHORIZED:
After the proclamation of a local state of emergency, the mayor may also, in
the interest of public safety and welfare, and to address the issues caused or
threatened by the emergency, may take any or all of the following actions by
executive order during the state of emergency:
   (A)   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency;
   (B)   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the village for the
purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality; and
   (C)   In the event the local state of emergency extends beyond the current
fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the mayor shall be
authorized to approve new spending by the village during the existence of the
local state of emergency. (Ord. 2020-4865, 4-6-2020)
9-5-5: DURATION:
The declaration herein authorized shall be effective for a period of up to
seven (7) days or until the adjournment of the next regular or special meeting
of the village board, whichever comes first, unless sooner terminated by a
proclamation of the mayor, or his or her interim emergency successor,
indicating that the local state of emergency no longer exists. The declaration
of civil emergency shall expire and automatically terminate, if not extended by
the village board of trustees, seven (7) days after the declaration is issued.
(Ord. 273, 7-2-1968; amd. 1979 Code; Ord. 2020-4865, 4-6-2020)
9-5-6: NOTICE:
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the municipal clerk shall
notify the news media situated within the village, and shall cause at least
four (4) copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency
and any curfew to be posted at the village hall, the police station, and in the
area of any curfew. (Ord. 273, 7-2-1968; amd. 1979 Code; Ord. 2020-4865, 4-6-
2020)
9-5-7: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating the provisions of this section or executive orders issued
pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense against the village and shall be
punished as provided by section
1-4-1 of the village code. (Ord. 2020-4865, 4-6-2020)
9-5-8: EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES:
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to impair the powers
contained in this code, giving powers to the police department and fire
district, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in
effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the village. (Ord. 2020-
4865, 4-6-2020)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-6-1: Definitions
9-6-2: Prohibited Acts
9-6-3: Notice Of Required Disposal
9-6-4: Impounding
9-6-5: Penalty
9-6-6: Exceptions
9-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle
incapable of being driven in its condition; or any vehicle that has not been
moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently
deserted.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or
in which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle
which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own
motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
JUNKED VEHICLES: Any vehicle which is without current, valid license and
registration, or is in a wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable
or abandoned condition.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject to
exemption from registration excepting however, bicycles, snowmobiles and
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind. (Ord. 251, 12-5-1967; amd. Ord. 84-1187, 3-6-1984;
Ord. 88-1744, 11-7-1988)
9-6-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   (A)   Inoperable Vehicles Declared Nuisance: Inoperable motor vehicles as
defined herein, whether on public or private property, and in view of the
general public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. However, nothing in this
section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when
not in use or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged
in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. (Ord. 88-1744, 11-7-1988)
   (B)   Abandonment Of Vehicles: No person shall abandon any motor vehicle
within the village and no person shall leave any motor vehicle at any place
within the village for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such
vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. (Ord. 251, 12-5-1967)
   (C)   Keeping Of Junked Vehicles: No person shall keep any junked vehicle as
defined herein on any property located within an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-
4 residential district of the village unless the property is licensed for such
use or unless the vehicle is kept within an enclosed structure. A "structure"
shall be that as defined in the building code of the village 1 . (Ord. 88-1744,
11-7-1988)
   (D)   Leaving Of Wrecked, Nonoperating Vehicles On Street: No person shall
leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any
street or highway in the village. (Ord. 251, 12-5-1967)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-1-1 of this code.
9-6-3: NOTICE OF REQUIRED DISPOSAL:
All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicles under
their control upon written notice received from the corporate authorities or
from the chief of police or any member of the police department commanding such
disposition of said inoperable motor vehicle. (Ord. 251, 12-5-1967)
9-6-4: IMPOUNDING:
The chief of police or any member of the police department designated by him is
hereby authorized to remove or have removed any motor vehicle left at any place
within the village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter
or which reasonably appears to be lost, stolen, or unclaimed, or which is an
"inoperable vehicle", as defined herein, or as defined in the Lisle police
department rules and regulation manual. Such vehicle shall be impounded in
accordance with the Lisle police department rules and regulations manual until
lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4-201 et seq., and in accordance with the Lisle police department
rules and regulations manual. (Ord. 84-1187, 3-6-1984)
9-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for: a first offense, a second offense, a third offense, the fourth
offense or any offense thereafter. Further, a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-6-6: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter concerning licensing and storage shall not apply
to temporary storage of corporately owned automobiles which have been legally
operated by the owner's employees, while such vehicles are awaiting transport
to a legal storage site and only under the following conditions:
   (A)   No more than fifteen (15) such automobiles shall be permitted to be
stored on a parcel at any time; and
   (B)   The automobiles must be parked on a paved lot which meets village code
standards and specifications; and
   (C)   This exception shall only apply to the O-R office- research zoning
district; and
   (D)   The storage shall not exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 95-2680, 8-21-
1995)
CHAPTER 7
FAIR HOUSING 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-4636, 3-21-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 17 of this code.
CHAPTER 8
BURGLAR AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Definitions
9-8-2: Automatic Protection Devices
9-8-3: Signaling Devices
9-8-4: Testing Equipment
9-8-5: Permits And Registration
9-8-6: False Alarms
9-8-7: Liability Of Village Limited
9-8-8: Enforcement
9-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER: Any person, firm or corporation that sells, leases or
installs signaling devices which transmit alarms upon receipt of a stimulus
from a detection apparatus.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE: An electrically operated instrument which
automatically sends a voice alarm over regular public telephone lines upon
detection of a fire or unauthorized intrusion.
FALSE ALARM: A visual and/or audible signal transmitted by a signaling device
which indicates the existence of an emergency situation when in fact no such
emergency situation exists.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
PROTECTED PREMISES: The contiguous area protected by a single alarm system and
under common ownership and use.
SIGNAL LINES: A line not connected to any standard telephone equipment which
leads into an indicator panel in the communications center of the police
department or to such a panel in either a central station protective system or
a modified central station and which is designed to transmit electrically an
alarm signal readily identifiable as to the location or origin.
SIGNALING DEVICE: An electrically operated instrument which sends,
automatically, visual and/or audible signals over a signal line to be
registered by indicators at a monitor panel at the receiving terminal.
Signaling devices may be one of two (2) types: either a system that transmits a
signal directly to the Lisle police department, or a system that transmits a
signal to an independent monitoring company.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle, Illinois. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-2: AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES:
   (A)   No automatic protection device shall be installed after the effective
date hereof by any person or premises of any kind in the village.
   (B)   Within ninety (90) days after the effective date hereof, all automatic
protection devices in the village shall be disconnected. The owner or lessee of
any such device shall be responsible for the disconnecting of it.
   (C)   After the effective date hereof, no one except an alarm equipment
supplier who has received written approval from the chief of police as required
by this chapter, shall install any automatic protection device in the village.
(Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-3: SIGNALING DEVICES:
   (A)   Monitoring System: The village police department is authorized to
contract for the installation of a uniform monitoring system to receive visual
and/or audible signals over a signal line or lines at a central location. This
system shall have a capacity of nine hundred ninety nine (999) terminals and
shall be available to any subscriber who meets the requirements for a permit
for connection.
   (B)   Financial Institutions: Any financial institution that is required by
regulations of federal supervisory agencies issued pursuant to the bank
protection act of 1968 to have an appropriate device for notifying the police
department that a burglary or robbery has occurred or is in progress, may
arrange to have the particular signaling device installed so as to operate
pursuant to approval by the chief of police.
   (C)   Standards: All signaling devices shall be in compliance with the
standards set by the National Fire Protection Association. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-
16-1992)
9-8-4: TESTING EQUIPMENT:
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of a signaling device
designed to make direct connection with headquarters of the police department,
without first obtaining permission from the chief of police. Where the
equipment to be tested or demonstrated is keyed to an intermediary, such
permission is not required unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed to the
police department. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-5: PERMITS AND REGISTRATION:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person or alarm equipment supplier shall cause a
signaling device to be connected to the Lisle police department monitoring
system without a valid alarm system permit. Any person or alarm equipment
supplier who operates or causes to be operated an alarm system which was
connected to the police department monitoring system and who has paid a fee for
said hookup shall be exempt from the initial permit fee, but shall obtain a
valid alarm system permit within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this
chapter.
   (B)   Application For Permit:
      1.   Applications for permits to install, maintain and operate a
signaling device connected to the police department monitoring system shall be
filed with the chief of police on forms supplied by the village, with the
applicable fee.
      2.   Said application shall contain the name, address and telephone
number of both the installer and the person or business on whose premises the
system was or is to be installed, as well as a description of the system and
location where the system is or is proposed to be installed. In the case of
business applicants, the application shall also include the name, address and
telephone number of one additional individual who shall be responsible for and
who has agreed to receive notification of an alarm at any time, and who agrees
to grant access to the premises and deactivate the alarm system if requested to
do so by fire or police personnel, and shall indicate the location of at least
one point of secondary access to the premises.
      3.   The chief of police shall approve such application if he finds that:
         (a)   The use of said signaling device to transmit a signal, message
or warning to a designated village police department telephone line will not
interfere with the orderly conduct of municipal business;
         (b)   The alarm equipment supplier installing the system maintains a
service organization capable of promptly and effectively repairing, maintaining
and otherwise servicing the signaling device sold or leased by him; and
         (c)   The signaling device is in compliance with all state and federal
regulations.
   (C)   Registration Required: All other alarm systems, other than those which
require a permit for connection to the police department monitoring system,
shall be registered with the police department. Registration is required at the
time that an alarm equipment supplier completes installation and activation of
a system, at all protected premises within the village. Any person wishing to
operate or cause to be operated an alarm system which was installed prior to
the effective date of this section must register said system within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-
1992)
   (D)   Registration Process:
      1.   Alarm systems not otherwise requiring permits shall be registered
with the village. Residential alarms shall be registered on forms supplied by
the police department. Business alarm systems shall be registered on the
business registration form supplied by the village of Lisle business office.
(Ord. 2010-4318, 5-3-2010)
      2.   Said registration shall contain the name, address and telephone
number of both the installer and the person or business on whose premises the
system was or is to be installed, as well as a description of the system and
location where the system is or is proposed to be installed. In the case of
business applicants, the application shall also include the name, address and
telephone number of one additional individual who shall be responsible for and
who has agreed to receive notification of an alarm at any time, and who agrees
to grant access to the premises and deactivate the alarm system if requested to
do so by fire or police personnel, and shall indicate the location of at least
one point of secondary access to the premises.
      3.   Information as outlined above for both permits and registrations
shall be updated as needed by the permit holder or registrant, but at least
annually.
      4.   No local alarm which is audible beyond the premises being served
shall be installed or maintained within the village without registration.
Audible type alarms which emit a sound intensity of greater than sixty five
(65) decibels at any location outside the protected premises are prohibited. No
such alarm may be installed or maintained unless it shall be controlled by an
automatic timing device after a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
(Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-6: FALSE ALARMS:
   (A)   Responsibility: Each person holding a permit or registration for the
operation or maintenance of a signaling device shall be strictly liable for any
false alarm transmitted by the device which the permit holder operates or
maintains.
   (B)   False Alarms: Whenever the village police department or fire
department responds to a signaling device, a member of the responding
department shall inspect the protected premises and shall determine whether the
response was caused by a false alarm. If the responding department member
determines the alarm to be false, a report of the false alarm shall be
forwarded to the chief of police who shall maintain a record of all false
alarms so transmitted.
   (C)   Exceptions: False alarms shall not include alarms activated by the
following:
      1.   Attempted or actual criminal activity or forcible or unauthorized
entry;
      2.   Structural damage to the protected premises due to earthquake, high
winds, lightning or flooding caused by the overflow of natural drainage;
      3.   Telephone line malfunction;
      4.   Electrical service interruption; and
      5.   System malfunction within thirty (30) days of a new installation or
modification of an existing system; provided, that the chief of police has
received prior notice of the work performed. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-7: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE LIMITED:
The village assumes no liability for any defects in operation of signal device
systems for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an
alarm from such a source, nor for the failure or neglect of any person in
connection with the installation and operation of equipment, the transmission
of alarm signals and prerecorded alarm messages or the relaying of such signals
and messages. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   False Alarm Charges:
      1.   To reimburse the costs of responding to false alarms, the permit
holder or registrant shall pay to the village, for each false alarm in excess
of three (3) in any calendar year, the amounts as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
      2.   A false alarm charge shall be payable to the village within thirty
(30) days of invoice. The permit holder or registrant shall be strictly liable
for all false alarms on the premises, and shall be responsible for the timely
payment of all false alarm charges.
   (B)   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit; Disconnection:
      1.   Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the chief of police for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any
other applicable ordinance or statute; and
         (b)   The failure to pay fees and changes as required by this section.
      2.   Once a permit is revoked, the chief of police may order the
disconnection from police department signal lines of an alarm system for the
premises subject to the previously revoked permit. The disconnection may be
ordered and may take place without further notice to the permit holder.
      3.   In addition to any fees or charges prescribed by this chapter, any
permit holder or registrant convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter may be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. All remedies provided by this chapter shall be
cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the village shall not bar the
use of any other remedy.
(Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992; amd. Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; Ord. 2010-4317, 5-3-
2021; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 9
MOTOR VEHICLE TOWS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Definitions
9-9-2: Application For Tow List
9-9-3: Investigation And Approval
9-9-4: Insurance
9-9-5: Duties And Requirements Of Tow Operators On Tow List
9-9-6: Collection Of Costs; Village Payments; Inspection Of Records
9-9-7: Operation Of Tow List
9-9-8: Tow Trucks For Semitractor Trailer Vehicles
9-9-9: Suspension Or Removal From Tow List
9-9-10: Services
9-9-11: Solicitation Of Business
9-9-12: Tow Truck Operation
9-9-13: Storage Facility
9-9-14: Tow Operator Personnel Qualifications
9-9-15: Violation And Penalty
9-9-16: Amendment Or Termination Of Tow Procedure And Tow List
9-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
ANNUAL FEE ORDINANCE:
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
EXTENDED SERVICE: Any tow which required the operator to perform services
beyond those required in a "normal tow". For the purpose of this definition a
"normal tow" is a tow where the vehicle's wheels are on the ground and the
vehicle may be readily towed.
HEAVY DUTY: Involving vehicles forty thousand (40,000) GVWR or heavier.
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE: 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
LIGHT DUTY: Involving vehicles up to, but not including, twelve thousand
(12,000) GVWR.
MEDIUM DUTY: Involving vehicles from twelve thousand (12,000) up to, but not
including, forty thousand (40,000) GVWR.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The village of Lisle police department.
TOW LIST: The most current list maintained by the Lisle police department
containing the names of those tow operators approved by the chief of police to
respond to requests by the Lisle police department dispatcher for the towing of
vehicles which are disabled where the person in charge of the vehicle has no
preference for any particular tow service or is unable to make such a decision.
The list shall also be utilized: a) to tow village owned vehicles in need of
service to a location designated by the police department; and b) to tow
vehicles impounded by the police department for evidentiary reasons.
TOW OPERATOR: A person or firm engaged in the business of, or offering the
services of, vehicle towing whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or
otherwise removed from one place to another by use of a tow truck, and which
person or firm is listed on the tow list.
UPRIGHTING: Bringing a vehicle that is either overturned or on its side to the
upright position in tow.
WINCHING: Bringing a vehicle that is completely off of the road surface onto
the road surface for the purpose of towing. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009; amd.
Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-9-2: APPLICATION FOR TOW LIST:
Any person desiring to perform towing work for the village must submit a
completed and correct "application form G" to the police department. After the
list is established, an operator must submit a current certificate of insurance
each year by May 1. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-3: INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL:
After receiving an application for towing the police department will conduct an
investigation to determine the truth and accuracy of the information contained
in the application. Additionally, towing equipment will be inspected by the
police department yearly. Upon completion of its investigation, the tow
operator will either be placed on the primary or secondary tow list or notified
in writing that the application has not been approved. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-
2009)
9-9-4: INSURANCE:
The tow operator must maintain, at its sole cost and expense, general liability
insurance with umbrella liability coverage as follows:
   (A)   Comprehensive General Liability: Must include the following industry
standard forms of insurance:
      1.   Premises/operation coverage;
      2.   Products and completed operations coverage;
      3.   Blanket contractual liability;
      4.   An amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for combined single limit or bodily injury and property damage.
   (B)   Comprehensive Auto Liability: Must include the following endorsements:
      1.   All owned autos, hired car coverage, and employers nonowned auto
coverage;
      2.   The policy shall not contain a radius restriction of less than fifty
(50) miles;
      3.   Hook liability in an amount as established by Title 1, Chapter 20,
“Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”.
   (C)   Garage Keepers' Legal Liability Or Motor Truck Cargo: The vendor shall
provide coverage for the vehicles in their custody. Either a motor truck cargo
policy, listing all storage lots as terminal locations, or garage keepers'
legal liability shall be required. The minimum amount of coverage shall be as
established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and
Regulatory Measures”.
   (D)   Workers' Compensation And Employers' Liability: Statutory limits for
workers' compensation and an amount as established by Title 1, Chapter 20,
“Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures” for employers'
liability limit.
All such insurance must be in amounts as established by Title 1, Chapter 20,
“Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”. The village must
be named as an additional insured under all such policies and the policies must
contain a provision that the insurance shall not be canceled without giving the
village at least thirty (30) days' notice of cancellation or material change.
All insurance policies must cover the operator, its carriers, agents and
subcontractors and be maintained in full force, at all times while on the tow
list.
No tow operator will be placed on the tow list unless and until it provides a
certificate of insurance conforming to the requirements of this section. (Ord.
2009-4263, 7-20-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-9-5: DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF TOW OPERATORS ON TOW LIST:
   (A)   The tow operator is responsible for providing a secured lot where
towed vehicles are stored, with an office at that location and staffed during
reasonable business hours. The storage lot shall be located within five (5)
miles of the village limits.
   (B)   All tow trucks must be equipped with warning lights and all other
equipment required by state law including, without limitation, one or more
brooms and shovels, oil-dry chemical, one or more trash cans at least eighteen
inches (18") in height, and one fire extinguisher of a dry chemical or carbon
dioxide type with an aggregate rating of at least 4B.C units and bearing the
approval of a laboratory qualified by the division of fire prevention for this
purpose; and have working two-way communication equipment on the same
commercial frequency as the base station located at the point where calls are
received. All tow trucks must carry dollies at all times and must be equipped
to safely transport motorcycles.
   (C)   The tow operator must possess a valid certification from the Illinois
commerce commission.
   (D)   Each tow operator will provide twenty four (24) hour per day service
each day of the year. There must be an attendant or answering service on duty
at all times for the purpose of receiving calls, and there must be a person on
call at all times for the purpose of releasing stored vehicles or for receiving
vehicles.
   (E)   The tow operator will be required to sign an indemnification
agreement, acceptable in form and substance to the village attorney, to
indemnify, save and hold the village harmless from any liability for injuries
or damages to any person or property by vehicles being towed or stored. No tow
operator will be added to the tow list unless and until a signed original of
the indemnity agreement is delivered to the police department.
   (F)   Tow operators will permit vehicle owners to remove personal property
from vehicles stored at their facility during business hours at no charge.
(Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-6: COLLECTION OF COSTS; VILLAGE PAYMENTS; INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, collection of towing and storage
charges from the owner or driver of the towed vehicle will be the sole
responsibility of the tow operator or his employee. The village will only be
responsible for paying towing fees to a towing operator listed on the tow list
where the vehicle in question is: a) village owned, or b) is a lawfully seized
vehicle, after forfeiture has been approved by a court, pursuant to the
provision of the Illinois vehicle code, or c) an abandoned vehicle that remains
unclaimed and may be disposed of as junk, pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois vehicle code. In no event will the village be responsible for any
storage costs for any abandoned vehicle, as that term is defined in the
Illinois vehicle code.
All tow operators on the tow list must maintain complete records and a system
of releasing vehicles that assures vehicles are released only to the proper
owner, or authorized person. All records involving towing from the tow list
will be open to the police department for inspection during normal business
hours or at such time as there is existing dispute concerning the amount or
validity of any towing or storage charges. In addition, all tow operators must
use receipt forms of a type and manner specified by the police department.
(Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-7: OPERATION OF TOW LIST:
The police department will contact tow operators for service in the order of
the tow list, with the position on the tow list being determined by the order
of approval of each tow operator in accordance with this chapter. In no event
will the police department call any towing service not on the tow list unless
all tow operators are unavailable. It is specifically permitted for the police
department to call a tow operator out of sequence in a life threatening
emergency where there is an urgent need for services of a tow operator located
in the near proximity of the event requiring service or where the estimated
response time makes it more practical to do so. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-8: TOW TRUCKS FOR SEMITRACTOR TRAILER VEHICLES:
A separate tow list of tow operators capable of towing semitractor trailer
vehicles will be maintained and will operate in accordance with section
9-9-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-9: SUSPENSION OR REMOVAL FROM TOW LIST:
   (A)   Power Of Chief Of Police: The chief of police may suspend or remove
any tow operator from the tow list when he finds one or more of the following:
      1.   Placement on the list was secured by fraud or concealment of a
material fact, that if known would have caused disapproval of the application;
or
      2.   The tow operator has violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
or
      3.   The service provided by the tow operator has been substantially
inadequate, because of one or more of the following reasons:
         (a)   Failing to be available for or not accepting calls,
         (b)   Slow response time,
         (c)   Excessive damage claims,
         (d)   Repeated complaints from citizens, or
         (e)   Inadequate or substandard towing equipment.
   The chief of police will provide written notice to the tow operator of a
suspension or removal from the tow list. The notice will specify the reason for
the suspension or removal and, in the event of a suspension, the actions
required by the tow operator for reinstatement on the tow list.
   (B)   Immediate Suspension Or Removal: If the chief of police determines
that a tow operator presents an immediate threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the village, or if the tow operator has not provided proof of valid
and current insurance in the amounts required by this chapter, the chief of
police may, in his sole and absolute discretion, and without prior notice,
suspend or remove the tow operator from the tow list.
   (C)   Appeals: Any suspended or removed tow operator may appeal the chief of
police's decision in writing to the village manager. Any such appeal must
specify the factual bases that warrant reconsideration of the chief of police's
decision or other facts showing that the chief of police's decision was made in
error. All decisions of the village manager will be final. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-
20-2009)
9-9-10: SERVICES:
The following services must be provided by every tow operator:
General towing (hook or flatbed):
Light duty vehicle tow
Medium duty vehicle tow
Heavy duty vehicle tow
Medium duty extended service tow
Heavy duty extended service tow
Service call (lockout, vehicle starting, tire changing, out of gas)
Winching/uprighting vehicle:
First half hour
Each additional half hour
Standby:
Light duty tow per half hour after first half hour on scene
Each additional half hour
Medium and heavy duty per truck
Storage:
For first 24 hours
After 24 hours:
Light duty
Light duty after hours release
Light duty inside storage
Medium and heavy duty
Medium and heavy duty inside storage
Mileage:
Within village limits or to storage facility designated on application
To storage facility other than as designated on application:
First 10 miles
Light duty
Medium and heavy duty vehicles
Extra manpower for offloading, etc.:
Medium and heavy duty vehicles
 
Every tow operator on the tow list will have a placard posted in the cab of the
tow vehicle at all times that completely corresponds to the list set forth in
this section and the fees for such services, which fees will be established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, if, in the
sole and absolute opinion of a police officer at the scene, special or unusual
circumstances require an exceptional amount of extra work or equipment, the tow
operator may charge an additional reasonable fee; provided, however, that the
owner or operator of the vehicle to be serviced, if available, is first
informed of any such additional reasonable fee. In the event that the owner or
operator is not available, the fees for services shall be as established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-9-11: SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS:
No tow operator may respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the
purpose of towing vehicles unless called there by the police department or
persons involved in the accident or emergency. Tow operators responding to an
accident or emergency at the request of a person other than a police officer,
must record the name and address of the person and make such information
available to the police department upon request.
This section is intended only to prohibit the soliciting of business at the
scene of accidents and emergencies, and will not be construed to prohibit any
tow operator from contracting with any person. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-12: TOW TRUCK OPERATION:
   (A)   Every tow operator or driver of a tow truck will remove or cause to be
removed all glass and debris deposited on any street or highway by the disabled
vehicle being serviced, and will, in addition, spread oil-dry upon that portion
of any street or highway where oil or grease has been deposited by the disabled
vehicle being serviced. No fees for this service will be charged unless the
spill requires special handling for removal.
   (B)   No tow operator or driver of a tow truck will respond to a call for
service while under the influence of intoxicants.
   (C)   Towed vehicles will be taken to the location designated by the vehicle
owner, driver or agent, should the person not wish to store the vehicle at the
tow operator's facility; provided, however, that vehicles towed upon the
direction of the police department will be towed to such a place as designated
by the police officer in charge at the scene.
   (D)   When a tow operator tows a vehicle pursuant to a DUI arrest, the tow
operator will hold that vehicle in storage for six (6) hours and may only then
release the vehicle to the owner.
   (E)   When a tow operator tows a vehicle pursuant to a driving while license
suspended (DWLS) or driving while licensed revoked (DWLR) arrest, the vehicle
cannot be released until the registered owner shows proof of insurance for the
vehicle towed and in such cases may only be released to the owner's agent who
must submit proof of a valid and current state of Illinois driver's license.
   (F)   Once notified of a tow, the tow operator will provide the police
department an approximate time it will take to arrive at the scene of a tow. If
a tow operator is unable to respond to a tow request within twenty (20)
minutes, the tow operator or his employee will advise the police department
that he is not available. The tow operator will be marked unavailable. The
police dispatcher will then call the next tow operator on the list. (Ord. 2009-
4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-13: STORAGE FACILITY:
Each tow operator will maintain a secure storage facility where all towed
vehicles can be safely stored. A storage lot must be enclosed by a fence not
less than six feet (6') in height and have a locked gate and a storage building
must be fully enclosed and secured. All storage facilities must meet all zoning
and fire ordinances and restrictions. When instructed by the police department
that a vehicle in storage must be secured from tampering, the operator must
store the vehicle so that it is not accessible to any person except upon
specific approval of the tow operator or his agent. A clearance of twenty four
inches (24") must be maintained around all vehicles from the tow list calls.
(Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-14: TOW OPERATOR PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person who has been convicted under the laws of the state of Illinois or
any other state of an offense which under the laws of the state of Illinois
would be a felony theft of a vehicle or a felony offense under the Illinois
vehicle code, will not be approved as a tow operator, nor will any tow operator
knowingly permit such a person to operate a tow truck on the tow list calls.
Each tow operator must furnish to the police department a complete and current
list of all drivers who may respond to tow list calls. No driver will be
permitted to respond to any tow list call unless his name, date of birth and
driver's license number have been furnished to the police department at least
twenty four (24) hours in advance by the tow operator on forms provided by the
police department. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-15: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter will, upon
conviction thereof, be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
9-9-16: AMENDMENT OR TERMINATION OF TOW PROCEDURE AND TOW LIST:
The village reserves the right to amend or terminate this chapter unilaterally
at any time without any notice and without recourse. Any amendment to this
chapter will apply to all current tow operators. The termination of this
chapter will automatically terminate the most current tow list. (Ord. 2009-
4263, 7-20-2009)
CHAPTER 10
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AT LISLE COMMUTER STATION AND DOWNTOWN AREA
SECTION:
9-10-1: Definitions
9-10-2: Prohibited Activities
9-10-3: Penalty
9-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
COMMUTER FACILITIES: The platform, station and shelter areas, sidewalks and
steps in, on and around the Lisle commuter train station lying north of Front
Street, south of Burlington Avenue, east of Main Street and west of a line
extending north from the north end of Columbia Avenue and intersecting the
Burlington Northern Railroad right of way.
COMMUTER PARKING LOTS AND DRIVEWAYS: Those areas defined as lots A, B, C, D, E,
and G in section
10-4-2 of this code.
DOWNTOWN AREA: Area defined in section
1-3-2 of this code.
MOTOR VEHICLES: A machine propelled by mechanical power designed to travel
along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and used to
transport person(s) or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, motorized bicycles,
tractors and wagons.
ROLLER SKATES: Devices worn on the feet with a combination of wheels, either
in-line or otherwise, which are propelled by human power.
SCOOTERS: Devices with two (2) or more wheels connected by a platform with a
steering handle or wheel which are designed for standing on and which are
propelled by human power.
SKATEBOARDS: Devices with a combination of wheels connected by a platform
designed for standing on and which are propelled by human power.
UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle without current and valid license and
registration, whether or not the vehicle is required to have such license or
registration. (Ord. 2008-4187, 3-17-2008; amd. Ord. 2009-4241, 1-12-2009; Ord.
2016-4623, 1-4-2016)
9-10-2: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   (A)   No motor vehicles, skateboards, roller skates or scooters shall be
used, operated or propelled in any way upon the commuter facilities, except
those vehicles owned and operated by the village or those used by a disabled or
handicapped individual for access to or from a train.
   (B)   No unlicensed motor vehicles, skateboards, roller skates or scooters
shall be used, operated or propelled in any way upon the commuter parking lots
and driveways.
   (C)   No motor vehicles, skateboards, roller skates or scooters shall be
used or operated in any way upon sidewalks, curbs, walls, railings, borders,
tables, benches or chairs on any public property within the downtown area
except those vehicles owned by the village or those lawfully used by a disabled
or handicapped individual. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this
subsection shall prohibit the use or operation of skateboards, roller skates or
scooters upon any street in the downtown area, or upon any sidewalk immediately
adjacent to and abutting a residentially zoned property within the defined
downtown area, nor shall anything in this subsection prohibit the carrying of
skateboards, roller skates, or scooters in the downtown area. (Ord. 2009-4241,
1-12-2009)
9-10-3: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. The procedure set forth in section
9-4-22 of this title may be used to settle and compromise a violation. Fines
for such settlements shall be as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees,
Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”. (Ord. 2008-4187, 3-17-
2008; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
TITLE 10
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Speed Limits
10-1-2: Operation Of Vehicles Restricted
10-1-3: School Crossings
10-1-4: School Crossing Guards
10-1-5: School Buses, Meeting Or Overtaking
10-1-6: Vehicle Weights, Limited Load Streets
10-1-6A: Permit Required For Overweight And Overdimension Vehicles
10-1-7: Driving On Sidewalks, Other Village Property
10-1-8: Driving On Public Or Private Property
10-1-9: Pedestrian Crosswalks
10-1-10: Illinois Vehicle Code Adoption
10-1-11: Temporary Parking Restrictions
10-1-12: Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System
10-1-13: Tow And Impoundment Of Motor Vehicles
10-1-1: SPEED LIMITS:
The chief of police recommends that certain speed limits be established on
streets within the corporate limits of the village, and said speed limits are
therefore hereby set: (Ord. 636, 5-18-1976)
   (A)   It is hereby determined that the reasonable and safe absolute maximum
speed is twenty five (25) miles per hour, and the maximum speed limit of twenty
five (25) miles per hour is hereby set for all portions of all village streets
within the corporate limits unless otherwise specified in subsection (B), (C),
or (D) of this section. (Ord. 2008-4233, 11-17-2008)
   (B)   Further, the speed limits for the following streets and alleys, or
portions thereof, are hereby set as follows: (Ord. 95-2703, 11-6-1995)
1. Main Street between Route 53 and Division Street                      30 mph
2. Main Street between Southport Avenue and Warrenville Road             30 mph
3. Main Street between Division Street and Southport Avenue              20 mph
4. College Road within the corporate limits of the village               40 mph
5. That alley located along the west property lines of 4712 through 4760 15 mph
Main Street
6. Leask Lane between Warrenville Road and the corporate limits of the   30 mph
village
7. Benedictine Parkway                                                   30 mph
8. School Street between Center Avenue and Main Street                   20 mph
 
(Ord. 2008-4233, 11-17-2008)
   (C)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of that
permitted by statutes of the state, while traveling through a special school
speed zone. (Ord. 89-2003, 11-6-1989)
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the above, the maximum speed limit of twenty
(20) miles per hour is hereby set for those streets listed as follows:
      Ashford Court
      Holly Court
      Kindling Court
      Navistar Circle
      Parksleg Court
      Pruthmore Court
      Stonehaven Way
      Trowbridge Way
      Woodbriar Court
   Appropriate signs giving notice of the limits set herein shall be erected in
accordance with the standards set forth in the state of Illinois "Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways".
   Any person violating any of the speed limits set by this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as provided in
the applicable statutes of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2011-4414, 11-7-2011)
10-1-2: OPERATION OF VEHICLES RESTRICTED:
No person shall operate any motor vehicle in the village unless such motor
vehicle is muffled to the maximum extent practicable so as to prevent
unnecessary noise, and further, no person shall operate any motor vehicle in
the village so as to cause unnecessary noise by rapid acceleration or
deceleration of the vehicle, or by racing of the engine or by squealing or
screeching of the tires on pavement 1 .
Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a
fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  9-4-14(A) of this code.
10-1-3: SCHOOL CROSSINGS:
Permanently mounted automatic school crossing stop signs shall be installed at
the locations hereinafter specified and all said signals shall bear red and
amber lenses and signs marked "School Crossing" and "Stop on Red Signal". After
said signals are installed, they shall be placed in operation during regularly
scheduled school crossing periods only and shall not be operated outside of
such periods.
When said signs are in operation, all pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall
stop on the red signal and obey the flashing indications and signs on said
signals, and any person who shall fail to obey said signals shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense.
   (A)   A school crossing sign, S 201, as listed in the "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways", state of Illinois department
of transportation, shall be placed and a crosswalk designated at the following
areas:
      Kingston Avenue north of Division
      Kingston Avenue opposite Schiesher School
      Middleton Avenue opposite Tate Woods School
   The placement of signs and designations of crosswalks shall be the
responsibility of the street department of the village.
   (B)   The following sign, S 301, as listed in the "Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices For Streets And Highways", state of Illinois department of
transportation, shall be placed in the following locations:
      Division and Kingston; Division eastbound, Kingston southbound and
northbound
      Kingston Avenue; southbound north of Gamble, northbound south of Ohio
      Middleton Avenue and Schwartz; northbound on Schwartz
   These signs shall be placed at a reasonable distance from the affected
schools taking into consideration intersecting streets, driveways and other
appurtenances. The Street Department of the Village shall be responsible for
the placement of these signs. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
10-1-4: SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS:
The Chief of Police shall have the authority, and he is hereby authorized, to
appoint such number of persons as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time
determine, to be known as school crossing guards, which guards, to be eligible
for appointment, shall be a person of not less than twenty one (21) years of
age and shall be of good moral character and in good health.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to assign guards to such
localities and for such periods of time as shall be best suited to afford
protection to those attending schools, and said Chief of Police shall be the
supervisor of the duties of the guards.
Guards shall maintain the orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
consistent with the safety of children attending schools in the Village, and
shall adhere to and be governed by all the rules and regulations of the Police
Department insofar as such rules and regulations are applicable to and
consistent with the special class of duties prescribed for school crossing
guards. Guards shall also comply with all other applicable ordinances, rules
and regulations adopted by the Village.
Said guards shall not be a part of or affiliated with the Village Police
Department in any official capacity except that they shall have and exercise
such limited police powers as may be delegated to them by the Chief of Police,
and the guards may be dismissed by said Chief of Police when he finds such
dismissal to be in the best interest of the Village. The Village Board may also
dismiss any guard for any reason it shall deem sufficient.
Crossing guards shall be paid in accordance with the rate of pay as from time
to time set forth by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. 291, 11-5-1968; amd. 1979
Code)
10-1-5: SCHOOL BUSES, MEETING OR OVERTAKING:
The driver of a vehicle upon any public street or highway within the Village,
upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has
stopped on such street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school children, shall stop said vehicle before reaching said school bus
when there is in operation on said bus a visual signal as specified in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1414.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
10-1-6: VEHICLE WEIGHTS, LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
   (A)   Motor vehicles weighing in excess of five (5) tons are hereby
prohibited from driving upon or using any street listed hereinafter, unless
they qualify as an exemption in subsection (B) of this section:
Street From To
Street              From            To
                                   
Abbeywood Drive     Naper Boulevard Golfview
Benedictine Parkway Maple           Abbeywood
Breckenridge Road   Green Trails    Sun Valley
Burlington Avenue   Yackley         Route 53
Center Avenue       Rolling         Maple
Division Street     Main            Kingston
Front Street        Venture         Easterly corporate
                                    limits
Green Trails Drive  New Albany      Easterly corporate
                                    limits
Hitchcock Avenue    Center          Westview
Kingston Avenue     Front           Maple
Lacey Avenue        Main            Ogden
Lacey Avenue        Yackley         River
Larkspur Lane       Jonquil         Maple
Main Street         Division        Route 53
Middleton Avenue    Center          Ogden
Middleton Avenue    Yender          Schwartz
Ohio Court          Ohio Street     Short Street
Ohio Street         Indiana         Yackley
Plank Road          Radcliff Road   Ogden Avenue
Riedy Road          Main            East corporate limits
Rolling Drive       Route 53        Larkspur
Schwartz Avenue     Middleton       Burlington
Short Street        Ohio Court      Route 53
Short Street        Route 53        Main
Southport Avenue    Main            Lacey
Sun Valley Road     Telluride       Old College
Westview Lane       Hitchcock       Maple
Yender Avenue       Ogden Avenue    Middleton Avenue
Yender Avenue       Western Court   Ogden
 
   (B)   The following vehicles are exempt from this weight limit:
      1.   Emergency vehicles, including, but not limited to, fire district
vehicles, when traveling to or from their destination.
      2.   School buses and public mass transit buses, when engaged in local
service. For the purposes of this section, "local service" is defined as travel
between passenger pick up points and passenger destinations.
      3.   Municipal vehicles, refuse and recycling trucks, and vehicles
operated by private utilities, when actively engaged in service in the local
area.
      4.   Vehicles making deliveries or pick ups on any of the various streets
named in subsection (A) of this section, or vehicles which cannot reach a pick
up or delivery point except by driving upon or using any of said streets, when
no alternate means of ingress or egress is available; in which case these
vehicles must use the shortest direct route between their destination and the
nearest arterial street. For the purposes of this section, "arterial streets"
are defined as Naper Boulevard, Yackley Avenue, College Road, Route 53, I-355,
I-88, Warrenville Road, Ogden Avenue and Maple Avenue.
      5.   Construction vehicles and equipment working on or along any of the
various streets named in subsection (A) of this section, or which cannot
otherwise reach a construction area except by driving upon or using any of the
streets listed in subsection (A) of this section when no alternate means of
ingress or egress is available; in which case these vehicles must use the
shortest direct route between their destination and the nearest arterial
street. For the purposes of this section, arterial streets are defined as Naper
Boulevard, Yackley Avenue, College Road, Route 53, I-355, I-88, Warrenville
Road, Ogden Avenue and Maple Avenue.
   (C)   Any person found to have violated any term or provision of this
section shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 90-2118, 11-19-1990; amd. Ord. 93-2386, 6-7-1993; Ord. 96-
2776, 5-20-1996; Ord. 99-3152, 10-4-1999; Ord. 2019-4829, 6-17-2019; Ord. 2019-
4848, 11-18-2019; Ord. 2021-4895, 3-15-2021; Ord. 2021-4902, 4-19-2021; Ord.
2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
10-1-6A: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OVERWEIGHT AND OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES:
   (A)   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, lessee
or driver to operate or move any vehicle over, upon or across any village road
or highway when the vehicle exceeds any of the limitations and regulations
stated in Illinois Compiled Statutes chapter 625, act 5, sections 15-102
(width), 15-103 (height), 15-107 (length) and 15-111 (weight), as such
limitations and regulations are amended from time to time, without having first
obtained a valid permit to do so from the director of public works.
   (B)   Liability For Damage: The permittee shall assume total liability for
any and all damages to streets, bridges, village owned appurtenances and
private or public property while engaged in a permit movement. The measure of
liability is the cost for all repairs or the cost of replacement of property
damaged beyond repair together with all other expenses incurred by the
authorities in control of the highway structure in providing a temporary
detour, including a temporary structure, to serve the needs of traffic during
the period of repair or replacement of the damaged highway or highway structure
by the permittee.
   (C)   Application For Permit; Authority To Grant And Establish Conditions:
The director of public works shall be empowered to receive, investigate and
determine the propriety of requests to transport or move overweight and
overdimension vehicles over, upon or across village roads and highways, to
require written application therefor, and to issue permits therefor consistent
with the public health, comfort, safety and welfare and the reasonable
preservation of the village roads and highways. The application for and
issuance of a permit shall be in accordance with Illinois Compiled Statutes
chapter 625, act 5, section 15-301, as amended from time to time, and all
movements under the permit shall be made in accordance with all applicable
federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
      1.   Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, firm,
business, or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or
that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement. The permit is
nontransferable and applies only to the permittee. Whenever such driver is not
the owner of such vehicle, object, or contrivance, but is so operating,
driving, or moving the same with the express or implied permission of the
owner, then the owner and driver are jointly and severally liable to the extent
provided herein.
      2.   The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the
permittee and the village that the move described in the application will take
place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report to the
village any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the village or the
permittee before starting any move. Any revisions made at the request of the
permittee for purposes of changing weights, dimensions, routes, or load
description shall be at the discretion of the director of public works.
Undertaking the move is prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit as
issued and its terms.
      3.   The route prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent of
the authority granted by the permit for the use of village roads, and any
vehicle and/or load found to be off route will be considered off route and
without a permit.
      4.   It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself or
herself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move
is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that:
         a.   The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements;
         b.   All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit
shall not be exceeded;
         c.   All operation, registration and license requirements have been
complied with;
         d.   All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal
requirements have been met; and
         e.   The permittee, including its officers, agents, or employees,
assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to persons or to public or
private property, including his or her own, or to the object being transported,
caused directly or indirectly by the transportation or movement of vehicles and
objects authorized under the permit. He or she agrees to hold the village
harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or proceedings of any kind and to
indemnify the village for any claim it may be required to pay arising from the
movement.
      5.   Upon application for a permit(s), the village may require an
applicant to provide evidence of a valid comprehensive general liability
insurance policy for protection against personal injury or property damage, in
the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. The village
shall be named as an additional, noncontributory coinsured on all policies of
insurance. The village shall receive written notice of cancellation or
reduction in coverage of any insurance policy thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date of cancellation or reduction. The permittee will be responsible
for obtaining new insurance coverage in this event. In addition, the permittee
shall carry, at its own expense, at least the following insurance coverage:
         a.   Commercial General Liability Insurance:
            Bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage with limits of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence/two million
dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate.
            Contractual insurance - broad form, with limits of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence/two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) aggregate.
         b.   Business Automobile Liability: One million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and
property damage.
      6.   As a condition of the issuance of any permit, the director of public
works shall have the power to regulate the date, time, route and conditions,
safety equipment and measures to be employed in making any such movement. This
may include the use of Woodridge police department escorts, which shall be
determined by the village based on density of the area and other safety
concerns, at the sole discretion of the village. The expenses for such escort
shall be paid for by the permittee with a one hour minimum charge. The director
of public works shall process all applications within one business day of the
receipt of a complete and proper application. Said applications and permits
shall be made and granted upon such forms as the director of public works may,
from time to time, reasonably provide.
         The permits issued under this section constitute the grant of a
privilege by the village and may be denied, suspended or revoked for such
reasons as the village may deem rationally related to its governmental
interests including, but not limited to:
         a.   A permittee knowingly providing incorrect information on an
application for a permit;
         b.   A permittee, its agents or employees acting on a permit which has
been altered;
         c.   Noncompliance by permittee, its agents or employees with federal,
state or local laws pertaining to the transport of goods or operation of a
vehicle engaged in the transportation of goods;
         d.   Overdue fines or fees due to the village;
         e.   Moving on village streets without a valid permit as is required.
      7.   Suspension or revocation of a current permit shall be for the time
determined appropriate by the director of public works or his or her designee;
however, reinstatement may be made upon conditions determined by the village
and payment of all outstanding settlements or judgments. The charges for
reinstatement are in accordance the annual fee ordinance.
         The director of public works or his or her designee shall administer
and enforce this section and shall have the authority to grant, deny, suspend,
revoke and reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee denied a permit or who
has had a permit suspended or revoked, upon request, shall be given a hearing
before the director of public works or his or her designee and, if applicant or
permittee desires, may appeal the decision of the director of public works
before the village administrator.
   (D)   Permit Fees: Permits may be applied for and granted in accordance with
the annual fee ordinance, plus necessary and appropriate administrative or
engineering fees. In addition to any ordinance violation prosecution or other
remedies authorized by law, the village manager is hereby authorized to direct
the village attorney to file suit to recover any and all costs incurred by the
village for any damage to any roadway of the village as determined by the
public works director, including, but not limited to: any repair costs, any
village staff time and equipment including overhead used to repair any damage
and any village payments to contractors for the same.
 
                                 Those in such close proximity to each other in
                                 distance or in time that the village would
                                 consider incorporating two (2) or more permit
MULTIPLE MOVES:                  moves as one move. Multiple move permits, when
                                 granted by the village, shall be for a period
                                 of time not to exceed thirty (30) days from
                                 the date of issuance. Multiple moves must be
                                 identified prior to obtaining a permit.
                                 One move from the point of origin to the point
                                 of destination. Any additional stops between
                                 the point of origin and the point of
ONE-WAY OR SINGLE TRIP MOVEMENT: destination are expressly prohibited. Single
                                 trip permits are valid for five (5)
                                 consecutive days from date of issuance unless
                                 otherwise directed by the village in writing.
                                 Two (2) trips over the same route in opposite
ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT:             directions. Round trip permits are valid for
                                 ten (10) consecutive days from the date of
                                 issuance.
 
      If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weight and/or dimensions
issues, the total fee will be based on the largest individual weight or
dimension factor only.
   (E)   Permit Carried In Vehicle: Every such permit issued shall be carried
in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open
to inspection by any police officer of the village.
   (F)   Locations Where Permit Is Not Valid: The permit is not valid on any
highway or bridge posted for a load limit less than the gross weight of the
move, on any highway closed to traffic, and on any highway not under the
jurisdiction of the village; provided, however, that whenever a vehicle is
operating pursuant to a permit issued hereunder for excess width or length,
such vehicle may be moved upon a state highway for a distance not to exceed
one-half (1/2) mile without a permit for the purpose of crossing the state
highway.
   (G)   Weighing Vehicles; Removal Of Excess Load:
      1.   Any village police officer having reason to believe that the weight
of a vehicle and load is unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit
to a weighing of the same either by means of portable or stationary scales. If
such scales are not available to the place where such vehicle is stopped, the
police officer shall require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest
available scale that has been tested and approved by the Illinois department of
agriculture.
      2.   Whenever a village police officer, upon weighing of vehicle and
load, determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer shall require the
driver to stop the vehicle at a suitable place and remain standing until such
portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the weight of the
vehicle to the limit permitted under this title or to the limit permitted under
the terms of a permit issued pursuant to subsection A of this section and shall
forthwith arrest the owner, operator, lessee or driver thereof. All material so
unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle at the risk
of such owner or operator. (Ord. 2019-4848, 11-18-2019)
10-1-7: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS, OTHER VILLAGE PROPERTY:
The operation of any motorized vehicle including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, minibikes, motorscooters, motorbikes, motorcycles and
buses is hereby prohibited on any Village parkway, sidewalk, levee, marked
depot area platforms or other property for which the Village is responsible for
maintenance, excepting Village streets and roadways. The foregoing shall not
apply to any vehicle authorized by the Village to operate or drive upon the
foregoing areas.
The operation of any motorized vehicle including, but not limited to, those
listed above, is hereby prohibited on any Village street or roadway unless said
vehicle is properly licensed in accordance with State and local laws and
regulations.
Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
10-1-8: DRIVING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   (A)   Definition: The term "vehicle" as used in this section shall be
construed to mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn on a highway or otherwise, except devices moved
solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
whether said vehicle is licensed or unlicensed. (Ord. 79-880, 8-21-1979; amd.
Ord. 79-881, 8-21-1979)
   (B)   Private Property: For the protection of the public health, safety,
welfare and property, the operation of any vehicle upon any private property
without the consent of the owner thereof is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 79-880, 8-
21-1979)
   (C)   Public Property: For the protection of the public's health, safety,
welfare and property, the operation of any vehicle upon any public property of
or within any public place in the Village, except public highways, publicly
dedicated and developed streets and alleys, designated Municipal parking lots
and improved driveways transversing public parkways is hereby prohibited. (Ord.
79-811, 8-21-1979)
   (D)   Penalty: Any person found to have violated any provision of this
section shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each violation. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
10-1-9: PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS:
At those locations determined by the board of trustees of the village to
require a marked crosswalk to assist pedestrians in traversing a street, road
or highway, said crosswalk shall be marked by paint striping or other
designation upon the roadway and proper signage shall provide notice to
oncoming cars of the existence of such a crosswalk.
Wherever pedestrian crosswalks have been designated, all vehicular traffic
shall yield to any and all pedestrians present within said crosswalk before
proceeding. Any person who shall fail to so yield shall be fined as established
by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
10-1-10: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTION:
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., of the Illinois vehicle code is
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by this reference. Further, citations
may be issued by authorized personnel of the village, using the Illinois
vehicle code in lieu of or in addition to using the sections of this title.
(Ord. 91-2135, 2-18-1991)
10-1-11: TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
The chief of police is hereby vested with the authority to direct, control and
regulate traffic through the temporary designation and posting of signs or
other traffic control devices. Any sign or device posted per order of the chief
of police shall be deemed an official sign and shall be valid for as long as
public safety requires. (Ord. 96-2754, 3-18-1996)
10-1-12: AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM:
   (A)   Definitions:
      AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device within the village
with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light
signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection
against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-306, or similar violation of this code.
      DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: Failure to stop and remain stopped
before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-306.
      NO TURN ON RED: Failure to stop and remain stopped, and not proceeding to
turn right at, an intersection controlled by both a sign indicating "No turn on
red", or other similar language, and a red signal as provided for in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-306.
      RECORDED IMAGES: Images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement
system, which consist of either two (2) or more photographs; two (2) or more
microphotographs; two (2) or more electronic images; or, a video recording
showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the
recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor
vehicle.
      TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: The person appointed as such through
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes article 25 who shall have power to adopt,
distribute and process automated traffic law violation notices and other
notices required by this article, collect money paid as fines and penalties,
operate the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified
reports to the secretary of state as required by this article.
   (B)   Violations: It shall be a violation of this section for a vehicle to
disregard a traffic control device or turn on red in violation of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-306.
   (C)   Administrative Adjudication: For purposes of administrative
adjudication of violations of this section, there is hereby established an
administrative hearing system pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
2.1-1, which is incorporated herein as though fully set forth. The village
manager shall appoint one or more hearing officers in accordance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1. The jurisdiction of the administrative
adjudication system shall include only violations of this section.
   (D)   Defenses: The following may be considered defenses by the hearing
officer for a violation of subsection (B) of this section:
      1.   That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle
were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in
the possession of the owner at the time of the violation;
      2.   That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when
the light was red either: a) in order to yield the right of way to an emergency
vehicle or b) as part of a funeral procession.
To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen
before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of
the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a
report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed
with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
   (E)   Notice Of Violation: When the automated traffic law enforcement system
records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in violation of subsection (B)
of this section, the village shall issue a written notice of violation to the
registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S.
mail within thirty (30) days after the Illinois secretary of state notifies the
village of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and
in no event later than ninety (90) days following the violation. The village
shall only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor
provides the lessee's name by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within sixty
(60) days of the notice's issuance. If the driver information is not provided
within sixty (60) days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If any
notice to an address is returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be
sent to the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved
database of the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall
be made by first class mail, postage prepaid. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
   A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law violation
shall require a review of the associated recorded image by the traffic
compliance administrator, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the
motor vehicle was being operated in violation of subsection (B) of this
section, or whether one of the defenses enumerated in subsection (D) of this
section is visibly applicable upon inspection. All violations must be reviewed
and approved by a law enforcement officer or retired law enforcement officer of
the village. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation
and that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the
registered vehicle owner in the manner provided for above. The traffic
compliance administrator shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded
images and other correspondence mailed to the owner of the vehicle. Each notice
of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and
is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of the above noted
statutory and local provisions and shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in this
section. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007; amd. Ord. 2010-4358, 12-20-2010)
   The notice of violation shall include the following information:
      1.   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the secretary of state, or, if such
information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded
in a United States post office approved database;
      2.   The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor
vehicle involved in the violation;
      3.   The violation charged;
      4.   The location where the violation occurred;
      5.   The date and time of the violation; (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
      6.   A copy of the recorded images, and a website address at which an
alleged violator may have access to the recorded images through the internet;
      7.   The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty
should be paid (14 days from the date of issuance) and a statement that the
payment of the fine shall operate as a final disposition of the violation;
(Ord. 2010-4358, 12-20-2010)
      8.   A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date
noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or
lessee;
      9.   The amount of the late fee;
      10.   A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified will
result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension
of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle;
      11.   A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie
evidence of a violation;
      12.   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the fine
or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing; and
      13.   A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested.
(Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
   (F)   Hearing: The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of this
section may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the notice of violation
(14 days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an
applicable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the
facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a
violation of this section. The notice of violation shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses
established in this section. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007; amd. Ord. 2010-4358,
12-20-2010)
   The owner's failure to appear at the hearing will result in a finding of
liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a "findings, decision and
order" letter will be sent to the owner. The owner's failure to pay the amount
by the date specified in that letter will result in a final determination.
   (G)   Nonresidents: Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle is not a resident of the village but seeks to contest the merits of the
alleged violation, such person may contest the charges using the same available
defenses as stated above, but rather than attend the administrative hearing,
they may submit any and all documentary evidence to the traffic compliance
administrator no later than the hearing date, together with a written statement
reflecting that they are nonresidents of the village. The traffic compliance
administrator shall forward all timely submitted materials to the hearing
officer for review and determination. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
   (H)   Final Determination: A final determination of an automated traffic law
violation(s) liability shall occur:
      1.   Following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty
after the hearing officer's determination of an automated traffic law violation
(s) liability within twenty five (25) days and the exhaustion of or the failure
to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth, or
      2.   Where a person fails to appear at the hearing for an automated
traffic law violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a
prior mailed notice. The hearing officer's determination of an automated
traffic law violation(s) liability shall become final upon the exhaustion of or
the failure to exhaust any administrative or judicial review procedures
hereinafter set forth:
         (a)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination, or
         (b)   Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without
a filing having been made.
   (I)   Notice Of Determination Of Liability: A determination of automated
traffic law violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine
or penalty, or to contest the alleged violation within fourteen (14) days of
the notice of violation. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest
the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed
notice, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order's
determination of automated traffic law violation liability which shall become
final: 1) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or
2) upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a filing
having been made. If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or
contests the violation by mail and is found liable, the hearing officer will
enter findings, decision and order, which is a final determination of automated
traffic law violation liability that is a final, appealable order.
The owner (or lessee) of a motor vehicle is subject to a penalty as set forth
in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. In the event that such penalty is not paid within fourteen (14) days
after service of a final determination of liability, an additional late payment
penalty shall be imposed as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines,
Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”. A penalty shall not apply if
the driver of the motor vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from a
police officer at the time of the violation. The village shall not charge court
costs or hearing fees to persons found liable after exercising their right to
appear and contest the violation at an administrative hearing. (Ord. 2010-4358,
12-20-2010; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
   (J)   Notice Of Final Determination: A notice of final determination shall
be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation
liability and the conclusion of judicial review. The notice of final
determination shall include the following information:
      1.   A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the
village;
      2.   A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the
village of Lisle within fourteen (14) days may result in a petition to the
circuit court of DuPage County to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment
or may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to
pay fines or penalties for five (5) or more violations under this section.
   (K)   Petitions To Set Aside Determination: A petition to set aside
determination of an automated traffic law violation must be filed with or
mailed to the traffic control administrator within fourteen (14) days of the
date of mailing of the notice of determination of liability. The grounds for
the petition are limited to:
      1.   The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the
date the violation notice was issued;
      2.   The person having already paid the fine for the violation in
question; and
      3.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of
liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if cause
has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the
village shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner
must appear to present his case. The village shall notify the petitioner of the
hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within
fourteen (14) days of the village's receipt.
   (L)   Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension: A notice of impending
driver's license suspension shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more violations of this
section. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall state the
following information:
      1.   The failure to pay the fine owing within forty five (45) days of the
notice's date will result in the village notifying the secretary of state that
the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5;
      2.   A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original ticket
imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the village
along with a request for the copy.
   The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of
state or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the
last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database.
   (M)   Driver's License Suspension: The traffic compliance administrator, by
certified report, may request that the secretary of state suspend the driving
privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine
or penalty due and owing as a result of five (5) automated traffic violations.
The report shall be certified and contain the following:
      1.   The name, last known address as recorded with the secretary of
state, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or
as recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent
under this section is returned as undeliverable, and driver's license number of
the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of
any vehicle known to be registered to such person in a state;
      2.   A statement that the report is being made by the village of Lisle
pursuant to this section; and
      3.   A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension
has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with
the secretary of state or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited
vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this section is
returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United States
post office approved database; the date on which such notice was sent; and
address to which such notice was sent.
   The traffic compliance administrator shall notify the secretary of state
whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously
recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the
original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also
be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein.
   Any person receiving notice from the secretary of state that their driving
privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period may challenge the
accuracy of the certified report prepared by the traffic compliance
administrator. The person shall, within seven (7) days after having received
notice from the secretary of state, request an opportunity to speak with the
traffic compliance administrator to challenge the accuracy of the certified
report. If the traffic compliance administrator determines that the original
report was in error due to the fact that the person challenging the report was
not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or that the person has already paid the
fine for the five (5) or more automated traffic violations, the traffic
compliance administrator shall immediately notify the secretary of state of
such error in a subsequent certified report. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
10-1-13: TOW AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      AGGRAVATED ASSAULT AND AGGRAVATED BATTERY: A violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-2 and 5/12-4, respectively.
      ARMED ROBBERY: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18-2.
      BURGLARY AND RESIDENTIAL BURGLARY: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/19-1 and 5/19-3, respectively.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any substance as defined and included in the
schedules contained in article II of the Illinois controlled substance act 1 ,
as amended from time to time, and cannabis as defined in section 3 of the
cannabis control act 2 , as amended from time to time.
      CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-1.
      DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE: Any violation as defined in 11-501 of the
Illinois vehicle code 3 , as amended.
      DRIVING WHILE LICENSE, PERMIT OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE IS
SUSPENDED OR REVOKED: Any violation as defined in 6-303 of the Illinois vehicle
code 4 , as amended.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Any equipment, product and/or materials as defined in
section 2 of the drug paraphernalia act 5 .
      HEARING OFFICER: A licensed attorney who is not an officer.
      OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT A VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE: A violation
of 6-101 and/or 6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code 6 , as amended from time to
time, where the driver's license or driving privileges have been suspended,
revoked, canceled, never obtained or previously had been obtained and have been
expired for not less than six (6) months.
      OWNER OF RECORD: The record titleholder to a motor vehicle.
      RETAIL THEFT: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16A-3.
      UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS: A violation of 24-1 of the criminal code of 1961
1 , as amended.
   (B)   Vehicles Subject To Tow And Impoundment: A motor vehicle, operated
with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, shall be
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to tow and impoundment
under this section where such motor vehicle is used in the commission of any of
the violations of village or state laws or regulations specified in this
subsection and where impoundment of the vehicle is determined by a police
officer on the scene to be reasonably necessary as a community caretaking
function so that the vehicle does not jeopardize public safety and the
efficient movement of vehicular traffic. It shall not be necessary for criminal
charges to be filed, prosecuted, and/or proven in order to demonstrate that one
of the following violations has been committed in order to trigger the towing
and impoundment of the offending vehicle:
      1.   The possession or delivery of a controlled substance or drug
paraphernalia; or
      2.   Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof; or
      3.   Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle is suspended or revoked in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-303, except a person whose driver's license, permit or privilege to operate
a motor vehicle is suspended only for a violation of the vehicle emissions
inspection law of 2005, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13C-1 et seq.; or
      4.   Operation of a motor vehicle without a valid and current driver's
license in violation of statutes including, but not limited to, either 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101(a) or 5/6-101(b); or
      5.   The unlawful possession of a firearm in violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1, use of weapons in violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/24-1, or discharge of a firearm in violation of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5; or
      6.   Retail theft, when the value of the merchandise exceeds one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00); or
      7.   Aggravated assault, aggravated battery, armed robbery, burglary,
residential burglary and criminal damage to property; or
      8.   Any violation of the provisions of the Illinois cannabis control
act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1; or
      9.   Fleeing or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer in
violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204; or
      10.   Driving recklessly in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-503; or
      11.   Street racing in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
506; or
      12.   The commission or attempted commission of any felony offense; or
      13.   The motor vehicle is otherwise subject to seizure and impoundment
pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1.
   (C)   Tow And Impoundment Of Vehicles: Whenever a police officer has
probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to tow and
impoundment pursuant to this section, and none of the circumstances delineated
in subsection (D) of this section are present, the police officer shall cause
the motor vehicle to be towed to a facility authorized by the village or its
agents in accordance with the procedures set forth in title 9, chapter 9 of
this code. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any
person identifying himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle or any person
who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the tow and of the vehicle
owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be held in accordance with
the administrative hearing procedures set forth in subsection
10-1-12(F) of this chapter, though the owner is not restricted to the defenses
enumerated in subsection
10-1-12(D) of this chapter. Said motor vehicle shall be impounded pending the
completion of the hearings provided for in this chapter, unless the owner of
the motor vehicle posts with the village a cash bond as set forth in subsection
(E) of this section and in an amount established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (D)   Exceptions To Vehicle Tow And Impoundment: A police officer who has
probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to tow and
impoundment pursuant to this section shall first ascertain whether the tow and
impoundment is necessary and reasonable under the circumstances. If in the
judgment of the police officer then present, a person authorized by the owner
of record or the operator of the vehicle is present, capable and willing to
provide for the lawful immediate removal of the vehicle and the owner or
operator of the vehicle executes an indemnification agreement, holding the
village harmless for releasing the motor vehicle into the custody of said
person, the police officer shall allow that individual to promptly remove the
motor vehicle without it being subject to tow and impoundment.
   (E)   Posting A Bond: If a bond is posted with the village, the impounded
vehicle shall be released to the owner of record, upon the payment by the owner
of record of the towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company. If
an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to this section and established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, the bond shall be applied to said fee; provided, in the event that a
violation of this section is not proven at the hearing referenced in subsection
(C) of this section, the bond shall be returned to the person posting the bond.
All bond money posted pursuant to this section shall be held by the village
until the hearing officer issues a decision, or, in the event of judicial
review, until a reviewing court issues a final decision.
   (F)   Preliminary Hearing: Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under
the provisions of this section requests in writing a preliminary hearing within
twelve (12) hours after the tow of the motor vehicle, the watch commander or
designated supervising officer must conduct a preliminary hearing within twenty
four (24) hours after the request for a preliminary hearing is received by the
village; provided that if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday,
or legal holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the next business day
following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. For purposes of this section,
the following shall apply:
      1.   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing.
      2.   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed and shall be admissible.
      3.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the watch commander or
designated supervising officer determines that there is probable cause to
believe that the vehicle was properly towed and impounded in accordance with
this section and that no enumerated exception justifies release of the vehicle
from impoundment, he or she shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle unless and until the owner of the vehicle posts a cash or certified
check bond with the village, and pays all towing and storage costs to the
applicable towing company. The village shall hold the cash or certified check
bond, together with payment for all accrued towing and storage charges, until
such time as the final hearing is completed.
      4.   If the watch commander or designated supervising officer determines
that there is not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was properly towed
and impounded under this section, then the motor vehicle shall be returned to
the owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs.
   (G)   Final Hearing:
      1.   Notice Of Hearing: Within twenty one (21) days after a motor vehicle
is towed and impounded pursuant to this section, the village shall notify the
owner of record of the vehicle of the date, time and location of a final
hearing, to be conducted in accordance with subsection
10-1-12(F) of this chapter. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on the records of
the Illinois secretary of state. Notice by certified mail need not be given
when the owner of the vehicle has been personally served with notice in written
form of the time, date and location of the hearing.
      2.   Hearing: For purposes of this section, the following shall apply at
an owner's final hearing:
         (a)   Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing
shall be held within forty five (45) days after the motor vehicle was
impounded.
         (b)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the
hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. At the hearing, the violation
citation shall be prima facie evidence that the violation was committed as
provided in the citation, and the burden of proof shall be upon the defendant
to prove that the violation was not committed.
         (c)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was properly
impounded, the hearing officer shall enter an order for the continued
impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of the vehicle pays to the village
the administrative fee, as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, plus all accrued towing and storage costs to the applicable towing
company. The administrative fee shall be a debt due to the village and the
owner shall be civilly liable therefor. If a cash bond has been posted, said
bond shall be applied to the administrative fee.
         (d)   If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the
hearing officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the village, which
order shall require the payment to the village of an administrative penalty, as
established in Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and
Regulatory Measures”, plus towing and storage costs to the applicable towing
company, as well as the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the owner
remits to the village the administrative fee and towing and storage costs to
the towing company.
         (e)   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used
in violation of this section then the motor vehicle shall be returned to the
owner of the vehicle promptly and without any penalty or other costs, or, if a
cash bond had previously been posted, said cash bond shall be returned.
   (H)   Unclaimed Vehicles:
      1.   Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within thirty (30) days after
the expiration of time in which the owner of record may seek judicial review of
the action of the village under this section or any vehicle for which payment
of all required monies to secure the vehicle has not been tendered within
thirty (30) days of the expiration of time in which the owner of record may
seek judicial review of the order entered at the conclusion of the final
hearing, or the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the
village by a court of proper jurisdiction, or the time at which a final
administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in
default, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and may be disposed of as an
abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as otherwise provided in the Illinois vehicle
code.
   (I)   Liability For Penalty And Costs:
      1.   The owner of record of a motor vehicle that is seized or impounded
shall be liable to the village for an administrative fee, established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, in addition to any fees and charges for the towing and storage of
the motor vehicle by the applicable towing company.
      2.   Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company
and not by the village, in accordance with the provisions of title 9, chapter 9
of this code.
      3.   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall remain impounded
until the earlier of the following events occurs:
         (a)   The administrative fee is paid to the village, and all towing
and storage costs are paid to the applicable towing company.
         (b)   A bond in an amount equal to the liability of the owner as
provided in this section is posted with the village and all applicable towing
and storage costs are paid to the applicable towing company.
         (c)   The vehicle is deemed unclaimed or abandoned, in which case the
vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition
of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles.
         (d)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien
holder or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
motor vehicle impounded under this section until the administrative fee and all
towing and storage costs applicable under this section have been paid in full.
(Ord. 2009-4250, 4-20-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 570/101 et seq.
2 2. 720 ILCS 550/3.
3 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
4 4. 625 ILCS 5/6-303.
5 5. 720 ILCS 600/2.
6 6. 625 ILCS 5/6-101, 5/6-303.
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/24-1.
CHAPTER 2
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Certain Places
10-2-2: Restrictions Enumerated
10-2-3: Manner Of Parking Vehicles
10-2-4: Time Limit In Designated Places
10-2-5: Regulations Under Village Agreements
10-2-6: Parking For Handicapped Persons
10-2-6-1: Exemptions To Parking Restrictions
10-2-6-2: Handicapped Motorists Cards
10-2-6-3: Prohibitions
10-2-7: Penalty
10-2-8:    Electric Vehicles
10-2-1: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall:
   (A)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle 1 :
      1.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      2.   On a sidewalk; (Ord. 451, 2-6-1973)
      3.   Beyond the edge of a driveway into any public right of way; (Ord.
2006-4021, 6-5-2006)
      4.   Within an intersection;
      5.   On a crosswalk;
      6.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of the safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
      7.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      8.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structures or within a highway
tunnel, underpass or subway;
      9.   On any railroad tracks;
      10.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. (Ord. 451, 2-
6-1973; amd. Ord. 2006-4021, 6-5-2006)
      11.   At any place which is designated by official signs as a cab stand,
unless said vehicle is duly registered within the village, or is present at the
cab stand for the purpose of dropping off passengers who were initially picked
up outside of the village. (Ord. 93-2360, 2-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2006-4021, 6-5-
2006)
   (B)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge passengers:
      1.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      2.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
      3.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      4.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the
roadway;
      5.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted);
      6.   In front of curbside mailboxes located on School Street between Main
and Spencer;
      7.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing. (Ord. 88-1766,
12-5-1988)
   (C)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
      1.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      2.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (D)   Further, there shall be no parking:
      1.   On any street between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. except by permission of the Police Department. (Ord. 451, 2-6-1973)
      2.   In any officially designated fire lane. Any person violating this
subsection (D)2 shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
      3.   Where vehicle would reduce the usable width of a street to less than
eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 451, 2-6-1973)
      4.   In a prohibited parking zone; or in a limited parking zone longer
than the time designated and authorized. Each continuing period of time equal
to the posted time limit shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 94-2603,
12-5-1994)
      5.   On private property without the consent of the owner of private
property. (Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  9-4-22(E) of this code.
10-2-2: RESTRICTIONS ENUMERATED:
Parking is restricted as hereinafter indicated on the following streets, except
by permission of the Police Department:
                          No parking                 Both sides, College Road
                                                     to Angel Lane
                                                     North side, College Road
                          No parking                 to a point 160 feet west
                                                     of Shorewood Court
                                                     North side, from Naper
                          No parking                 Boulevard to Surrey Ridge
                                                     Road
                                                     North side, Lexington Road
Abbeywood Drive           No parking                 to a point 250 feet east
                                                     of Lexington Road
                          No parking                 South side, from Surrey
                                                     Ridge Road west 300 feet
                          No parking                 South side, Timberview
                                                     Drive to Lexington Road
                                                     South side, from a point
                          Parallel parking only, no  300 feet west of Surrey
                          parking on grass           Ridge Road to Naper
                                                     Boulevard
Academy Drive             No parking                 Both sides
                          No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:
Adams Drive               30 A.M., weekdays except   Both sides
                          holidays
Alley (located between
the east property line of                            Both sides, from
1108 Burlington Avenue    No parking, standing,      Burlington Avenue to the
and the west property     stopping or loading        north property line of
line of 4760 Garfield                                4712 Main Street
Avenue)
Alley (located south of
Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,                             Both sides, from Keller
12 and 13 in A.T.         No parking                 Street approximately 410
McIntosh and Company's                               feet westerly
Ogden Farm Subdivision)
                                                     West side, from 100 feet
                          No parking April 15        north of Basswood Drive to
Arbor View Drive          through July 15            the south end of the
                                                     property at 4500 Arbor
                                                     View Drive
                          No parking                 West side, Ogden Avenue to
Auvergne Avenue                                      Chicago Avenue
                          2 hour parking             East side, Ogden Avenue to
                                                     Chicago Avenue
Beau Bien Boulevard       No parking                 Both sides, Ogden Avenue
                                                     to Old Tavern Road
Benedictine Parkway       No parking                 Both sides, from Maple
                                                     Avenue to Abbeywood Drive
Black Partridge Lane      No parking April 15        East side, Old Tavern Road
                          through July 15            north to Shabbona Lane
                          No parking                 Both sides, Garfield
                                                     Avenue to Yender Avenue
                          No parking                 South side, Main Street
                                                     east 350 feet
                                                     North side, Center Avenue
Burlington Avenue         2 hour parking 5:00 A.M.   to Garfield Avenue; south
                          to 7:00 P.M., Monday       side, from Main Street
                          through Friday             west 142 feet; and from
                                                     Center Avenue west 350
                                                     feet
                          15 minute parking          1 stall in front of 1012
                                                     Burlington Avenue
Burr Oak Drive            No parking                 Both sides, Maple Avenue
                                                     to Robin Lane
Cabot Drive               No parking                 Both sides, Warrenville
                                                     Road to Forbes Drive
                          No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9: Both sides, from Oakhill
Candlewood Court          30 A.M., Monday through    Drive north to the dead
                          Friday                     end
                          No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:
Cascade Drive             30 A.M., weekdays except   Both sides
                          holidays
                          No parking                 Both sides, Burlington
                                                     Avenue to Ogden Avenue
                          No parking                 Both sides, Inverness
                                                     Drive to Rolling Drive
                          No parking                 East side, Front Street to
                                                     Division Street
Center Avenue             No parking school hours    Both sides, Gamble Drive
                                                     to Jonquil Avenue
                          2 hour parking             West side, Front Street to
                                                     Division Street
                          4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.   Both sides, Riedy Road to
                          to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     Gamble Drive
                          except holidays
Chicago Avenue            No parking                 Both sides, Auvergne
                                                     Avenue to Elm Street
                                                     Both sides, Front Street
                                                     to Riedy Road, except
                          2 hour parking             during school bus only
                                                     hours on east side of
Columbia Avenue                                      street from Division
                                                     Street north 240 feet
                          School bus parking only on East side, Division Street
                          school days 7:30 A.M. to   to a point 240 feet north
                          8:30 A.M. and 1:30 P.M. to of Division Street
                          2:30 P.M.
                                                     Both sides, from Ogden
                          No parking                 Avenue to a point 300 feet
Devon Avenue                                         south of Ogden Avenue
                          No parking                 East side, from Ogden
                                                     Avenue north 300 feet
                          No parking                 North side, Main Street to
                                                     Columbia Avenue
                          No parking                 South side, Main Street to
                                                     Kingston Avenue
Division Street           Pick up and drop off zone  North side, Columbia
                          on school days 7:00 A.M.   Avenue to a point 145 feet
                          to 3:00 P.M.               east of Columbia Avenue
                          2 hour parking             North side, Columbia
                                                     Avenue to Kingston Avenue
                          No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9: Both sides, from Oakhill
Driftwood Court           30 A.M., Monday through    Drive north to the dead
                          Friday                     end
                                                     Both sides, from
Dumoulin                  4 hour parking             Burlington Avenue to Ogden
                                                     Avenue
                          No parking                 Both sides, Burr Oak Road
Eisenhower Lane                                      to Patton Drive
                          No parking                 Both sides, Patton Drive
                                                     east to dead end
Elm Street                No parking                 Both sides, Chicago Avenue
                                                     to Burlington Avenue
Fender Avenue             No parking                 Both sides, Ogden Avenue
                                                     to Ridgeland Avenue
                                                     Both sides, from
Forbes Drive              No parking                 Warrenville Road to a
                                                     point 1,050 feet north of
                                                     Warrenville Road
                                                     Both sides, from Columbia
                          No parking                 Avenue, east to the east
                                                     of property lines of 722
                                                     and 727 Front Street
                          No parking                 South side, from Columbia
                                                     Avenue to Spencer Street
                                                     North side, from Center
Front Street                                         Avenue west to a point 100
                          2 hour parking             feet east of the east
                                                     right-of-way of Main
                                                     Street.
                                                     South side, from Spencer
                                                     Avenue west to a point 100
                          2 hour parking             feet east of the east
                                                     right-of-way of Main
                                                     Street.
                          4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.   Both sides, Center Avenue
Gamble Drive              to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     to Kingston Avenue
                          except holidays
                          No parking 7:30 A.M. to 8:
Garden Drive              00 A.M. and 2:30 P.M. to   Garden Drive, both sides
                          3:00 P.M. on school days
                          No parking                 East side, Burlington
Garfield Avenue                                      Avenue to Route 53
                          No parking any time        Both sides, Burlington
                                                     Avenue to Ogden Avenue
                                                     East side, Coach House
                          No parking April 15        Road to the cul-de-sac at
                          through July 15            the north end of Glenbrook
Glenbrook Court                                      Court
                                                     From the east lot line of
                          No parking between signs   6356 to the west lot line
                                                     of 6357 Glenbrook Court
                                                     East side, from Green
                          No parking                 Trails Drive to Sleepy
                                                     Hollow Lane
                                                     West side, from Green
Golfview Drive            No parking                 Trails Drive to a point
                                                     300 feet north of Carriage
                                                     Hill Road
                          No parking                 West side, Trinity Drive
                                                     to Heritage Lane
                                                     From a point 1,100 feet
Green Trails Drive        No parking, standing,      westerly of Garden Drive
                          stopping or loading        excluding the paved
                                                     shoulders
                          4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.
Hawthorne Lane            to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     Both sides
                          except holidays
                          4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.   Both sides, Center Avenue
Hitchcock Avenue          to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     to Kingston Avenue
                          except holidays
Indiana Avenue            No parking                 Both sides, Ogden Avenue
                                                     to railroad tracks
                          No parking                 Both sides, Oakview Drive
Jonquil Avenue                                       to Center Avenue
                          No parking                 Both sides, Oakview Drive
                                                     to Main Street
Keller Street             No parking                 Both sides, Ogden Avenue
                                                     to Wellington Avenue
                          No parking                 Both sides, Front Street
                                                     to Division Street
                                                     Both sides, Front Street
Kingston Avenue           No parking                 to Maple Avenue (school
                                                     area)
                          No parking                 Both sides, Gamble Drive
                                                     to Rolling Drive
                                                     Both sides, from Main
                                                     Street, 250 feet easterly;
                          No parking                 from School Street to 100'
Lacey Avenue                                         north of McKenzie Station
                                                     Drive
                          4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.   Both sides, from 100'
                          to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     north of McKenzie Station
                          except holidays            Drive west to dead end
                                                     Both sides, Ohio Street
Larkspur Lane             No parking                 north to Jonquil Avenue
                                                     (school crossing)
Leask Lane                No parking                 Both sides, entire street
                                                     where indicated
Lisle Place               No parking                 Both sides, Route 53 to
                                                     Main Street
                          No parking                 Both sides, Burlington
                                                     Avenue to Route 53
                                                     Both sides, from
                          No parking                 Warrenville Road south to
                                                     Ogden Avenue
                                                     1 stall in front of 4738
                                                     Main Street
                                                     1 stall in front of 4740
Main Street               15 minute parking          Main Street
                                                     2 stalls in front of 4726
                                                     Main Street
                                                     2 stalls in front of 4752
                                                     Main Street
                          2 hour parking 5:00 A.M.
                          to 7:00 P.M., Monday       Both sides, Ogden Avenue
                          through Friday except      to Burlington Avenue
                          where otherwise restricted
                          4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.
McKenzie Station Drive    to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     Both sides
                          except holidays
                          No parking, stopping or    Both sides, from Dumoulin
                          standing                   Avenue 350 feet generally
McKinley Avenue                                      southeasterly
                                                     Both sides, from
                          4 hour parking             Burlington Avenue 700 feet
                                                     northerly
                          No parking, stopping or    South side, Schwartz
Middleton Avenue          standing                   Avenue to Devon Avenue
                          No parking weekdays 11:00  Both sides, Yackley Avenue
                          A.M. to 2:00 P.M.          to Winchester Avenue
                                                     East side, Robin Lane
                          No parking                 south to the end of the
                                                     street
Newport Drive                                        West side, Robin Lane
                          No parking                 south to the north side of
                                                     the driveway at 5300
                                                     Newport Drive
                          No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9: Both sides, from Yackley
Oakhill Drive             30 A.M., Monday through    Avenue to Pennywood Drive
                          Friday
Oakview Drive             No parking                 West side, Jonquil Avenue
                                                     to Rolling Drive
Ogden Avenue              No parking                 Both sides
Ohio Court                No parking                 Both sides, from Ohio
                                                     Street 400 feet easterly
                          No parking                 Both sides, from Yackley
                                                     Avenue to Ohio Court
                                                     North side, from Kingston
                          No parking                 Avenue to the west side of
Ohio Street                                          740 Ohio Street
                          No parking                 South side, from Kingston
                                                     Avenue to Larkspur Lane
                          No parking                 South side, from Yackley
                                                     Avenue to Illinois Street
Old Tavern Road           No parking                 South side, Beau Bien
                                                     Boulevard to Fender Avenue
Patton Drive              No parking                 Both sides, Maple Avenue
                                                     north to dead end
                                                     Both sides, from Ogden
                                                     Avenue to a point 122 feet
Plank Road                No parking                 south of the south right-
                                                     of-way line of Ogden
                                                     Avenue
                          No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:
Ranier Drive              30 A.M., weekdays except   Both sides
                          holidays
                                                     North side, Main Street to
                          No parking                 east property line of 1024
                                                     Riedy Road
                          No parking                 South side, Main Street to
                                                     Center Avenue
Riedy Road                4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.   North side, Elm Street to
                          to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     east property line of 1024
                          except holidays            Riedy Road
                          4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.   South side, Elm Street to
                          to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     Center Avenue
                          except holidays
Rielly Place              No parking                 Both sides (only 1 posted)
River Bend Drive          No parking                 Both sides
River Drive               No parking                 West side, from Ogden
                                                     Avenue north 200 feet
Riverview Drive           No parking                 Both sides, from Short
                                                     Street, south 1,020 feet
Robin Lane                No parking                 Both sides
                                                     North side, Rolling Drive
                          No parking                 at Center Street, 400 feet
Rolling Drive                                        either side of crossing
                                                     (school crossing)
                          No parking                 South side, Route 53 to
                                                     Kingston Avenue
                          No parking                 From Burlington Avenue to
Route 53                                             Maple Avenue
                          No parking (within 15 feet Both sides, Warrenville
                          of pavement)               Road to Maple Avenue
                                                     North side, from Spencer
                          No parking                 Avenue to east end of
                                                     School Street
                                                     South side, from a point
                          No parking                 400 feet east of Center
                                                     Avenue to the east end of
                                                     School Street
                          No parking                 South side, from Spencer
                                                     Avenue to Center Avenue
School Street                                        South side, from Center
                          2 hour parking             Avenue to a point 305 feet
                                                     east of Center Avenue
                          2 hour parking 5:00 A.M.   Both sides, Main Street to
                          to 7:00 P.M., Monday       Spencer Avenue
                          through Friday
                                                     South side, from a point
                          4 hour parking             305 feet east of Center
                                                     Avenue to a point 400 feet
                                                     east of Center Avenue
                          No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:
Shasta Drive              30 A.M., weekdays except   Both sides
                          holidays
                                                     Both sides, from Main
                          No parking                 Street to the DuPage River
                                                     Bridge
                          No parking                 Both sides, Main Street to
                                                     Route 53
                                                     North side, from a point
                                                     315 feet west of the west
                          No parking                 end of DuPage River Bridge
                                                     to a point 390 feet west
Short Street                                         of the west end of the
                                                     DuPage River Bridge
                                                     North side, from the
                          No parking                 DuPage River west to Ohio
                                                     Court
                                                     South side, from Ohio
                                                     Court east to the east
                          No parking                 parking lot access drive
                                                     of the Lisle Park District
                                                     Community Center
                          No parking                 Both sides, Main Street to
                                                     Route 53
Southport Avenue          4 hour parking 6:00 A.M.   Both sides, from Main
                          to 1:00 P.M., weekdays     Street east to Lacey
                          except holidays            Avenue
                          No parking                 Both sides, from Ogden
                                                     Avenue to School Street
                                                     East side, from a point
                          No parking                 140 feet south of School
                                                     Street to Burlington
                                                     Avenue
                                                     East side of Spencer
                          No parking                 Avenue from Front Street
Spencer Avenue                                       to Division Street
                          2 hour parking             West side, from Front
                                                     Street to Division Street
                          2 hour parking 5:00 A.M.   East side, from School
                          to 7:00 P.M., Monday       Street to a point 140 feet
                          through Friday             south
                          2 hour parking 5:00 A.M.   West side, from School
                          to 7:00 P.M., Monday       Street to Burlington
                          through Friday             Avenue
                                                     Entire length both sides
                                                     between Spencer and Center
Spencer Avenue alley      No parking                 Avenues and the entire
                                                     length both sides behind
                                                     1007 Front Street to the
                                                     south end
                          No parking                 West side, from Abbeywood
                                                     Drive to New Albany Road
Surrey Ridge Road         No parking any time        East side, from Abbeywood
                                                     Drive to Camden Court
                          2 hour parking             East side, from Camden
                                                     Court to New Albany Road
                          No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9: Both sides, from Oakhill
Tall Tree Court           30 A.M., Monday through    Drive north to the dead
                          Friday                     end
                                                     Both sides, between 3016
Tangley Oaks Trail        No parking                 and 3037 Tangley Oaks
                                                     Trail
                          No parking                 North side, Scarlet Oak
Trinity Drive                                        Lane to Golfview Drive
                          No parking                 South side, Stonehaven Way
                                                     to Golfview Drive
University Lane           No parking                 Both sides, Ohio Court to
                                                     Academy Drive
Varsity Drive             No parking                 Both sides
Wayfaring Lane            No parking any time        North side and west side
                                                     North side, from
                                                     Benedictine Parkway to a
Weeping Willow Drive      No parking any time        point opposite the
                                                     extension of the west curb
                                                     line of Wayfaring Lane
                          No parking any time        South side and east side
Wellington Avenue         No parking                 Both sides, Keller Street
                                                     to Fender Avenue
Wellington Court          No parking                 Both sides
Western Avenue            No parking                 Both sides
Western Court             No parking                 Both sides
                                                     Both sides, from Ogden
                          No parking any time        Avenue to a point 500 feet
Winchester Avenue                                    north of Ogden Avenue
                                                     Both sides, from Ogden
                          No parking any time        Avenue to Burlington
                                                     Avenue
                                                     Both sides, from Ogden
                                                     Avenue southerly 750 feet
                                                     from centerline of Ogden
                          No parking                 Avenue and from Ogden
Yackley Avenue                                       Avenue northerly 750 feet
                                                     from centerline of Ogden
                                                     Avenue
                          No parking                 500 feet immediately north
                                                     of Ogden Avenue
                          No parking                 East side, Burlington
                                                     Avenue to Ogden Avenue
                          No parking                 West side, Burlington
Yender Avenue                                        Avenue to Middleton Avenue
                          No parking Monday through  East side, Ogden Avenue to
                          Friday (except national    Middleton Avenue
                          holidays)
 
(Ord. 2018-4779, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-4830, 7-15-2019; Ord. 2020-4883, 11-
2-2020; Ord. 2021-4915, 8-2-2021; Ord. 2023-5043, 12-18-2023)
10-2-3: MANNER OF PARKING VEHICLES:
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway in the Village
shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels parallel to and within
twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb or as close thereto as practicable
to the right hand edge of the right hand shoulder.
   (B)   Every vehicle parked in a compact car space shall not exceed the size
limitation indicated by the posted restriction and shall not protrude or
overhang any space limitation marked on the pavement. (Ord. 92-2321, 10-19-
1992)
   (C)   Any person failing to obey these restrictions shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
10-2-4: TIME LIMIT IN DESIGNATED PLACES:
   (A)   When And Where Prohibited:
      1.   Parking Prohibited During Snowfall: It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle on any portion of any public street or highway in the Village during or
after any snowfall resulting in an accumulation of one inch (1") or more, and
for a period thereafter of twenty four (24) hours, or within such further
period as may be reasonably required to complete snow removal operations.
      2.   All Night Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle on any portion of any public street or highway in the Village between
the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   (B)   Authority To Impound Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is so parked
illegally as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic or interfere with the
sweeping or repair of streets or removal of snow therefrom, the Chief of
Police, or any person authorized by him, is hereby authorized to cause such
vehicle to be removed from the public street and conveyed by or under the
direction of a member of the Police Department to an authorized garage. The
Village shall be entitled to the fees provided in subsection (C) of this
section.
   (C)   Fees For Redemption: Before the owner or person entitled to the
possession of any impounded or removed vehicle shall be permitted to remove the
same from the custody of the Chief of Police, or person authorized by him, he
shall furnish satisfactory evidence of his identity and ownership of vehicle
and right of possession thereto, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle and in
addition to the fine provided for herein, shall pay the fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for such vehicle to cover the cost of towing or removal of such
vehicle, and in addition thereto, the cost of storage charged by such
authorized garage at the prevailing rate for such storage.
   (D)   Central Business District: The total maximum time limit for parking a
vehicle within the Central Business District shall be two (2) hours, with the
exception of Municipal Lot G, which shall be four (4) hours. No vehicle shall
be moved from one (1) parking location to another parking location within the
Central Business District such that the vehicle is parked for a combined total
of more than two (2) hours for the entire area, nor shall any vehicle be moved
between a parking location within the Central Business District and Municipal
Lot G such that the maximum combined time limit of four (4) hours is exceeded.
The term "Central Business District" shall refer to that portion of the Village
bounded by Ogden, Garfield, Division and Center. (Ord. 79-830, 1-16-1979; amd.
Ord. 2003-3439, 1-20-2003; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
10-2-5: REGULATIONS UNDER VILLAGE AGREEMENTS:
The Village, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-7 and 5/11-209,
has hereby entered into the following agreements and shall hereafter regulate
the parking of motor vehicles and the traffic thereof within the premises named
in each respective agreement:
   Agreement between the Village of Lisle and:
   Arboretum Lakes - 801 Warrenville Road (Res. 2022-4228, 2-7-2022 - 2-7-2042)
   Arboretum Lakes - 1011 Warrenville Road (Res. 2022-4229, 2-7-2022 - 2-7-
2042)
   Arboretum Village Apartments (Res. 2016-3586, 9-13-2016 - 9-12-2036).
   Benedictine University - 5700 College Road (Res. 2023-4422, 12-18-2023 - 12-
18-2043)
   Dana Automotive Systems Group, LLC (Res. 2008-2876, 04-07-2008 - 04-06-
2028).
   Four Lakes Village (Res. 2006-2725, 10-2-2006 - 10-1-2026).
   Highpoint in Green Trails (Res. 2016-3583, 8-15-2016 - 8-14-2036).
   Hyatt Lisle (Res. 2022-4236, 3-7-2022 - 3-7-2042)
   Lisle Apartments, Franklin Properties, Inc. (Res. 2008-2938, 11-17-2008 -
11-16-2028).
   Lisle Community School District 202 (Res. 2017-3616, 2-6-2017 - 2-5-2037).
   Lisle Library District (Res. 2016-3565, 6-20-2016 - 6-19-2036).
   Main Street Complex (Res. 2010-3082, 11-15-2010 - 11-14-2030).
   McKenzie Station (Res. 2015-3443, 4-7-2015 - 4-6-2035).
   River Bend Townhomes (Ord. 2005-3922, 4-18-2005 - 4-17-2025).
(Ord. 2001-3356, 11-19-2001; amd. Ord. 2002-3374, 2-4-2002; Ord. 2002-3393, 4-
15-2002; Ord. 2004-3849, 6-21-2004; Ord. 2005-3922, 5-2-2005; Ord. 2005-3942,
7-18-2005; Ord. 2006-4062, 10-2-2006; Ord. 2007-4131, 8-20-2007; Ord. 2007-
4140, 9-17-2007; Ord. 2008-4171, 1-7-2008; Ord. 2008-4192, 4-7-2008; Ord. 2008-
4211, 7-21-2008; Ord. 2008-4223, 9-8-2008; Ord. 2008-4232, 11-17-2008; Ord.
2009-4237, 1-12-2009; Ord. 2009-4246, 3-2-2009; Ord. 2010-4305, 3-15-2010; Ord.
2010-4349, 11-15-2010; Ord. 2011-4373, 3-21-2011; Ord. 2011-4407, 10-17-2011;
Ord. 2015-4574, 4-6-2015; Ord. 2016-4661, 6-20-2016; Ord. 2016-4670, 8-15-2016;
Ord. 2016-4675, 9-12-2016; Ord. 2016-4679, 10-3-2016; Ord. 2017-4701, 2-6-2017;
Ord. 2017-4713, 3-20-2017; Ord. 2022-4946, 3-7-2022; Ord. 2023-5044, 12-18-
2023)
10-2-6: PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS 1 :
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-4-5 of this title.
10-2-6-1: EXEMPTIONS TO PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a physically handicapped
person pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-616 or to a disabled
veteran pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-609 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, effective July 1, 1970, as amended 2 , is hereby declared to be
exempt from any ordinance imposing time limitations on parking in a business
district; but otherwise is subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "no
stopping", "no standing" zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways,
public building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is
prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard
and the motor vehicle must be moved at the instruction and request of a law
enforcement officer to a location designated by the officer. Any motor vehicle
bearing registration plates specified in this section or similar registration
plates issued under the Vehicle Codes of other States, as amended, or
handicapped motorist's cards issued by the Village, as evidence that the
vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, may
park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking place specifically
reserved, by posting of an official sign, for such vehicles. Parking privileges
granted by this section are strictly limited to those persons to whom the
special registration plates or cards are issued and to qualified operators
acting under such person's express direction while the disabled person is
present. No person shall use any area for parking of any motor vehicle pursuant
to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
effective July 1, 1970, as amended, or where an official sign controlling such
area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours. (Ord. 80-
952, 9-16-1980)
 
Notes
2 2. 625 ILCS.
10-2-6-2: HANDICAPPED MOTORISTS CARDS:
The Business Office Manager shall issue, without charge, upon application of
any handicapped person or disabled veteran, a special handicapped motorist card
furnished by the Illinois Secretary of State, pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, for the purpose of allowing said card to be used and
displayed on a vehicle being used to transport said handicapped person or
disabled veteran, but not owned or displaying a special handicapped or disabled
veteran's license plate, so as to identify said vehicle and entitle it to all
the parking privileges afforded to a vehicle possessing such special
handicapped or disabled veteran's license plates as hereinbefore provided. Such
card shall be issued only to handicapped persons or disabled veterans and the
same shall be displayed by hanging such card from the rearview mirror of the
vehicle and shall allow the vehicle to utilize special, handicapped parking
privileges when used to transport such handicapped person or disabled veteran.
The Village shall issue only temporary handicapped motorist cards. Requests for
permanent cards shall be directed to the Illinois Secretary of State.
For purposes of this section, a "physically handicapped person" shall mean
every natural person who is unable to walk two hundred feet (200') or more
unassisted by another person or without the aid of a walker, crutches, brace,
prosthetic device, or a wheelchair or without great difficulty or discomfort
due to the following impairments: neurologic, orthopedic, respiratory, cardiac,
arthritic disorder, blindness, or the loss of function or absence of a limb or
limbs.
All applicants shall complete an application form as provided by the business
office manager. Such form includes information which shall be completed by the
applicant and his or her physician. The physician shall designate whether the
handicap is temporary or permanent. If temporary, the physician must indicate
the length of the handicap. A temporary card will be issued for the designated
period not to exceed ninety (90) days. If an extension is needed, the applicant
must complete a new application and furnish proof of the reason for such
extension from the attending physician. No handicapped motorist vehicle card
shall be transferable. Use of any such card by any person other than the
handicapped person to whom it is issued except as provided herein, shall be
deemed a violation of this section and shall render the card void. Any abuse of
the card or unauthorized use shall render any such card subject to revocation.
No handicapped motorist card shall be issued until an application form is
completed and received by the business office manager. Providing false
information in the application filed with the business office manager shall be
deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. 2000-3185, 2-21-2000)
10-2-6-3: PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates to a physically handicapped or to a disabled veteran,
pursuant to the applicable sections of the Illinois motor vehicle code, or
similar registration plates duly issued under the motor vehicle code of another
state, or handicapped motorist card issued by the village or such decal, cards,
or devices issued by other municipalities pursuant to the authority granted to
them under the Illinois vehicle code as the local authorities of other
municipalities deem proper as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a
handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking place for motor vehicles
bearing such registration, plates, decals, cards or devices. Violation of this
section shall carry a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense.
   (B)   The parking spaces located at or near the addresses listed below shall
be designated for handicapped parking. However, said list shall not be
interpreted as being inclusive of all such spaces within the village, nor shall
such designation limit the effect or enforcement of handicapped parking
prohibitions in locations other than listed below:
4710 Main Street
4739 Main Street
(Ord. 88-1652, 3-21-1988; amd. Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-
2021)
10-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person convicted in a court of law of any violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. The procedure set forth in section
9-4-22 of this code may be used to settle and compromise a violation.
(Ord. 2003-3439, 1-20-2003; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
10-2-8: ELECTRIC VEHICLES:
   (A)   A person may park only an electric vehicle in an electric vehicle
charging station space designated for use by electric vehicles. Unauthorized
use of electric vehicle-only parking by non-electric vehicles at both public
and private properties is prohibited.
   (B)   Public electric vehicle charging stations shall charge fees as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
(Ord. 2024-5083, 7-15-2024)
CHAPTER 3
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Definitions
10-4-2: Municipal Parking Lots Established
10-4-3: Permits Required; Fees
10-4-4: Designation Of Parking Spaces
10-4-5: Parking Restrictions
10-4-6: Hours Limited
10-4-7: Collection Of Permit Fees
10-4-8: Appeal Process
10-4-9: Penalties
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
MOTOR VEHICLE: A machine propelled by mechanical power designed to travel along
the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and used to transport
person(s) or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation,
automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, motorized bicycles, tractors and
wagons.
PERMITTED VEHICLE: That vehicle registered in the village business office, for
which a permit is issued.
In addition, only those vehicles which are validly registered, as required by
the laws of the state of residence of the vehicle owner, may be permitted
vehicles under this definition.
PERMITTEE: The person to whom a permit is issued for the right to park in
commuter parking lots as the parking lots have been established for municipal
purposes. (Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2534, 6-6-1994; Ord. 94-2583,
9-19-1994; Ord. 2003-3794, 11-17-2003)
10-4-2: MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS ESTABLISHED:
There are hereby established municipally owned and leased off street parking
lots, as follows:
 
      That property lying south of properties commonly known as 1014 and 1018
LOT A Burlington Avenue and north of the Burlington Northern right of way and
      lying west of Spencer Avenue to the curb line east of Main Street.
      That property lying south of Burlington Avenue and north of the
LOT B Burlington Northern right of way and lying west of Center Avenue and east
      of Spencer Avenue.
      That property lying south of Burlington Avenue and north of the
LOT C Burlington Northern right of way and lying west of a line running south
      of the former Lisle depot and east of Center Avenue.
      That property lying south of the Burlington Northern right of way north
LOT D of Front Street and lying west of the village of Lisle commuter station
      and west to the curb line just east of the Main Street tunnel.
      That property lying north of the Burlington Northern right of way, east
LOT E of the Burlington Northern/Lisle train station and west of the St.
      Joseph's Creek culvert.
LOT G That property known as 4717 through 4719 Garfield Avenue, lying between
      Ogden Avenue and Burlington Avenue. (Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-2003)
 
10-4-3: PERMITS REQUIRED; FEES:
   (A)   General: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a motor vehicle in the above described village parking lots
without first obtaining a permit. Certain spaces in certain lots may be, from
time to time, designated by signs for purposes other than commuter parking or
public parking purposes. The uses for which certain spaces may be designated
shall include, but not be limited to, areas for village employees, handicapped
parking, loading zones, Burlington Northern agent parking, visitors' parking,
police use, or other specific uses as indicated by signs. For regulations
pertaining to bicycles, refer to chapter 6 of this title.
      1.   Validity Of Permits; Transfer Prohibited:
         (a)   All permits required by this section shall be valid only for the
permitted vehicle, which shall be owned or leased by the permittee and shall
have a state license number assigned thereto. Two (2) vehicles may be
registered under the same permit; provided, that both vehicles are owned or
leased by the permittee and are registered in the village business office under
the permittee's name. However, only one of said two (2) vehicles shall be
allowed to use the permit at any one time.
         (b)   The transfer of any permit required herein between vehicles
other than those registered to the permittee is strictly prohibited. Any
attempt to transfer any permit required herein shall result in an automatic
revocation of said permit and the imposition of a fine as hereinafter set
forth. Further, if any person violates this subsection (A)1 while he is on the
permit waiting list, he shall be automatically placed at the end of the waiting
list for a parking permit in addition to paying any applicable fines.
      2.   Permit Issuance: The village reserves the right to issue permits
based upon rules which, in the opinion of the corporate authorities, further
the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of its citizens, and
which, in the opinion of the corporate authorities, are in the best interests
of the village. Such rules may include giving priority to village employees,
village residents or any other group of persons determined appropriate by the
corporate authorities of the village.
      3.   Fee Increase: The village reserves the right to increase the fee due
for a parking permit at any time prior to the effective date of the permit.
Notification of the increase and the effective date thereof shall be deemed
given upon passage of the ordinance modifying the fee.
      4.   Payment Of Fee Difference Required: Holders of permits which are not
yet effective at the time a fee increase ordinance is passed shall pay to the
village the difference between the new fee and amount previously paid for the
permit.
   (B)   Categories: For purposes of issuing the parking permits prescribed
herein, there shall be the following categories:
Category 1    Lots A, B, C, D and E.
Lots A, B, D, and E shall be operated as commuter parking lots for which
quarterly parking permits are issued. A portion of lot C shall be operated as a
commuter parking lot for which quarterly parking permits are issued. Other
portions of lot C shall be designated by signage as employee parking and
village hall visitor parking. When space is available, daily permits shall be
issued for portions of lot C and lot E in a manner as determined appropriate by
the business office manager.
Category 4    Lot G.
The aforementioned lot shall be used by the owners and operators of retail and
other businesses and residents of multi-family units located in the central
business district. As used in this subsection, the term central business
district shall refer to that portion of the village bounded by Ogden, Garfield,
Division and Center. In the issuance of parking permits for lot G, priority
shall be given to such owners and operators of businesses and residents of
multi-family units; however, if spaces remain available after being offered to
business owners and operators and residents of multi-family units, the business
office manager may issue permits to others, or provide free public parking as
deemed appropriate by the business office manager.
   (C)   Fees And Purchasing Procedure:
      1.   Parking permits shall be obtained from the village of Lisle business
office manager. Fees shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
      2.   There is hereby established the following procedures for purchase of
quarterly parking permits:
         (a)   Permits shall be paid for in full and obtained from the business
office manager prior to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last village business
day of the quarter preceding the quarter for which the permit is to apply.
         (b)   Failure to pay for and obtain a parking permit by five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. on the last business day of a quarter shall be deemed to be a
forfeiture of the permittee's parking permit without further notice on the part
of the village. However, if the permittee pays for and obtains the parking
permit within the first five (5) business days of the quarter to which the
permit applies, the business office manager, upon the payment of a late fee in
the amount as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance,
Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”, may reinstate and reissue the permit.
Further, if the permittee pays for and obtains the parking permit within six
(6) to fifteen (15) business days after the first day of the quarter to which
it applies, the business office manager, upon the payment of a late fee in the
amount as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, may reinstate and reissue the permit. Upon the passage of fifteen
(15) days following the first day of the quarter, the permittee forfeits all
rights and privileges whatsoever in the permit and must reapply for a permit
pursuant to subsection (D) of this section.
         (c)   Failure to pay to the village any increase in parking permit
fees, as set forth in subsection (A)3 of this section, shall render the parking
permit void.
         (d)   Any person who has failed to pay any ticket issued pursuant to
this chapter, and due pursuant to the terms of this code, by five o'clock (5:
00) P.M. on the last village business day of the quarter to which the current
permit applies, shall be denied the issuance of a permit for the new quarter
until such tickets are paid in full.
   (D)   Permit Application: Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle
desiring a permit for such vehicle, shall file a permit application with the
village business office setting forth the name and address of the applicant,
the description of the vehicle for which the permit is desired, and the state
license number of the vehicle for which the permit is desired. The applicant
shall furnish proof of ownership and/or registration if it is requested by the
village. Upon satisfactory completion and acceptance of the application and
payment of the applicable permit fees hereinafter provided, the village may
issue a permit. Upon the issuance of a permit by the village business office,
the applicant shall be permitted to park said registered vehicle in the
appropriate village parking lot until the expiration or revocation of such
permit. In the event that no commuter parking permits are available for sale,
the village of Lisle may at its discretion maintain a wait list for commuter
parking permits as provided for in subsection (D)1 of this section. If any
applicant uses or attempts to use a permit in connection with the parking of a
vehicle not registered with the village business office; or if any applicant
uses or attempts to use a permit in connection with the parking of a vehicle
not owned or leased by said applicant; or if any applicant uses or attempts to
use a permit in any manner not authorized by this chapter, the applicant shall
be automatically placed at the end of the waiting list, the permit will be
revoked and fines shall be imposed as hereinafter set forth.
      1.   In the event that no commuter parking permits are available for
sale, the village of Lisle may at its discretion maintain a wait list for
commuter parking permits. In order to be placed on the wait list an application
must be submitted on a form provided by the business office and a fee paid as
required by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. The applicant must be the individual in whose name the permit will
be issued. As permits are offered to those on the wait list, forty five percent
(45%) of available permits must be offered only to incorporated village of
Lisle residents in chronological order, with those residents on the list the
longest being offered permits first, and the remaining fifty five percent (55%)
of available permits offered without regard for residency in chronological
order, with those on the list the longest being offered permits first.
   (E)   Refund: Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle having secured such a
permit from the business office manager as provided in subsection (D) of this
section may obtain a partial refund according to the schedule as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” if the owner or operator desires to cancel said permit at some time
prior to its expiration.
   (F)   Display Of Permit: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in
any of the above described village parking lots without displaying the permit
required by this chapter in the following manner: 1) parking permits that are
required to be affixed to the windshield shall be prominently displayed in the
lower right hand corner (passenger's side) of the front windshield within a
twelve inch (12") radius of said lower right hand corner; 2) parking permits
that are required to be hung from the rearview mirror shall be hung from the
rearview mirror in a prominently displayed manner, and in no event shall such
permits be affixed to the rearview mirror or otherwise displayed in any manner
contrary to this subsection. It shall be the permittee's obligation to securely
affix or hang the required permit in the designated location as provided in
this subsection.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no permit need be acquired nor displayed while
parking in lots B, C, D, and E for the period starting at two o'clock (2:00)
P.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. each day Monday through Thursday and from two
o'clock (2:00) P.M. Friday to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Monday. However, any
vehicles parked at any location upon a municipal parking lot shall comply with
all other parking restrictions and time limits as set forth in this chapter.
   (G)   Revenue: All revenues derived from the sale of permits as provided
under this section shall be deposited in the general corporate fund of the
village.
   (H)   Penalties, Fines:
      1.   Failure To Display Permit: Failure to display a permit on any
permitted vehicle shall be determined to be a violation for which a fine as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” shall be assessed for each offense.
      2.   Failure To Secure Permit: Parking in any municipal parking lot
without a valid permit shall be deemed a violation for which a fine as
established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and
Regulatory Measures” shall be assessed for each offense.
(Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2534, 6-6-1994; Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994;
Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-2003; Ord. 2005-3965, 11-7-2005; Ord. 2010-4357, 12-6-
2010; Ord. 2011-4382, 5-2-2011; Ord. 2014-4540, 8-18-2014; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
10-4-4: DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES:
Parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the
surface of the parking lot. (Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992)
10-4-5: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to parking upon municipal parking lots,
as regulated by this chapter:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in more than one parking space
as designated by curb and striping. The fine for violating this subsection
shall be as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (B)   Certain parking spaces in the aforesaid parking lots shall be
designated as parking spaces for disabled persons. Qualifications for parking
in aforesaid spaces shall be secured by the ability of the permittee to obtain
a disabled license plate for the vehicle for which the permit is secured from
the secretary of state. Violation of this subsection shall carry a fine as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. A citation written for a violation of this section
may be settled and compromised according to the procedures set forth in section
9-4-22 of this code and is subject to increase pursuant to subsection
9-4-22(F) of this code.
   (C)   It shall be prohibited in the aforesaid parking lots to back a vehicle
into a parking space except for police emergency vehicles. Violation of this
subsection shall carry a fine as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees,
Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures” for each offense.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to park, stand, or stop a vehicle in a manner
which blocks the progress of other vehicles through any aisle, or which blocks
a parking space. The foregoing shall not prohibit temporary stopping of a
vehicle if it is done for the purpose of waiting for the immediate exit of
another vehicle from a parking space, or if the stopped vehicle's progress is
impeded by traffic. The fine for violating this subsection shall be as
established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and
Regulatory Measures”. (Ord. 2003-3439, 1-20-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-
2003; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
10-4-6: HOURS LIMITED:
The following time limits shall apply to parking upon municipal parking lots,
as regulated by this chapter:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in any of the parking
lots described in section
10-4-2 of this chapter from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. until four thirty o'clock
(4:30) A.M. except in spaces that have been conspicuously marked with signs
stating that overnight parking is permitted, or as provided for in subsection
(D) of this section. Overnight parking in designated spaces in lot B shall only
be allowed from two o'clock (2:00) P.M. Friday through two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
Monday.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked in a space designated for overnight parking
for more than twenty four (24) hours in any seventy two (72) hour period,
except that there is no such time restriction from two o'clock (2:00) P.M.
Friday through two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Monday.
   (C)   Visitor parking in lot C shall be limited to the number of hours
specified by signage prior to two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on days that the village
hall is open, except that the business office manager may issue parking permits
for visitor spaces that allow for parking without such posted time limits. Time
limits specified by signage for visitor parking spaces are not in effect after
two o'clock (2:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, and on days that the village
hall is not open.
   (D)   At the discretion of the business office manager, overnight parking
permits may be issued for certain parking spaces in lot C or lot G.
   (E)   Certain spaces in lot G shall be designated by signage as free four
(4) hour parking. (Ord. 2011-4382, 5-2-2011)
10-4-7: COLLECTION OF PERMIT FEES:
For purposes of collection of permit fees in designated areas, only the
aforementioned provisions shall exclude the collection of permit fees for the
periods set forth in subsection
10-4-3(F) of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-3794, 11-
17-2003)
10-4-8: APPEAL PROCESS:
Whenever the village revokes or refuses to grant a permit, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of this chapter do not apply, or that the true
intent and meaning of this chapter have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant or person affected may appeal from that decision to
the board of appeals, consisting of the village manager, the chief of police
and the street superintendent, by written notice filed in the office of the
business office manager within fifteen (15) days from the date of the decision
appealed. The board of appeals shall call a hearing on the appeal within
fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The board shall render
a decision within no more than five (5) days after completing such hearing.
Nothing herein shall restrict the village from seeking immediate enforcement of
the regulations of this chapter in court, where the hazard involved requires
such action. This section shall not be interpreted to grant jurisdiction to the
board of appeals over claims pertaining to the validity or enforceability of
pending citations issued by the village for violations of this chapter. (Ord.
94-2563, 8-1-1994; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
10-4-9: PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-
20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 5
TRAFFIC MOVEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-5-1: One-Way Streets And Alleys
10-5-2: Stop And Yield Signs
10-5-3: Right Turns On Red Lights
10-5-4: Other Turning Movements Restricted
10-5-5: Special Restrictions
10-5-6: Penalties
10-5-1: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The following streets and alleys are hereby designated for one-way traffic
only:
   (A)   Columbia Avenue from Front Street to Division Street, northbound
traffic only.
   (B)   Middleton Avenue from Schwartz Avenue to Devon, westbound traffic
only. (Ord. 90-2031, 2-19-1990)
10-5-2: STOP AND YIELD SIGNS:
Stop signs and yield signs shall be erected at the following named street
intersections, and any person failing to obey any of the signs erected pursuant
to this section shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
   (A)   Stop Signs:
Abbeywood Drive at College Road                                    2-way stop
Abbeywood Drive at Naper Boulevard                                 1-way stop
Academy Drive at Ohio Street                                       1-way stop
Adler Court at Pennywood Drive                                     1-way stop
Alley west of Main at Burlington Avenue                            1-way stop
Alta Court at Sun Valley Road                                      2-way stop
Angel Lane at Abbeywood Drive                                      1-way stop
Arborview Drive at Ogden Avenue                                    1-way stop
Ashley Circle (east) at Burlington Avenue                          1-way stop
Ashley Circle (west) at Burlington Avenue                          1-way stop
Aspen Road at Breckenridge Road                                    1-way stop
Aspen Road at Sun Valley Road                                      1-way stop
Aster Court at Meadow Lane                                         1-way stop
Atwater Court at Burlington Avenue                                 1-way stop
Auvergne Avenue at Chicago Avenue                                  3-way stop
Auvergne Avenue at Odgen Avenue                                    1-way stop
Barkridge Court at Pennywood Drive                                 1-way stop
Barnwall Court at Ohio Street                                      1-way stop
Basswood Drive (north) at Arborview Drive                          1-way stop
Basswood Drive (south) at Arborview Drive                          1-way stop
Bayside Court at Pennywood Drive                                   1-way stop
Beau Bien Boulevard at Burlington Avenue                           2-way stop
Beau Bien Boulevard at Ogden Avenue                                2-way stop
Beau Bien Boulevard at Old Tavern Road                             3-way stop
Benedictine Parkway at Abbeywood Drive                             1-way stop
Berkshire Court at Valley Forge Road                               1-way stop
Black Partridge Lane at Old Tavern Road                            1-way stop
Blackhawk Lane at Old Tavern Road                                  1-way stop
Bloomfield Drive at Green Trails Drive                             1-way stop
Bluebell Court at Westview Lane                                    1-way stop
Bonita Court at Normandy Drive                                     1-way stop
Bordeaux Place at Normandy Drive                                   1-way stop
Breckenridge Road at Green Trails Drive                            1-way stop
Brighton Court at Longview Drive                                   1-way stop
Brittany Drive at Fender Road                                      1-way stop
Brittany Drive at Old Tavern Road                                  1-way stop
Brookwood Road at Golfview Drive                                   1-way stop
Burgundy Place at St. Tropez Place                                 1-way stop
Burlington Avenue at Center Avenue                                 4-way stop
Burlington Avenue at Schwartz Avenue                               3-way stop
Burlington Avenue at Yackley Avenue                                2-way stop
Burlington Avenue eastbound at Radcliff Road                       1-way stop
Burlington Avenue westbound at Yender Avenue                       1-way stop
Burnham Street at Burlington Avenue                                1-way stop
Burr Oak Road at Robin Lane                                        1-way stop
Bush Street at Chelsea Avenue                                      1-way stop
Bush Street at Kingston Avenue                                     1-way stop
Cabot Drive at Corporate West Drive (2443 Corporate West Drive)    2-way stop
Cabot Drive at Forbes Drive                                        1-way stop
Camden Court at Surrey Ridge Road                                  1-way stop
Candlewood Court at Oak Hill Drive                                 1-way stop
Canterbury Lane at Leask Lane                                      1-way stop
Cape Cod Court at Stonebrook Road                                  1-way stop
Carriage Hill Road at Golfview Drive                               2-way stop
Carriage Hill Road at Ridgewood Road                               1-way stop
Cascade Drive at Maple Avenue                                      1-way stop
Cascara Lane (north) at Hatch Lane                                 1-way stop
Cascara Lane (south) at Hatch Lane                                 1-way stop
Center Avenue at Division Street                                   1-way stop
Center Avenue at Front Street                                      1-way stop
Center Avenue at Maple Avenue                                      1-way stop
Center Avenue at Ogden Avenue                                      1-way stop
Center Avenue at Riedy Road                                        1-way stop
Center Avenue at Rolling Drive                                     1-way stop
Center Avenue at School Street                                     4-way stop
Chateau Place at Old Tavern Road                                   1-way stop
Chatfield Lane at Golfview Drive                                   1-way stop
Chippewa Court at Old Tavern Road                                  1-way stop
Christian Lane at Abbeywood Drive                                  1-way stop
Coach House Road at New Albany Road                                1-way stop
Collegewood Court at Old College Road                              1-way stop
Columbia Avenue at Division Street northbound                      1-way stop
Columbia Avenue at Front Street northbound                         1-way stop
Columbia Avenue at Riedy Road                                      1-way stop
Commuter train parking lot B at Center Avenue                      1-way stop
Concorde Place at Old Tavern Road                                  1-way stop
Cypress Court at Ohio Street                                       2-way stop
Deerpath Court at Carriage Hill Road                               1-way stop
Devon Avenue at Burlington Avenue                                  2-way stop
Devon Avenue at Middleton Avenue                                   1-way stop
Devon Avenue at Ogden Avenue                                       2-way stop
Division Street at Kingston Avenue                                 1-way stop
Division Street at Main Street                                     1-way stop
Driftwood Court at Oak Hill Drive                                  1-way stop
Dumoulin Avenue at Burlington Avenue                               1-way stop
Edgebrooke Drive at Leask Lane                                     1-way stop
Eisenhower Lane at Burr Oak Road                                   1-way stop
Eisenhower Lane at Patton Drive                                    2-way stop
Fender Avenue at Burlington Avenue                                 1-way stop
Fender Road at Ogden Avenue                                        2-way stop
Fender Road at Ridgeland Avenue                                    3-way stop
Fernwood Drive at Breckenridge Road                                2-way stop
Fernwood Drive at Green Trails Drive                               1-way stop
Forbes Drive at Warrenville Road                                   1-way stop
Four Lakes Drive at Lakeshore Drive northbound                     1-way stop
Front Street at Kingston Avenue westbound                          1-way stop
Front Street at Main Street                                        2-way stop
Gamble Drive at Center Avenue                                      1-way stop
Gamble Drive at Westview Lane                                      1-way stop
Garden Drive at Fernwood Drive                                     1-way stop
Garden Drive at Green Trails Drive                                 1-way stop
Garfield Avenue at Burlington Avenue                               1-way stop
Garfield Avenue at Route 53                                        1-way stop
Glenbrook Court at Coach House Road                                1-way stop
Green Trails Drive at Carriage Hill Road southbound, eastbound,    3-way stop
westbound
Green Trails Drive at Golfview Road                                1-way stop
Grenoble Court at Breckenridge Road                                1-way stop
Hampshire Court at Surrey Ridge Road                               1-way stop
Handley Court at Handley Drive                                     1-way stop
Handley Drive at Burnham Street                                    1-way stop
Hanover Court at Valley Forge Road                                 1-way stop
Hasting Lane at Lexington Road                                     1-way stop
Hasting Lane at Valley Forge Road                                  1-way stop
Hatch Lane at Spruce Lane                                          1-way stop
Hatch Lane at Warrenville Road                                     1-way stop
Hawthorne Lane at Main Street                                      1-way stop
Heritage Lane at Abbeywood Drive                                   1-way stop
Heritage Lane at Golfview Drive                                    1-way stop
Hickory Drive at Abbeywood Drive                                   1-way stop
Hitchcock Avenue at Center Avenue                                  1-way stop
Hitchcock Avenue at Yackley Avenue                                 1-way stop
Illinois Avenue at Ohio Street                                     2-way stop
Indiana Avenue at Ohio Street                                      2-way stop
Innsbrook Court at Breckenridge Road                               1-way stop
Inverness Road at Center Avenue                                    1-way stop
Inverness Road at Kingston Avenue                                  2-way stop
Inverness Road at Larkspur Lane                                    2-way stop
Ivanhoe Avenue at Ogden Avenue                                     1-way stop
Ivy Drive at Abbeywood Drive                                       1-way stop
Jonquil Avenue at Main Street                                      1-way stop
Karns Road at Ogden Avenue                                         1-way stop
Keller Street at Burlington Avenue                                 1-way stop
Keller Street at Ogden Avenue                                      1-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Gamble Drive                                    4-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Hitchcock Avenue                                4-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Maple Avenue                                    1-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Ogden Avenue                                    1-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Riedy Road                                      4-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Rolling Drive                                   4-way stop
Knollwood Court at Surrey Ridge Road                               1-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Center Avenue                                      3-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Devon Avenue                                       2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Main Street                                        2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Odgen Avenue                                       2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at River Drive                                        2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Route 53                                           1-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Schwartz Avenue                                    2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Winchester Avenue                                  2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Yackley Avenue                                     1-way stop
Lakewood Drive at Abbeywood Drive                                  1-way stop
Larkspur Lane at Maple Avenue                                      1-way stop
Leask Lane at Warrenville Road                                     1-way stop
Lexington Road at Abbeywood Drive                                  1-way stop
Lexington Road at Green Trails Drive                               1-way stop
Lillian Court at Leask Lane                                        1-way stop
Lincoln Place at Middleton Avenue                                  1-way stop
Lisle Place at Main Street                                         1-way stop
Lisle Place at Route 53                                            1-way stop
Lisle police station at Route 53 (5040 Lincoln Avenue)             1-way stop
Lisle police station east parking lot at Short Street              1-way stop
Lisle police station west parking lot at Short Street              1-way stop
Longview Drive (east) at Abbeywood Drive                           1-way stop
Longview Drive (west) at Abbeywood Drive                           1-way stop
Maple Court at Maple Avenue                                        1-way stop
Mark Carre Court at Beau Bien Boulevard                            1-way stop
McKenzie Station Drive at Lacey Avenue                             1-way stop
McKenzie Station Drive at School Street                            1-way stop
McKinley Avenue at Burlington Avenue                               1-way stop
Meadow Lane at Inverness Road                                      1-way stop
Meadow Lane at Meyer Drive                                         2-way stop
Meyer Drive at Gamble Drive                                        1-way stop
Middleton Avenue at Center Avenue                                  1-way stop
Middleton Avenue at Main Street                                    1-way stop
Middleton Avenue at Route 53                                       2-way stop
Middleton Avenue at Yackley Avenue                                 2-way stop
Middleton Place at Main Street                                     1-way stop
Mill Bridge Lane at Abbeywood Drive                                1-way stop
New Albany Road at Green Trails Drive                              1-way stop
New Albany Road at Surrey Ridge Road                               1-way stop
Newport Drive at Robin Lane                                        1-way stop
Normandy Drive at Old Tavern Road                                  1-way stop
Oak Hill Drive at Yackley Avenue                                   1-way stop
Oakview Drive at Jonquil Lane                                      1-way stop
Oakview Drive at Rolling Drive                                     1-way stop
Ohio Court at Ohio Street                                          1-way stop
Ohio Court at Short Street                                         3-way stop
Ohio Street at Kingston Avenue                                     1-way stop
Ohio Street at Pennywood Drive                                     1-way stop
Old College Road at Tanglewood Drive                               1-way stop
Old Tavern Road at Fender Road                                     1-way stop
Parking lot at Short Street (by baseball field)                    1-way stop
Patton Drive at Maple Avenue                                       1-way stop
Pebblecreek Drive at Leask Lane                                    1-way stop
Peppertree Court at Timbertrails Road                              2-way stop
Pine Hill Road at Warrenville Road                                 1-way stop
Plank Road at Ogden Avenue                                         1-way stop
Pleasant Hill Lane at Abbeywood Drive                              1-way stop
Portsmouth Drive at Robin Lane                                     1-way stop
Radcliff Road at Odgen Avenue                                      1-way stop
Raintree Court at Carriage Hill Road                               1-way stop
Redwood Lane at Hatch Lane                                         2-way stop
Regency Woods Drive at Leask Lane                                  1-way stop
Ridgeland Avenue at Karns Road                                     4-way stop
Ridgewood Road at Green Trails Drive                               1-way stop
Riedy Road at Main Street                                          1-way stop
Rielly Place at Lisle Place                                        1-way stop
River Bend Drive at Four Lakes Avenue                              3-way stop
River Drive at Burlington Avenue                                   2-way stop
River Drive at Ogden Avenue                                        2-way stop
Riverview Drive at Short Street                                    1-way stop
Riverview parking lot at Riverview Drive                           1-way stop
Robin Lane at Yackley Avenue                                       1-way stop
Rolling Drive at Route 53                                          1-way stop
St. Anton Court at Breckenridge Road                               1-way stop
St. Tropez Place at Normandy Drive                                 1-way stop
Scarlet Oak Lane at Trinity Drive                                  1-way stop
Scott Circle (east) at Handley Drive                               1-way stop
Scott Circle (west) at Handley Drive                               1-way stop
Shabbona Lane at Old Tavern Road                                   1-way stop
Shagbark Court at Carriage Hill Road                               1-way stop
Shorewood Court at Abbeywood Drive                                 1-way stop
Short Street at high school park district driveways                4-way stop
Short Street at Lisle park district administrative building (east  1-way stop
exit)
Short Street at Lisle park district administrative building (west  1-way stop
exit)
Short Street at Main Street                                        1-way stop
Sleepy Hollow Lane at Brookwood Road                               1-way stop
Sleepy Hollow Lane at Golfview Drive                               1-way stop
Southport Avenue at Main Street                                    2-way stop
Spencer Avenue at Burlington Avenue                                3-way stop
Spencer Avenue at Division Street                                  1-way stop
Spencer Avenue at Front Street (includes exit drive at parking lot 2-way stop
D)
Spencer Avenue at Ogden Avenue                                     1-way stop
Spencer Avenue at School Street                                    4-way stop
Spruce Lane at Arborview Drive                                     1-way stop
Stonebrook Road at New Albany Road                                 1-way stop
Stonehaven Way at Trinity Drive                                    1-way stop
Stowe Court at Breckenridge Road                                   1-way stop
Sun Valley Road at Breckenridge Road                               3-way stop
Sun Valley Road at College Road                                    2-way stop
Sun Valley Road at Old College Road                                1-way stop
Sunnydale Lane at Golfview Drive                                   1-way stop
Surrey Ridge Road at Abbeywood Drive                               1-way stop
Tall Tree Court at Oak Hill Drive                                  1-way stop
Tangley Oaks Trail at Fender Road                                  1-way stop
Taos Court at Sun Valley Drive                                     1-way stop
Tealwood Drive at Green Trails Drive                               1-way stop
Telluride Court at Sun Valley Road                                 1-way stop
Timbertrails Road (east) at Green Trails Drive                     1-way stop
Timbertrails Road (west) at Green Trails Drive                     2-way stop
Timberview Drive at Abbeywood Drive                                1-way stop
Trinity Drive at Abbeywood Drive                                   2-way stop
Trinity Drive at Golfview Drive                                    1-way stop
Trowbridge Way at Trinity Drive                                    1-way stop
Twin Oak Lane at White Oak Lane                                    1-way stop
Tyrnbury Drive at Abbeywood Drive                                  1-way stop
Vail Court at Breckenridge Road                                    1-way stop
Valley Forge Road at Lexington Road                                1-way stop
Valley Forge Road at New Albany Road                               1-way stop
Valley Forge Road at Surrey Ridge Road                             1-way stop
Varsity Drive at University Lane                                   1-way stop
Waubansie Lane at Old Tavern Road                                  1-way stop
Wedgewood Court at Old Tavern Road                                 1-way stop
Weeping Willow Drive at Benedictine Parkway                        1-way stop
Wellington Avenue at Keller Street                                 2-way stop
Westerhoff Drive at Warrenville Road                               1-way stop
Western Court at Yender Avenue                                     1-way stop
Westview Lane at Hitchcock Avenue                                  1-way stop
Westview Lane at Maple Avenue                                      1-way stop
White Birch Drive at Warrenville Road                              1-way stop
White Oak Lane at Lexington Road                                   1-way stop
Willow Glen Court westbound at Radcliff Road                       1-way stop
Winchester Avenue at Burlington Avenue                             1-way stop
Winchester Avenue at Middleton Avenue                              1-way stop
Winchester Avenue at Ogden Avenue                                  2-way stop
Woodcliff Court at Lexington Avenue                                1-way stop
Yender Avenue at Ogden Avenue                                      2-way stop
Yender Avenue at Warrenville Road                                  1-way stop
Yender Avenue southbound at Burlington Avenue                      1-way stop
 
(Ord. 2005-3920, 4-4-2005; amd. Ord. 2010-4334, 7-19-2010; Ord. 2010-4335, 7-
19-2010; Ord. 2016-4666, 7-18-2016)
   (B)   Yield Signs:
Acorn Hill Court at White Oak Lane                               1-way yield
Arborview Drive opposite lots 138 and 139 (4363 Arborview Drive) 1-way yield
Arborview Drive opposite lots 203 and 204 (4525 Arborview Drive) 1-way yield
Bentley Court at Hasting Lane                                    1-way yield
Briarcliff Court at Woodcliff Court                              1-way yield
Brunswick Court at Hasting Lane                                  1-way yield
Burning Tree Court at White Birch Drive                          1-way yield
Colton Court at Keller Street                                    1-way yield
Hatch Lane between lots 146 and 149 (4338 Hatch Lane)            1-way yield
Hatch Lane opposite lots 177 and 178 (4587 Hatch Lane)           1-way yield
Inverness Road at Larkspur Lane                                  2-way yield
Inverness Road at Westview Lane                                  1-way yield
Kingston Avenue at Middleton Avenue                              1-way yield
Kirkwood Court at Fernwood Drive                                 1-way yield
Lakeshore Drive eastbound at River Bend Drive                    1-way yield
Meadow Lane at Clover Drive                                      2-way yield
Meadow Lane at Westview Lane                                     1-way yield
Muirwood Court at Timbertrails Road                              1-way yield
Oakton Court at Lakewood Drive                                   1-way yield
Ohio Street at Larkspur Lane                                     1-way yield
Ory Bridge Court at Chatfield Lane                               1-way yield
Paxton Court at Keller Street                                    1-way yield
Pine Tree Court at White Birch Drive                             1-way yield
Pinehurst Court at Timbertrails Road                             1-way yield
Redwood Lane at Arborview Drive                                  1-way yield
Rehm Court at Sleepy Hollow Lane                                 1-way yield
Rolling Drive at Larkspur Lane                                   1-way yield
Royal Glen Court at Carriage Hill Road                           1-way yield
Southbury Court at Stonebrook Road                               1-way yield
Tanglewood Drive at Timbertrails Road                            1-way yield
Wildwood Court at Tanglewood Drive                               1-way yield
Winkler Court at Sleepy Hollow Lane                              1-way yield
 
(Ord. 2005-3920, 4-4-2005; amd. Ord. 2016-4666, 7-18-2016)
10-5-3: RIGHT TURNS ON RED LIGHTS:
Right turns shall be and they are hereby prohibited on red lights at the
following intersections, and any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense:
Northbound Indiana Avenue at Ogden Avenue, between the hours of four o'clock
(4:00) to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
Northbound Main Street at School Street.
Northbound Route 53 at Main Street, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M.
Southbound Route 53 at Short Street, on school days when children are present.
Westbound Short Street at Route 53, on school days when children are present.
(Ord. 2005-3921, 4-4-2005; amd. Ord. 2015-4591, 7-20-2015; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
10-5-4: OTHER TURNING MOVEMENTS RESTRICTED:
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven so as to cross the centerline of Main
Street between Ogden and Burlington Avenues, except when an obstruction makes
it necessary or when making a left turn into or from any alley, private road or
driveway. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction on Main Street between Ogden and Burlington
Avenues, nor to enter a parking space located across the centerline.
   (B)   Operators of motor vehicles are hereby prohibited from turning left
when exiting the parking lot of Jewel Foods at Route 53 and Maple Avenue via
the southernmost of the two (2) driveways providing access from said parking
lot onto Route 53. This prohibition shall not apply to the northernmost
driveway of the two (2) driveways providing access from said parking lot onto
Route 53. Anyone found to have violated any provision of this subsection shall
be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each violation.
   (C)   Reserved.
   (D)   Reserved.
   (E)   Reserved.
   (F)   Operators of motor vehicles are hereby restricted to making right hand
turns only from the right hand lane when traveling north on College Road at the
intersection of Abbeywood; provided, however, that this provision shall not
apply to RTA and other common carrier buses transporting members of the public.
   (G)   Operators of motor vehicles are hereby allowed only to turn right from
the driveways located on the north property line of the Amoco station at 1101
Warrenville Road, Lisle, Illinois.
   (H)   Operators of motor vehicles are hereby prohibited from making U-turns,
when traveling east on Warrenville Road, from Route 53 easterly to the village
corporate limits. (Ord. 90-2087, 9-4-1990; amd. Ord. 94-2579, 9-19-1994; Ord.
96-2776, 5-20-1996; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
10-5-5: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Operators of nonemergency motor vehicles are hereby prohibited from driving
upon, prohibited from allowing any nonemergency vehicle to occupy, and are
prohibited from in any way causing any nonemergency motor vehicle to traverse,
stop, back or stand in the driveway located immediately north of the village
hall/police station building from Main Street to Spencer Avenue. Anyone found
to have violated any provision of this section shall be fined as established by
the annual fee ordinance for each violation. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-5-6: PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-
20-2021)
CHAPTER 6
BICYCLES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Definitions
10-6-2: Rules For Riding And Operating
10-6-3: Equipment
10-6-4: Traffic Regulations Applicable
10-6-5: Permits Required
10-6-6: Penalties
10-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
BICYCLE: Shall mean and include, a vehicle with two (2) tandem wheels, neither
of which are less than twenty inches (20") in diameter, with solid or pneumatic
tires, having a steering bar or wheel, a saddle seat and propelled by human
power.
OPERATE: The word to "operate" or any form or tense thereof, shall mean and
refer to the use, putting into action or causing to function of a bicycle by a
person mounted thereon.
In addition to the above definitions, any applicable definitions of the traffic
code shall be deemed to be included therein. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964)
10-6-2: RULES FOR RIDING AND OPERATING:
   (A)   Riding Abreast: When more than two (2) persons in a group are
operating bicycles upon a roadway, they shall ride single file.
   (B)   Clinging To Vehicles: No person operating a bicycle shall cling or
attach himself or the bicycle to any other moving vehicle.
   (C)   Extra Passenger: No person operating a bicycle shall carry another
person on the handlebars of said bicycle.
   (D)   Emerging From Alley, Driveways And Garages: The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or private sidewalk shall stop the
bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or across a public sidewalk or onto
or across a public sidewalk line projected across an alley, and shall exercise
extreme care in making such movements.
   (E)   Intoxication; Drugs; Physical Inability: No person shall operate a
bicycle while under the influence of liquor or drugs or while physically or
mentally unfit to safely operate the same. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964)
   (F)   Operating On Sidewalks: Except as hereinafter provided, bicycles may
be operated on sidewalks in public parks and in residence and nonresidence
districts, but in single file only. Under all circumstances, the rider shall
yield the right of way to pedestrians using the sidewalk, and due and proper
care shall at all times be exercised by the rider for the pedestrians. When
approaching a pedestrian on the sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle shall be
reduced to a speed which is no greater than necessary to continue the operation
of the bicycle without the rider dismounting, and shall not be increased until
the pedestrian has passed. No bicycle shall be operated upon the following
described public walks 1 :
      1.   That public walk extending from Meyer Drive to Bluebell Court and
lying between lots 38 and 39 and 57 and 58 in the subdivision known as Oakview
unit 4.
      2.   That public walk extending from the southeast edge of the Schiesher
School grounds to Larkspur Lane and from Larkspur Lane to Meadow Lane and lying
between lots 19 and 20, 30 and 31 and 45 and 46 in the subdivision known as
Oakview unit 1. (Ord. 2009-4241, 1-12-2009)
   (G)   Parking Bicycles: It shall be unlawful to park any bicycle in the
business district along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with
pedestrians, or along roadways where they may interfere with traffic, or with
persons getting into or out of motor vehicles. No person other than the owner
or operator shall move, or in any manner interfere with any bicycle properly
parked, nor shall any person interfere or in any manner hinder any person from
properly parking a bicycle, except that members of the police department and
fire department may move, or in proper cases, prevent the parking of the
bicycle when, in the judgment of the policemen and firemen, his action is
necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property.
   (H)   Keep To Right: All bicycles when operated on roadways shall be kept to
the right and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right hand edge
of the roadway.
   (I)   Speed: No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than is
reasonable or proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable
regard to the safety of the rider and of other persons and property.
   (J)   Trick Riding: No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or
engage in any kind of trick or unsafe riding.
   (K)   Turns; Starting; Stopping: The operator of a bicycle on a roadway,
when making a right turn shall follow the right hand edge of the roadway, and
the operator of a bicycle on a roadway when making a left turn shall approach
the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No
operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without
first indicating such movement as provided by law. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964; amd.
Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-1983)
   (L)   Chaining Of Bicycles To Public Property; Use Of Bike Racks: No bicycle
shall be chained, tied, or otherwise attached to any public property, other
than designated bike racks, including, but not limited to, fences, utility
poles, sign poles, parking meters, newspaper vending boxes, or handrails.
Bicycles chained, tied, or otherwise attached to any public property other than
designated bike racks may be removed and disposed of by the police department
without notice and without liability to the village.
   (M)   Time Restriction: Bicycles attached to public bike racks in excess of
twenty four (24) hours, other than those bicycles attached to public bike racks
located in commuter parking lots C and D and displaying a current village
permit as provided for in section
10-6-5 of this chapter, may be removed and disposed of by the police department
without notice and without liability to the village. (Ord. 2005-3965, 11-7-
2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  9-4-22(E) of this code regarding fines.
10-6-3: EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   Lights: No bicycle shall be operated within the period from sunset to
sunrise without having a properly lighted headlight attached to the front of
the bicycle, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof
for a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') nor without having a
red light attached to the rear of the bicycle which is clearly visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') from the rear.
   (B)   Mechanical Condition: No person shall operate a bicycle which is not
in such mechanical condition so that it can be safely operated.
   (C)   Signaling Devices: Each bicycle shall be equipped with a mechanical or
electrical signaling device in good working order and audible at a distance of
fifty feet (50') when sounded. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964; amd. Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-
1983)
10-6-4: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs and
signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and
shall obey the orders and directions of every officer of the village authorized
to direct or regulate traffic. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964; amd. Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-
1983)
10-6-5: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   (A)   General: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any
person to attach a bicycle to a public bike rack in village commuter parking
lots C and D in excess of twenty four (24) hours without first obtaining a
permit.
   (B)   Permit Issuance: Permits are issued for twelve (12) month periods
beginning January 1 through December 31.
   (C)   Permit Application: Every owner or operator of a bicycle desiring a
permit for such bicycle, shall file a permit application with the village
business office setting forth the name, address, and phone number of the
applicant, and the description and serial number of the bicycle for which the
permit is desired. The applicant shall furnish proof of ownership if it is
requested by the village. Upon satisfactory completion and acceptance of the
application, the village may issue a permit. Upon the issuance of a permit by
the village business office, the applicant shall be permitted to park said
registered bicycle in the appropriate village parking lot until the expiration
or revocation of such permit.
   (D)   Display Of Permit: It shall be unlawful to attach any bicycle to any
public bike rack in commuter lots C and D in excess of twenty four (24) hours
without displaying a current permit as required by this chapter in the
following manner: 1) permits must be affixed on top of the top tube in front of
the seat, 2) the permit must not be wrapped around the tube. (Ord. 2005-3965,
11-7-2005)
10-6-6: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
fines and penalties as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. (Ord. 2005-3965, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Department Established
10-7-2: Appointments
10-7-3: Compensation
10-7-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Administrative Adjudication Department.
   (A)   The Administrative Adjudication Department shall adjudicate any
violation of the Village’s parking ordinances.
   (B)   The adoption of this Chapter does not preclude the Village from using
other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of its codes and ordinances.
(Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-7-2: APPOINTMENTS:
The Village Manager is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the Hearing
Officer and other positions set forth in chapters 10-8, 10-9 and 10-10 hereof
and such other positions as may be necessary or desirable for the efficient
operation of the Administrative Adjudication Department. One person may hold
and fulfill the requirements of one or more of said positions. Hearing Officers
shall meet the requirements of 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-4(c) and shall have successfully
completed a formal training program which includes the following:
   (A)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
which he/she will conduct;
   (B)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations he/she will
adjudicate;
   (C)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
   (D)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and
issuing final orders.
In addition, every Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law
in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-
2022)
10-7-3: COMPENSATION:
Compensation to be paid for the positions established within this Chapter shall
be as determined by the Village Board. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR STANDING, PARKING AND COMPLIANCE
VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose
10-8-2: Definitions
10-8-3: Administration
10-8-4: Procedures
10-8-5: Final Notice
10-8-6: Notice Of Final Determination
10-8-7: Final Determination Of Liability
10-8-8: Petition To Set Aside Determination Of Liability
10-8-9: Non-Resident Procedures
10-8-10: Fines/Penalties
10-8-11: Enforcement Of Judgment
10-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a means for fair and efficient
enforcement of Village vehicular standing, parking, and condition of vehicle
regulation violation(s) and other Village regulation violation(s) as may be
allowed by law, through an administrative adjudication of such violation(s)
within the geographic boundaries of the Village and a schedule of uniform fines
and penalties and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and
penalties pursuant to Section 11-208.3 of the Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/
11-208.3). (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
 
COMPLIANCE A violation of a Village regulation governing the condition or use of equipment
VIOLATION: on a vehicle or governing the display of a municipal vehicle tax license.
NON-MOVING (1)   A violation of any vehicular standing or parking ordinance or regulation of
TRAFFIC    the Village; or
VIOLATION: (2)   A compliance violation. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
 
10-8-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations shall provide for a Traffic Compliance
Administrator, who shall be the Police Chief or his/her designee, with the
power, authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth to:
   (A)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation(s).
   (B)   Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance
violation notices and other notices as may be required under this chapter 10-
8 or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability.
   (D)   Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual report(s) verifying
that the final determination of standing, parking, and compliance regulation
violation(s) liability issued in accordance with this chapter and with 625 ILCS
5/11-208.3.
   (E)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter, as hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5.
   (F)   Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and validity of notices of
impending drivers license suspension in an administrative review capacity in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, as hereinafter set forth.
   (G)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
   (H)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by directing the Village Attorney
to file complaints in the Circuit Court seeking judgments for unpaid fines or
penalties and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by law. (Ord.
2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-4: PROCEDURES:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations shall be in accordance with the following
procedures. Final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice of impending impoundment,
validity of notice of impending drivers license suspension, and collections
shall be made only in accordance with the provisions set forth below:
   (A)   Non-Moving Traffic Violation Notice: Vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations notice(s) ("non-moving traffic violation
notice(s)") shall be issued by the person(s) authorized herein and shall
contain information and shall be served, certified and have evidentiary
admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Authorization: All full-time, part-time, and auxiliary police and
community service officers, as well as other specifically appointed
individuals, shall have the authority to issue non-moving traffic violation
notices.
   (C)   Detection Of Non-Moving Traffic Violations: Any individual authorized
herein to issue violation notices and who detects a non-moving traffic
violation of any section of any applicable Village ordinance, shall issue a
notice of non-moving traffic violation thereof and shall make service thereof
as hereinafter set forth.
   (D)   Contents Of Non-Moving Traffic Violation Notice: The non-moving
traffic violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
      1.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      2.   The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violated.
      3.   Either the vehicle make and state registration number or the license
number of the vehicle.
      4.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment
prior to the hearing date.
      5.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      6.   A section entitled "Request for Hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the registered owner or lessee may request, within ten (10) days of
the date of the violation notice issuance, and may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by:
         (a)   A written request for a hearing by mail made to the office of
the Traffic Compliance Administrator; or
         (b)   An in-person request for a hearing made during normal business
hours at the office of the Traffic Compliance Administrator at the Lisle Police
Department, 5040 Lincoln Avenue, Lisle, IL.
      7.   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
   (E)   Service: Service of violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the person
issuing such notice by:
      1.   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
standing or parked or non-complying vehicle; or
      2.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee to
the vehicle, if present.
   (F)   Certification: The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice(s) shall be
certified by the person issuing said notice by:
      1.   Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service; or
      2.   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the Traffic Compliance Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his/her control.
   (G)   Record Of Notice: The original or a facsimile of the violations notice
(s) shall be retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept as a
record in the ordinary course of business.
   (H)   Prima Facie Evidence Of Correctness: Any violations notice(s) issued,
signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be
prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
facts shown the notice.
   (I)   Admissibility: The violations notice(s) or a copy(s) shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
   (J)   Administrative Hearing: Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the
Traffic Compliance Administrator shall schedule a date for the hearing and
shall provide written notice of the hearing date to the registered owner or
lessee of the vehicle who has requested the hearing.
   (K)   A nonresident registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice without
personally appearing by following the procedures set forth in section
10-8-9.
   (L)   If the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle either fails to
request a hearing or fails to pay the fine, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall send a Final Parking/Code Violation Notice to the
registered owner or lessee of the vehicle as provided in section
10-8-5 hereof. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-5: FINAL NOTICE:
Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to
request a hearing as set forth in the vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violations notice(s), or pay the fine, a final notice:
   (A)   Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle"
at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State.
   (B)   Shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last
known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease.
   (C)   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
   (D)   Service of the final notice sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   (E)   The final notice sent in accordance herewith shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following information:
      1.   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations notice(s).
      2.   Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated.
      3.   Vehicle make and state registration or license number.
      4.   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
      5.   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current status,
other than paid in full.
      6.   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
      7.   Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable penalty
or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time
and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations liability for the "cited"
violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated, which final
determination shall constitute a debt due and owing the Village. (Ord. 2022-
4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-6: NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION:
A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violations liability shall be sent following an appearance by the
violator and a determination of liability, or the failure to appear by the
violator by the final hearing date upon conclusion of any review, as is
hereinafter set forth in section
10-8-7, and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information and warnings:
   (A)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt
due and owing the Village.
   (B)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing
the Village within the time specified may result in the Village's use of a
collection agency or the Village's filing a Complaint in the Circuit Court to
have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a Judgment in accordance with 625 ILCS
5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference.
   (C)   A warning that the person's vehicle may be immobilized pursuant to
chapter 10-10 of this Title. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-7: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violations liability shall:
   (A)   Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty
after the Hearing Officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust the administrative petition procedure set forth in section
10-8-8; or
   (B)   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the final
administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violations on the date
and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the
Hearing Officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) liability shall become final:
      1.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or
      2.   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a
filing having been made. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-8: PETITION TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violations liability may be filed by a person owing an
unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions and
grounds hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in the office of the Hearing Officer within, but not later than, twenty-
one (21) days from the date the final determination of liability is made.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer shall act upon the petitions timely filed and
render a decision thereon within twenty-one (21) days of the date filed.
   (C)   The grounds for setting aside a final determination of liability shall
be limited to the following:
      1.   The person against whom the determination of liability is made was
not the owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" on the date the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations notice(s) were issued.
      2.   The person's having already paid the fine or penalty for the
violations in question.
      3.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (D)   Should the final determination of liability be set aside, the Hearing
Officer shall:
      1.   Notify the final registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be,
that the determination of liability has been set aside.
      2.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a
date, time and place, for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
final determination of liability has been set aside, as appropriate.
      3.   Notice of setting aside of the final determination of liability and
the notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid,
to the address set forth on the petition to set aside the final determination
of liability.
      4.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice(s)
are deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-9: NON-RESIDENT PROCEDURES:
Non-residents of the Village who have been served vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violations notice(s) or Code or Ordinance violation
notices in accordance with this chapter may contest the alleged violation on
its merits, as could a resident pursuant to section
10-8-4, or may contest the validity without personally appearing at an
administrative hearing by:
   (A)   Requesting a "Non-Resident Request for Hearing" form from the Traffic
Compliance Administrator within ten (10) days of the date of the violation
notice issuance by:
      1.   A written request for a hearing form made to the office of the
Traffic Compliance Administrator by U.S. mail; or
      2.   An in-person request for a hearing form made during normal business
hours at the office of the Traffic Compliance Administrator at the Lisle Police
Department, 5040 Lincoln Avenue, Lisle, IL.
   (B)   Filing a completed "Non-Resident Request for Hearing" form and a
notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the
violation notice or citation which must be filed with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator and postmarked within ten (10) days of the date of issuance of
the Non-Resident Request for Hearing form. The request shall be deemed filed
upon receipt by the Administrative Adjudication Department.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts
set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the non-resident and the
facts as contained in the violation notice or citation.
   (D)   Notice of the determination of the Hearing Officer shall be served
upon the non-resident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
non-resident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
   (E)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.
   (F)   All other provisions of this Chapter shall apply equally to non-
residents of the Village. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-10: FINES/PENALTIES:
The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations shall be as set forth in
the codes and ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-8-11: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   (A)   Any fine, penalty, or part of any fine or any penalty remaining unpaid
after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies
under this Chapter and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall
be a debt due and owing the Village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty
resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a
final disposition of that violation.
   (B)   After expiration of the period within which a petition for judicial
review under section
10-9-4 may be sought for a final determination of the parking, standing or
compliance violation, the Village may commence a proceeding in the Circuit
Court for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the final determination of
violation. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the Village from consolidating
multiple final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violation
against a person in a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the Village
shall file a certified copy of the final determination of parking, standing, or
compliance violation, which shall be accompanied by a certification that
recites facts sufficient to show that the final determination of violation was
issued in accordance with this Chapter and applicable state law. Service of the
summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by Section 2-
203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, provided that the total amount of fines and penalties for final
determination of parking, standing or compliance violations does not exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
CHAPTER 9
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-9-1: Applicability
10-9-2: Hearing Officer
10-9-3: Administrative Hearings
10-9-4: Administrative Review Law To Apply
10-9-5: Administrative Remedies Not Exclusive
10-9-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all administrative adjudications
conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter 10-9. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-
16-2022)
10-9-2: HEARING OFFICER:
The Hearing Officer shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed
to:
   (A)   Preside over the administrative hearings, established in this chapter,
as the adjudicator.
   (B)   Administer oaths.
   (C)   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production
of relevant papers or documentation.
   (D)   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations as are established in this
Chapter.
   (E)   Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative hearing(s).
   (F)   In his/her discretion, approve the expungement/sealing of citations
based upon a motion and petition to expunge/seal filed by the party subject to
the citation. The motion and petition to expunge/seal shall be substantially in
the form used by the Appellate Defender’s office. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-9-3: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
   (A)   Hearing dates shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in
the violation notice or citation issued and served in accordance with this
chapter or such additional notices issued in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   All administrative hearings shall be tape recorded.
   (C)   Persons appearing to contest the alleged standing, parking, or
compliance violation, Code violation or Ordinance violation on its merits may
be represented by counsel at their own expense and may present evidence and
cross-examine opposing witnesses.
   (D)   The Hearing Officer shall consider testimony and other evidence
without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence.
   (E)   Administrative hearings shall culminate in a determination of the
Hearing Officer as set forth in this title.
   (F)   The Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess
fines and penalties as set forth in this Code. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-9-4: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW TO APPLY:
The finding, decision and order of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to
review in the Circuit Court of the appropriate county, and the provisions of
the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.), and all amendments
and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted
and shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the
findings, decision and order of a Hearing Officer under this Chapter, except as
otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-9-5: ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The administrative remedies contained in this title are not exclusive, and the
Village shall have the right to pursue any other legally available remedies.
(Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
CHAPTER 10
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM
SECTION:
10-10-1: Vehicle Immobilization Program Established
10-10-2: Vehicles Eligible For Immobilization
10-10-3: Notice Of Vehicle Immobilization And Hearing
10-10-4: Notice To Be Affixed To Immobilized Vehicle
10-10-5: Towing Of Immobilized Vehicle
10-10-6: Release Of Immobilized Vehicle
10-10-7: Post Vehicle Immobilization/Impoundment Notice
10-10-8: Immobilized Vehicle Hearing
10-10-9: Immobilization Fees
10-10-10: Unlawful To Relocate Immobilized Vehicles
10-10-1: VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
The Chief of Police, or his designee, is authorized to direct and supervise a
program of vehicle immobilization as provided for in this chapter. The program
of vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle
upon the public way, in a public place, or on private property with the consent
of the property owner, by placement of a restraint in such a manner as to
prevent its operation when there are five (5) or more outstanding or otherwise
unsettled parking violation notices or warrants issued for such violations
pending against the owner of such motor vehicle. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-2: VEHICLES ELIGIBLE FOR IMMOBILIZATION:
A vehicle shall be eligible for immobilization, as provided herein, any time
after inclusion of its state registration number or other vehicle
identification number on any immobilization list, regardless of whether or not
the listed vehicle itself has received a parking violation complaint. A
vehicle's state registration number or other vehicle identification number
shall be included on an immobilization list only if:
   (A)   The registered owner of the vehicle has accumulated five (5) or more
outstanding or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices from the Village
or a warrant issued for such violations is pending against the owner of such
motor vehicle.
   (B)   At least fourteen (14) days prior to the Village's placing the
registration plate number of the vehicle on the vehicle immobilization
eligibility list, notice of impending vehicle immobilization has been sent to
the registered owner via first class mail, postage prepaid, at the address of
the registered owner recorded with the Secretary of State or, in the case of a
vehicle bearing the registration number of a state other than Illinois, at the
address of the registered owner recorded in that state's registry of motor
vehicles. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-3: NOTICE OF VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION AND HEARING:
The notice required in subsection 10-10-2(B) shall state the name and address
of the registered owner, the state registration number or vehicle
identification number of the vehicle, the nature of the ordinance(s) violated
and the numbers and issue dates of the outstanding complaints. The notice shall
also advise that a person may request a hearing to challenge the validity of
the notice of impending vehicle immobilization. The request for a hearing shall
be made within ten (10) days of mailing the notice. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-4: NOTICE TO BE AFFIXED TO IMMOBILIZED VEHICLE:
Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the
vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is
immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage.
The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the
immobilizing restraint is a violation of the Illinois Criminal Code. The notice
shall also provide information specifying how release of the immobilizing
restraint may be had and how the registered owner may obtain a post-
immobilization hearing pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-5: TOWING OF IMMOBILIZED VEHICLE:
Except where the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilizing
restraint has not been released pursuant to section
10-10-6 within forty-eight (48) hours of its placement, or twenty-four (24)
hours during snow plowing operations, the restraint shall be released and the
vehicle towed and impounded. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-6: RELEASE OF IMMOBILIZED VEHICLE:
Prior to a hearing on the validity of the immobilization as provided in section
10-10-8, the owner of an immobilized vehicle or other interested person shall
be permitted to secure release of the vehicle by:
   (A)   Paying the immobilization and towing and storage fees, if applicable,
specified in section
10-10-9; and
   (B)   Paying all the fines and penalties, if any, on the outstanding
complaints for which notice had been sent prior to the date of the
immobilization. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-7: POST VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION/IMPOUNDMENT NOTICE:
Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner of the vehicle at the address to which the notice specified in subsection
10-10-2(B) was mailed. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to a
post-immobilization and post-towing hearing as provided in subsection 10-10-8,
and that if the car is not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of the
notice, the vehicle may be disposed of in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle
Code and/or Village of Lisle Ordinance. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-8: IMMOBILIZED VEHICLE HEARING:
The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other interested person shall have the
right to a hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent
towing was erroneous or whether the vehicle was properly included on an
immobilization list, if the owner files a written demand for a hearing with the
Chief of Police, or his designee, within fourteen (14) days after issuance of
the notice specified in this chapter or within fourteen (14) days after the
immobilization, whichever is later. A hearing shall be conducted within
seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of a written demand for a hearing prior to
the immobilization of the vehicle and within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt
of a written demand for a hearing after the vehicle has been immobilized,
unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parties. Failure to request or attend a
scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the
event of such failure, any amount deposited pursuant to subsection 10-10-6(A)
shall be forfeited. A hearing provided in accordance with this Chapter shall
not determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or notice of
parking violations issued relative to the immobilized vehicle but shall only
relate to whether the vehicle was properly immobilized or towed. (Ord. 2022-
4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-9: IMMOBILIZATION FEES:
The fee for immobilization shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The owner of
the vehicle shall be charged reasonable storage and towing fees should the
vehicle be removed to a private storage facility, provided that not fees shall
be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be
erroneous. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
10-10-10: UNLAWFUL TO RELOCATE IMMOBILIZED VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an
immobilizing device without the approval of the Chief of Police or his
designee. (Ord. 2022-4961, 5-16-2022)
TITLE 11
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-3: Registration
11-1-4: License
11-1-5: Authorization To Provide Cable And Video Services
11-1-6: Cable Television Franchise
11-1-7: Application To Existing Franchise Ordinances And Agreements
11-1-8: Penalties
11-1-9: Other Remedies
11-1-10: Severability
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this title is to:
   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services;
   (B)   Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications providers and services;
   (C)   Promote competition in telecommunications;
   (D)   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services;
   (E)   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the village;
   (F)   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the village
for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
   (G)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in
public trust by the village;
   (H)   Assure that the village's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
   (I)   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the village and the
residents of the village for permitting private use of the public ways;
   (J)   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations
of the village;
   (K)   Assure that the village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety and welfare; and
   (L)   Enable the village to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof,
the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the
context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that, directly or indirectly, owns or controls, is owned or
controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person, and
including any person owning, controlling or holding power to vote five percent
(5%) or more of the outstanding voting securities of such other person.
AS BUILT DRAWINGS: See definition of Record Drawing.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, 47 USC section 532 et
seq., as now and hereafter amended.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide
"cable service" within the village as that term is defined in the cable act.
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, hand hole or other utility facility within the public way
that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications
facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or
lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers on a national level.
FRANCHISE COSTS: Direct and indirect fees, costs and expenses incurred by the
village in connection with the enforcement and administration of this title, as
now or hereafter amended, which are to be reimbursed or paid to the village,
including, but not limited to, the application and review fees provided in
section
11-6-2 of this title, the construction permit fees provided in section
11-6-6 of this title, the annual license fee provided in section
11-6-7 of this title, and such other costs as may be incurred by the village in
connection with a license or franchise granted under this title.
FRANCHISE FEE: With respect to cable television franchises granted by the
village, the franchise fee provided in section
11-5-20 of this title.
   With respect to open video systems, the franchise fee provided in section
11-6-9 of this title.
   With respect to other telecommunications systems, the compensation provided
for in a license or franchise agreement pursuant to this title for the right
and privilege granted by the village to use, cross and occupy public ways of
the village for the installation, operation, maintenance, repair and
replacement of telecommunications facilities of the grantee, but does not
include franchise costs.
GRANTEE: Any person receiving a telecommunications license, a
telecommunications franchise or a cable television franchise from the village
pursuant to this title.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received for the
operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service
within the village.
   (A)   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
      2.   Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges;
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges;
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments;
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the grantee or holder
or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the operator's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement;
      8.   Compensation received by the grantee or holder that is derived from
the operation of its network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the grantee or holder as
compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on its
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection
(A)9 of this definition;
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
grantee or holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the
revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of
business; and
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b) and the franchise fee collected under any franchise issued
under chapter 5 of this title.
   (B)   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the grantee or holder to the extent the
refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video
service;
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the grantee's or
holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business
and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders;
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay a service provider fee or
franchise fee with respect to the service;
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the grantee or holder and required to be remitted to the
taxing entity, including sales and use taxes;
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   (C)   Revenue of an affiliate of a grantee or holder shall be included in
the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the grantee or holder has the effect of
evading the payment of the service provider fee or franchise fee which would
otherwise be paid on the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The state administrative agency, or lawful
successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers,
services and providers in the state of Illinois.
INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR: A person or entity that provided cable services or
video services in the village of Lisle under a franchise agreement with the
village pursuant to chapter 5 of this title on January 1, 2007.
OVS OR OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: A video platform operated by a local exchange
telephone carrier or cable operator providing common carriage to programming
distributors unaffiliated with the OVS operator and certified by the FCC as an
open video system in accordance with section 653 of the telecommunications act
of 1996, subject to village telecommunications franchise requirements and the
payment of fees to the village based on the annual gross revenues of the OVS
operator, but not to exceed the rate at which cable television franchise fees
are imposed on cable operators franchised by the village.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of
way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications
facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground
supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and
individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for
motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village which
has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as
those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the village, but only
to the extent of the village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a
license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
RECORD DRAWING: A document certified to the village that accurately locates all
aspects of construction horizontally and vertically (depth and/or height). The
final record drawing document shall be exactly the same as the approved
construction plan, except for any modifications that revised items of
construction proposed or implied in the approved construction plan, all of
which shall be depicted on the final record drawing document.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the
necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and
regulations of the Illinois commerce commission, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property
within the village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including,
but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas,
electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means and includes every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any
ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease,
or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data,
image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: See definition of Telecommunications Facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under
the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports
for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the
lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois commerce
commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the village and acquired, established,
dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with
telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not
limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
public ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications services.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle.
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the village,
other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined
herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which
are not subject to right of way licensing and franchising as provided in this
title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2007-4149, 11-5-2007)
11-1-3: REGISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and
providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications originating or terminating in the village shall register
with the village pursuant to chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-4: LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire
to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons
and areas outside the village shall first obtain a license granting the use of
such public ways from the village pursuant to chapter 3 of this title. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-5: AUTHORIZATION TO PROVIDE CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICES:
A person or entity, including a telecommunications carrier, seeking to provide
cable service or video service pursuant to this title shall not use the public
rights of way for the installation or construction of facilities for the
provision of cable service or video service or offer cable service or video
service until it has obtained either: a) a state issued authorization from the
commission to offer or provide cable or video service under section 401 of the
cable and video competition law of 2007 1 ; or b) a cable franchise from the
village under chapter 5 of this title and section 11-42-11 of the Illinois
municipal code 2 . An operator providing cable or video service under a state
issued authorization shall operate subject to chapter 5A of this title. An
operation providing cable service under a village issued franchise shall
operate subject to chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 2007-4149, 11-5-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.
11-1-6: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires
to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications
facilities in any public way of the village for the purpose of providing cable
service to persons in the village shall first obtain a cable franchise from the
village as provided in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-7: APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS:
This title shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or
franchise agreement until:
   (A)   The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
   (B)   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall be fined as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-
15-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-1-9: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this title shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that
the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this title. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this
title, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared invalid,
in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
CHAPTER 2
REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Required
11-2-2: Fee
11-2-3: Purpose
11-2-4: Exceptions
11-2-1: REQUIRED:
Except as provided in section
11-2-4 of this chapter, all telecommunications carriers having
telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the village, and
all telecommunications carriers or providers that offer or provide
telecommunications service to customer premises within the village, shall
register with the village pursuant to this chapter on forms to be provided by
the village clerk, which shall include the following:
   (A)   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates.
   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
   (C)   A description of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications
facilities within the village.
   (D)   A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the village.
   (E)   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject
to public way licensing or franchising under this title.
   (F)   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the village.
   (G)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois commerce
commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the
village.
   (H)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the federal communications commission to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the village.
   (I)   Such other information as the village clerk may reasonably require.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-2-2: FEE:
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider
shall be accompanied by a fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-2-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of registration under this chapter is to:
   (A)   Provide the village with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the village, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the village.
   (B)   Assist the village in enforcement of this title.
   (C)   Assist the village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the village.
   (D)   Assist the village in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-2-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The following telecommunications carriers and providers are exempt from
registration under this chapter:
   (A)   Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated by any
political subdivision of this state for its own use.
   (B)   A company or person which provides telecommunications services solely
to itself, its affiliates or members between points in the same building, or
between closely located buildings under common ownership or control, provided
that such company or person does not use or occupy any public ways of the
village or other ways within the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
CHAPTER 3
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE
SECTION:
11-3-1: Telecommunications License
11-3-2: License Application
11-3-3: Determination By The Village
11-3-4: Agreement
11-3-5: Nonexclusive Grant
11-3-6: Rights Granted
11-3-7: Term Of Grant
11-3-8: License Route
11-3-9: Location Of Facilities
11-3-10: Construction Permits
11-3-11: Compensation To Village
11-3-12: Services To Village Users
11-3-13: Amendment Of Grant
11-3-14: Renewal Applications
11-3-15: Renewal Determinations
11-3-16: Obligation To Cure As A Condition Of Renewal
11-3-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the village for the sole
purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside
the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this chapter
shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information:
   (A)   The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
      3.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
      4.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
   (E)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
   (F)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   (G)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      1.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
      2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   (H)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
   (I)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   (J)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
   (K)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
   (L)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
   (M)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to chapter 6 of this
title.
   (N)   Such other and further information as may be required by the village
manager. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-3: DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE:
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application
under section
11-3-2 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying
the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
   (D)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
   (E)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
   (F)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
   (G)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
   (H)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
license is granted.
   (I)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
   (J)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
   (K)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-4: AGREEMENT:
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the
village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms
and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of the
village will be granted. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No license granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-6: RIGHTS GRANTED:
   (A)   No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or
interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
   (B)   No license granted under this chapter shall authorize or excuse a
licensee from securing such further easements, leases, licenses, permits or
other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use a public way,
excess capacity in an underground facility or surplus space in an overhead
facility.
   (C)   No license granted under this chapter shall be construed as any
warranty of title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-7: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license
granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-8: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this chapter shall be limited to a
grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-
15-1996)
11-3-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms and conditions
set forth in title 7, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-3-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in title 7, chapter 1 of this code,
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and
a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide
substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-3-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each license granted under this chapter is subject to the village's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing
in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a licensee from agreeing to the
compensation to be paid. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-12: SERVICES TO VILLAGE USERS:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to
persons or areas within the village upon submitting an application for approval
pursuant to chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-13: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
   (A)   A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the village which are not
included in a license previously granted under this title.
   (B)   If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the
village shall grant a license amendment without further application. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-14: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its license under this chapter shall, not more
than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than ninety (90) days before
expiration of the current license, file an application with the village for
renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
   (A)   The information required pursuant to section
11-3-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the
village and the grantee. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-15: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under section
11-3-14 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
   (D)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this title and the
license agreement.
   (E)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
   (F)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-16: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this
title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken
by the grantee has been approved by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
CHAPTER 4
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
SECTION:
11-4-1: Telecommunications Franchise
11-4-2: Franchise Application
11-4-3: Determination By The Village
11-4-4: Agreement
11-4-5: Nonexclusive Grant
11-4-6: Term Of Grant
11-4-7: Rights Granted
11-4-8: Franchise Territory
11-4-9: Location Of Facilities
11-4-10: Construction Permits
11-4-11: Compensation To Village
11-4-12: Nondiscrimination
11-4-13: Services To Village
11-4-14: Amendment Of Grant
11-4-15: Renewal Applications
11-4-16: Renewal Determinations
11-4-17: Obligation To Cure As A Condition Of Renewal
11-4-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the village and to provide
telecommunications services to any person or area in the village. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this chapter
shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information:
   (A)   The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of
the applicant.
   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed
facilities.
   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
      3.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
      4.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
   (E)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
   (F)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   (G)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      1.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
      2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   (H)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
   (I)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   (J)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
   (K)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
   (L)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
   (M)   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, an open video
system (OVS) or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
   (N)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the village that applicant intends to use or
lease.
   (O)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will
offer or make available to the village and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
   (P)   A description of applicant's policies for line extensions and for
customer access to applicant's services, facilities and/or network.
   (Q)   The area or areas of the village the applicant desires to serve and a
schedule for build out to the entire franchise area.
   (R)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to chapter 6 of this
title.
   (S)   Such other and further information as may be requested by the village
manager. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-3: DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application
under section
11-4-2 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying
the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
   (D)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
   (E)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
   (F)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
   (G)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
   (H)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
franchise requested is granted.
   (I)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
   (J)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
   (K)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-4: AGREEMENT:
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the village
have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the
village will be granted. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-6: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications
franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-7: RIGHTS GRANTED:
   (A)   No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title
or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
   (B)   No franchise granted under this chapter shall authorize or excuse a
franchisee from securing such further easements, leases, franchises, permits or
other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use a public way,
excess capacity in an underground facility or surplus space in an overhead
facility.
   (C)   No franchise granted under this chapter shall be construed as any
warranty of title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-8: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be limited to
the specific geographic area of the village to be served by the franchise
grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms and conditions
set forth in title 7, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-4-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in title 7, chapter 1 of this code,
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and
a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures
provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction
practices. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-4-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the village's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing
in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a franchisee from agreeing to
the compensation to be paid. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-12: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any
customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's
services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a
franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently
situated customers. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-13: SERVICES TO VILLAGE:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the
village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-
1996)
11-4-14: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
   (A)   A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to
locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the village which
are not included in a franchise previously granted under this title.
   (B)   If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the
village shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-15: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not
more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less than one hundred fifty (150)
days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the
village for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following
information:
   (A)   The information required pursuant to section
11-4-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between
the village and the grantee. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-16: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application
under section
11-4-15 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
   (D)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this title and the
franchise agreement.
   (E)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
   (F)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-17: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of
this title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be
taken by the grantee has been approved by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-
1996)
CHAPTER 5
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
SECTION:
11-5-1: Franchise
11-5-2: Franchise Application
11-5-3: Overbuild Application
11-5-4: Response To Community Needs
11-5-5: Duty To Supplement Application
11-5-6: Renewal Proposals
11-5-7: Determination Of Formal Renewal Proposals
11-5-8: Determination Of Alternative Renewal Proposals
11-5-9: Noncable Act Renewal Application
11-5-10: Determination Of Noncable Act Renewal
11-5-11: Obligation To Cure As A Condition Of Renewal
11-5-12: Determination Of Overbuild Franchise Proposals
11-5-13: Franchise Agreement
11-5-14: Nonexclusive Grant
11-5-15: Term Of Grant
11-5-16: Rights Granted
11-5-17: Franchise Territory
11-5-18: Location Of Facilities
11-5-19: Construction Permits
11-5-20: Franchise Fee
11-5-21: Nondiscrimination
11-5-22: Services To The Village
11-5-1: FRANCHISE:
A cable television franchise shall be required of any person who desires to
construct a cable system in public streets and ways of the village and to
provide or offer cable service to any person or area within the village. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a cable franchise authorizing the use of the public
ways of the village shall file an application with the village pursuant to this
chapter which shall include the following information:
   (A)   The identity of the cable television franchise applicant and, if
different, the identity of the affiliate that will be the cable operator if a
franchise is granted.
   (B)   The identity and relationship of all other affiliates of the applicant
not disclosed pursuant to subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   The design and performance characteristics of the subscriber network
that will be constructed and/or provided by the applicant.
   (D)   The design and performance characteristics of the institutional
network that will be constructed and/or provided by the applicant.
   (E)   A network map of all existing facilities owned or used by the
applicant in the village, if any, together with preliminary engineering plans,
specifications and a network map of the facilities proposed to be located
within the village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
      1.   The location and route requested for applicant's proposed cable
television facilities.
      2.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
      3.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other cable operators or telecommunications
carriers.
      4.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
   (F)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its cable facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
   (G)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's cable facilities.
      2.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's cable facilities.
   (H)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      1.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
      2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's cable facilities.
   (I)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
   (J)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   (K)   Financial statements and pro formas prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's
financial ability, over the life of the franchise, to construct, operate,
maintain, relocate and remove the cable system and facilities.
   (L)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the cable
television and telecommunications facilities and services described in the
application.
   (M)   If the applicant is proposing to use its cable system to provide or
offer a telecommunications service, sufficient information to determine whether
a telecommunications franchise or license is required under chapter 3 or 4 of
this title.
   (N)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing cable or
telecommunications facilities in the village that applicant intends to use or
lease.
   (O)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will
provide or make available to the village and other local public, educational
and governmental institutions.
   (P)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will
provide or make available for local origination cable programming.
   (Q)   A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
   (R)   The franchise area or areas of the village the applicant desires to
serve and a schedule for build out to the entire proposed franchise area.
   (S)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to chapter 6 of this
title.
   (T)   Such other and further information as may be requested by the village
manager or required by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-3: OVERBUILD APPLICATION:
To the extent required by the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-42-11, an applicant requesting a new cable franchise from the
village to provide cable services within all or any portion of the geographic
territory of the village served by another cable operator with a cable
franchise granted by the village shall, in addition to the information
otherwise required by this chapter, provide sufficient information to
demonstrate that it will provide cable service upon franchise terms and
conditions that will equal or exceed those terms and conditions required under
the existing cable television franchise which pertain to:
   (A)   The territorial extent of the franchise.
   (B)   System design.
   (C)   Technical performance standards.
   (D)   Construction schedules.
   (E)   Performance and surety bonds.
   (F)   Standards for construction and installation of cable television
facilities.
   (G)   Service to subscribers.
   (H)   Public, educational and governmental (PEG) access channels and
programming.
   (I)   Production assistance for PEG access channels and programming.
   (J)   Liability protection and indemnification.
   (K)   Franchise fees. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-4: RESPONSE TO COMMUNITY NEEDS:
In addition to the information otherwise required by this chapter, the
applicant shall present sufficient information to demonstrate that its cable
franchise proposal will, if approved by the village, meet the future cable
related needs and interests of the community as identified by the village.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-5: DUTY TO SUPPLEMENT APPLICATION:
Applicants and their affiliates are responsible for the continuing accuracy and
completeness of all information and supporting materials submitted or required
to be submitted in support of their cable franchise application, or related
application for a telecommunications license or franchise to use a cable system
to provide other telecommunications services. Information and supporting
materials submitted must be current and updated as necessary and in a timely
manner at any time and all times before a decision is rendered on the
application. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-6: RENEWAL PROPOSALS:
   (A)   Upon completion of proceedings by the village under section 626 of the
cable act to review the performance of the cable operator under the expiring
franchise and to identify the future cable related community needs and
interests of the village, the village shall issue its request for a renewal
proposal and shall establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section or
the provisions of section 626(a) through (g) of the cable act, the village may
agree to consider a cable operator's proposal for renewal of its franchise
pursuant to the alternative renewal procedures authorized by section 626(h) of
the cable act, and shall have discretion to grant or deny such renewal proposal
after first giving the public adequate notice and an opportunity to comment on
the renewal proposal. The denial of a renewal proposal submitted pursuant to
this alternative procedure shall not affect the action on any subsequent
renewal proposal pursuant to subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   Cable franchise renewal proposals submitted to the village under
subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall contain the materials required by
the village including the information required by sections
11-5-2,
11-5-3 and
11-5-4 of this chapter.
   (D)   In the event that any or all of the above referenced provisions of the
cable act are repealed, proceedings for franchise renewal shall be conducted in
accordance with sections
11-5-9 and
11-5-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-7: DETERMINATION OF FORMAL RENEWAL PROPOSALS:
Proceedings to consider proposals for renewal of a cable franchise pursuant to
subsection
11-5-6(B) of this chapter and section 626(a) through (g) of the cable act shall
be conducted in accordance with the requirements of section 626 and with the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-8: DETERMINATION OF ALTERNATIVE RENEWAL PROPOSALS:
Proceedings to consider alternative proposals for renewal of a cable franchise
submitted pursuant to subsection
11-5-6(B) of this chapter and section 626(h) of the cable act shall be
conducted and determined in the discretion of the corporate authorities. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-9: NONCABLE ACT RENEWAL APPLICATION:
A grantee that desires to renew its franchise pursuant to subsection
11-5-6(D) of this chapter shall, not more than two hundred forty (240) days nor
less than one hundred fifty (150) days before expiration of the current
franchise, file an application with the village for renewal of its franchise
which shall include the following information:
   (A)   The information required pursuant to sections
11-5-2,
11-5-3 and
11-5-4 of this chapter.
   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between
the village and the grantee. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-10: DETERMINATION OF NONCABLE ACT RENEWAL:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application
under section
11-5-9 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
   (D)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this title and the
franchise agreement.
   (E)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
   (F)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-11: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of
this title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be
taken by the grantee has been approved by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-
1996)
11-5-12: DETERMINATION OF OVERBUILD FRANCHISE PROPOSALS:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete cable franchise
application proposal pursuant to section
11-5-3 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying
the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
   (D)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
   (E)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
   (F)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
   (G)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
   (H)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
franchise requested is granted.
   (I)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
   (J)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
   (K)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-13: FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:
The approval of any cable franchise granted hereunder shall be preliminary
until the applicant and the village have executed a written franchise agreement
setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to
occupy and use public ways of the village will be granted. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-
1996)
11-5-14: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to construct, maintain and operate a cable
system within the public ways of the village for the delivery of video
programming or other telecommunications services. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-15: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a cable television
franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-16: RIGHTS GRANTED:
   (A)   No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title
or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
   (B)   No franchise granted under this chapter shall authorize or excuse a
franchisee from securing such further easements, leases, franchises, permits or
other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use a public way,
excess capacity in an underground facility or surplus space in an overhead
facility.
   (C)   No franchise granted under this chapter shall be construed as any
warranty of title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-17: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A cable franchise granted under this chapter shall be limited to the specific
geographic area of the village to be served by the franchise grantee. Unless
otherwise stated in the franchise agreement, the franchise territory shall be
all territory within the corporate limits of the village during the term of the
franchise. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-18: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all cable facilities shall
be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms
and conditions:
   (A)   If technically feasible, grantee's cable facilities should be
installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess
capacity exists within such utility facility.
   (B)   A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a cable franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way
must also locate its cable facilities underground.
   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its existing cable facilities underground within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
franchise term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as
determined by the village engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently
to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
   (E)   Whenever new cable facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public
street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications
carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits,
manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-19: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All cable franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for cable
facilities as required in chapter 7 of this title; provided, however, that
nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a cable franchisee from
agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a
franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially
equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-
15-1996)
11-5-20: FRANCHISE FEE:
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, every cable
operator shall pay a franchise fee to the village, as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, equal to an amount in relation to the cable franchisee's annual
gross revenues derived from the provision of cable service within the village.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, franchise fee
payments shall be payable quarterly within thirty (30) days after the end of
each calendar quarter. Each quarterly franchise fee payment shall be
accompanied by a verified financial statement which shall accurately present
the cable operator's gross revenues derived from the provision of cable service
within the village for any such calendar quarter.
   (C)   In addition to the quarterly financial statements provided herein, the
cable franchisee shall also submit a verified annual financial statement within
ninety (90) days after the end of the twelve (12) month franchise fee period
which shall accurately present the cable operator's annual gross revenues for
the twelve (12) month period. Any recomputed amounts due the village as a
franchise fee shall be paid to the village at that time, together with interest
at the rate as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance,
Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”. Any recomputed amounts overpaid to the
village as a franchise fee shall be credited against the franchise fee payment
due for the next calendar quarter.
   (D)   The franchise grantee shall permit the village to inspect the cable
operator's books and records for the purpose of auditing the operator's annual
gross revenues derived from the provision of cable service within the village.
Any additional amount determined to be due the village as a result of an audit
shall be paid to the village within thirty (30) days, together with interest at
the rate as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance,
Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures” and the audit expenses incurred by the
village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-5-21: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A cable operator shall make its cable services available to any customer within
its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to
the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services; provided,
however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a cable operator from
making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-22: SERVICES TO THE VILLAGE:
A franchisee shall make its cable services available to the village and to
governmental entities within the village at its most favorable rate for
similarly situated users, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
CHAPTER 5A
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICES UNDER STATE ISSUED AUTHORIZATION
SECTION:
11-5A-1: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
11-5A-2: PEG Access Carriage Requirements
11-5A-1: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   Fee Imposed: A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the service provider fee imposed hereby
shall be as established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”.
   (C)   Notice To The Village: Unless the holder has earlier sent notice to
the village pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(a), the holder
shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the
holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village. Together with this ordinance the village shall
send the holder instructions for remitting the payment and statement required
hereby.
   (E)   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable service or
video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the
village, under chapter 5 of this title and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
42-11, in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection (B) of this section.
   (H)   Applicable Principles: All determinations and calculations under this
chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
   (I)   No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder: Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the village, including any tax that is or may later be required
to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video
service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the
holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telecommunications
service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government's
9-1-1 or E9-1-1 fees, taxes or charges.
   (J)   Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider:
      1.   Audit Requirement: The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the village imposes under section
11-5-20 of this title on other cable service or video service providers in its
jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any
amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of this section. If all
local franchises between the village and cable operators terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those applicable under the local government taxpayers'
bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of
amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
      2.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall
be paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an
invoice for the sum.
   (K)   Late Fees/Payments: All fees due and payments which are past due shall
be governed by the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1. (Ord. 2007-4149, 11-5-2007; amd. Ord. 2007-4152, 11-19-
2007; Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-5A-2: PEG ACCESS CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS:
On the date set forth in subsection
11-5A-1(D) of this chapter, but not earlier than ninety (90) days after a
holder sends notice to the village under 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
801(a), a holder shall: a) designate the same amount of capacity on its network
to provide for public, education, and government access use, as the incumbent
cable operator is required to designate under its franchise terms in effect
with a local unit of government on January 1, 2007; and b) retransmit to its
subscribers the same number of public, education, and government access
channels as the incumbent cable operator was retransmitting to subscribers on
January 1, 2007. (Ord. 2007-4149, 11-5-2007)
CHAPTER 6
FEES AND COMPENSATION
SECTION:
11-6-1: Purpose
11-6-2: Application And Review Fee
11-6-3: Other Village Costs
11-6-4: Reserved Compensation For Public Ways
11-6-5: Compensation For Village Property
11-6-6: Construction Permit Fee
11-6-7: Annual Fees
11-6-8: Cable Fees
11-6-9: OVS Fees
11-6-10: Regulatory Fees And Compensation; Not A Tax
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the payment and recovery of
all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the village related to the
enforcement and administration of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
   (A)   Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to chapter 3 or 4 of
this title shall pay a flat fee or a percentage, as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, of the estimated cost of the applicant's proposed telecommunications
facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional engineer, whichever is
greater.
   (B)   The application and review fee shall be deposited with the village as
part of the application filed pursuant to chapter 3 or 4 of this title.
   (C)   An applicant whose license or franchise application has been
withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its application
and review fee written request, be refunded an amount as established by Title
1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory Measures”.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-6-3: OTHER VILLAGE COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written
demand therefor, reimburse the village as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” in relation to direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the
village in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of
the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-2800,
7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-6-4: RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS:
The village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications
license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the
village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the
granted property rights. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-5: COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use
and occupy village property for the installation of telecommunications
facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the village. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-6: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit
fee as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” equal to a flat fee or a percentage of the estimated cost of
constructing the telecommunications facilities, whichever is greater, as
certified by the applicant's engineer and approved by the village engineer.
(Ord. 97-2887, 6-2-1997; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-6-7: ANNUAL FEES:
Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each license
or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the village as
established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures” as reimbursement for the village's costs in connection with
reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the public ways
in behalf of the public and existing or future users. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996;
amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-6-8: CABLE FEES:
Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments
and costs provided in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-9: OVS FEES:
Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, all OVS systems and
franchise grantees shall pay a fee to the village in relation to annual gross
revenues, as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”, subject to the same regulations contained in section
11-5-20 of this title for franchise fees paid to the village by cable operators
franchised to provide cable service within the village and for payment of any
franchise costs, if applicable. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2021-4921,
9-20-2021)
11-6-10: REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION; NOT A TAX:
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any
compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in section
11-6-4 of this chapter, are separate from, and additional to, any and all
federal, state, local and village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on
account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications
services. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
CHAPTER 7
CONDITIONS OF GRANT
SECTION:
11-7-1: Location Of Facilities
11-7-2: General Duties
11-7-3: Construction Permits
11-7-4: Interference With The Public Ways (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-5: Damage To Property
11-7-6: Notice Of Work (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-7: Repair And Emergency Work (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-8: Maintenance Of Facilities
11-7-9: Relocation Or Removal Of Facilities (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-10: Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-11: Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185,
3-17-2008)
11-7-12: Damage To Grantee's Facilities
11-7-13: Restoration Of Public Ways, Other Ways And Village Property (Rep. by
Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-14: Facilities Maps
11-7-15: Duty To Provide Information
11-7-16: Leased Capacity
11-7-17: Grantee Insurance (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-18: General Indemnification (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-19: Performance And Construction Surety (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-
2008)
11-7-20: Security Fund (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-21: Construction And Completion Bond (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-22: Coordination Of Construction Activities
11-7-23: Assignments Or Transfers Of Grant (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-24: Transactions Affecting Control Of Grant (Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-
2008)
11-7-25: Revocation Or Termination Of Grant
11-7-26: Notice And Duty To Cure
11-7-27: Hearing
11-7-28: Standards For Revocation Or Lesser Sanctions
11-7-1: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with
the terms and conditions set forth in title 7, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord.
2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
   (A)   All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any
construction in the public ways, comply with all requirements of JULIE.
   (B)   All license or franchise grantees shall, on written request from the
village manager, provide written confirmation sufficient for customary land
survey and land title insurance purposes concerning the location of its
facilities in public ways, and disclaiming any interest in public ways where it
has no license or franchise to construct or operate its facilities. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits
for telecommunications facilities as required in title 7, chapter 1 of this
code. However, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a grantee
from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in
a license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide
substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-4: INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-5: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf
shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or
damage any village property, public ways of the village, other ways or other
property located in, on or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-6: NOTICE OF WORK:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-7: REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-8: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and
safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state
and local requirements. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-9: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-10: REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-11: EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-12: DAMAGE TO GRANTEE'S FACILITIES:
Unless directly and proximately caused by the wilful, intentional or malicious
acts by the village, the village shall not be liable for any damage to or loss
of any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the village as a
result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements,
construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public
ways by or on behalf of the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-13: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-14: FACILITIES MAPS:
Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the village with an accurate
map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within
the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-15: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
Within ten (10) days of a written request from the village manager, each
license or franchise grantee shall furnish the village with information
sufficient to demonstrate:
   (A)   Grantee has complied with all requirements of this title.
   (B)   All municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the
village in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities
provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
   (C)   All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the
grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made
available for inspection by the village at reasonable times and intervals.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-16: LEASED CAPACITY:
A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior village
approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided:
   (A)   Grantee shall furnish the village with a copy of any such lease or
agreement.
   (B)   The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with
the requirements of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-17: GRANTEE INSURANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-18: GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-19: PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-20: SECURITY FUND:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-21: CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-22: COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
All grantees are required to cooperate with the village and with each other.
   (A)   By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the village with a
schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public ways.
   (B)   Each grantee shall meet with the village, other grantees and users of
the public ways annually or as determined by the village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
   (C)   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the village engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-23: ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-24: TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-25: REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT:
A license or franchise granted by the village to use or occupy public ways of
the village may be revoked for the following reasons:
   (A)   Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways of the
village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
   (B)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
   (C)   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
   (D)   Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
   (E)   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or
license assets, or a substantial interest therein.
   (F)   Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in
any application to the village.
   (G)   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
   (H)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this title.
   (I)   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the
village.
   (J)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
   (K)   Violation of material provisions of this title.
   (L)   Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-26: NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE:
In the event that the village manager believes that grounds exist for
revocation of a license or franchise, he shall give the grantee written notice
of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise
statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance,
and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30)
days to furnish evidence:
   (A)   That corrective action has been, or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
   (B)   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
   (C)   That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-27: HEARING:
In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory
to the village manager as provided in section
11-7-26 of this chapter, the manager shall refer the apparent violation or
noncompliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall
provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard
concerning the matter. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-28: STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS:
If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material
provisions of this title, or of a franchise or license agreement, the corporate
authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to
establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances,
extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the
following factors:
   (A)   Whether the misconduct was egregious.
   (B)   Whether substantial harm resulted.
   (C)   Whether the violation was intentional.
   (D)   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
   (E)   Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
   (F)   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
CHAPTER 8
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
CHAPTER 9
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
11-9-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
11-9-2: Enforcement
11-9-3: Penalties
11-9-4: Customer Credits
11-9-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   (A)   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments: Any mandatory amendment to the cable and video customer
protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 2007-4148, 11-5-2007)
11-9-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law. (Ord. 2007-4148, 11-5-2007)
11-9-3: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does
hereby declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements
of the cable and video customer protection law, as incorporated by reference in
this chapter, a cable or video provider shall be subject to monetary penalties
as established in
Title 1, Chapter 20, “Fees, Fines, Insurance, Guarantees, and Regulatory
Measures”. Such penalties shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the
law and shall not represent the village's exclusive remedy for any material
breach. All monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis.
   (A)   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (B)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified
material breach.
   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection (B) of this
section.
   (D)   The board of trustees hereby delegates authority to levy penalties to
the village manager.
   (E)   Any decision of the village manager to levy penalties may be appealed
to the board of trustees, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged material
breach and penalties levied therefor within twenty one (21) days following
receipt of the cable or video providers request for an appeal. (Ord. 2007-4151,
11-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2021-4921, 9-20-2021)
11-9-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule of
customer credits for violations of the law provided for in the provisions of
220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s). Those credits shall be applied on
the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video
provider is responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer
is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 2007-4148, 11-5-2007)
CHAPTER 10
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
11-10-1: Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Repealed
11-10-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE REPEALED:
Effective January 1, 2003, there is enacted the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act. If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified
municipal telecommunications tax act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for
any reason, or if chapter 11 of this title is repealed or becomes ineffective
for any reason, then ordinance 98-2947, passed January 5, 1998, shall be deemed
in full force and effect as of the date public act 92-0526 or chapter 11 of
this title is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
CHAPTER 11
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
11-11-1: Definitions
11-11-2: Tax Imposed
11-11-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
11-11-4: Returns To Department
11-11-5: Resellers
11-11-6: Rebates
11-11-7: Severability
11-11-8: Effective Date
11-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage between each
channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the
interstate interoffice channel provided within Illinois. However, "gross
charge" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
municipality;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and community
affairs;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices; or
   (I)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of
any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision
of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state,
who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state.
The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six
percent (6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer.
   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six
percent (6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be
allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such
other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in this state.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this section is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   (A)   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use in
the manner prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
department in the manner provided by the department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before the last day of February, and on or before the last day of every
month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication
retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required
by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the
act. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-5: RESELLERS:
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided in this chapter, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax
free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active
resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-6: REBATES:
The village may rebate some or all of the amount of the tax authorized by this
chapter paid by persons sixty five (65) years of age or older. Any tax related
to such rebate shall be rebated from the village directly to persons qualified
for the rebate as determined by chapter 12 of this title of the village of
Lisle, which shall not be filed with the department. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2002-
3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-8: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval and publication as required by law, provided, however, that: a)
sections
11-11-2 and
11-11-3 of this chapter shall take effect for all bills issued on or after
January 1, 2003, b) the tax provided for herein shall take effect for all bills
issued on or after January 1, 2003, and c) any amounts due or payable to the
municipality for any tax periods ending prior to January 1, 2003, shall
nevertheless remain payable as if this chapter had not been adopted. (Ord.
2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
TITLE 12
STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LEGAL FRAMEWORK
SECTION:
12-1-1: Official Name
12-1-2: Authority
12-1-3: Purpose
12-1-4: Minimum Requirements
12-1-5: Conflicting Provisions
12-1-6: Adoption
12-1-7: Amendments To The DuPage County Countywide Stormwater And Floodplain
Ordinance
12-1-8:    Saving Clause
12-1-1: OFFICIAL NAME:
The official name of this document (Title 12) is the “Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance of the Village of Lisle, Illinois.” For convenience, it is referred
to throughout this title as the “Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the powers
granted and limitations imposed by Illinois law, including 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/
11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-1-3: PURPOSE:
This Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance is adopted for the purposes of:
   (A)   Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on stormwater
drainage;
   (B)   Reducing the existing potential for stormwater damage to public
health, safety, life, and property;
   (C)   Protecting human life and health from the hazards of flooding and
degradation of water quality;
   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the quality, quantity, and availability of
surface and ground water resources;
   (E)   Preserving and enhancing existing wetlands, buffers, and aquatic
environments, and encouraging restoration of degraded areas;
   (F)   Controlling sediment and erosion in and from stormwater facilities,
developments, and construction sites;
   (G)   Preventing the further degradation of the quality of ground and
surface waters;
   (H)   Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff control,
especially when the land is developed for human activity;
   (I)   Requiring the design and evaluation of each site runoff control plan
consistent with watershed capacities;
   (J)   Encouraging the use of stormwater storage in preference to stormwater
conveyance;
   (K)   Lessening the taxpayers’ burden for flood related disasters, repairs
to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
   (L)   Meeting the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water
Resources’ floodway permitting requirements delineated in 615 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/18g (“an Act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and
streams of the State of Illinois”), as amended from time to time;
   (M)   Making Federally subsidized flood insurance available to the Village
of Lisle and Village of Lisle property owners by fulfilling the requirements of
the national flood insurance program, and participating in the community rating
system so that flood damages are further mitigated by improved regulation and
property owners benefit by discounted insurance premiums for floodplain
properties;
   (N)   Complying with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified in title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
   (O)   Encouraging cooperation between the Village of Lisle, DuPage County,
and other governmental entities with respect to floodplain and stormwater
management;
   (P)   Requiring cooperation and consistency in stormwater management
activities within and between the units of government having stormwater
management jurisdiction;
   (Q)   Restricting future development in the floodplain to facilities that
will not adversely affect the floodplain environments or adversely affect the
potential for flood damage;
   (R)   Incorporating water quality and habitat protection measures in all
stormwater management activities within the Village of Lisle;
   (S)   Requiring regular, planned maintenance of stormwater management
facilities;
   (T)   Encouraging control of stormwater quantity and quality at the most
site specific or local level;
   (U)   Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and
realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when
necessary to ensure the adequacy of stormwater controls;
   (V)   Participating in a procedure by which communities throughout DuPage
County may petition the DuPage County Stormwater Committee to implement and
enforce the provisions of their DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance; and
   (W)   Requiring strict compliance with and enforcement of this Code.
(Ord. 2021-4935, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-1-4: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance are the
minimum requirements deemed necessary to carry out the Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance's stated purposes and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by State Statutes.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance, all development and construction activities must comply with all
other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations of the Village.
   (C)   All references in this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance to other
governmental regulations are for informational purposes only and do not
necessarily constitute a complete list of other applicable regulations. These
references do not imply responsibility for the Village to enforce regulations
imposed by other government authorities.
(Ord. 2021-4935, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-1-5: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Conflict with State or Federal Regulations: If the provisions of this
Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state or
federal government, the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent
allowed by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more
stringent controls.
   (B)   Conflict with Other Village Regulations: If the provisions of this
Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance are inconsistent with one another or if
they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations
of the Village, the more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise
expressly stated. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more
stringent controls.
   (C)   Conflict with Private Agreements: This Stormwater Water and Floodplain
Ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement,
covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the
provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance impose a greater
restriction than imposed by an agreement or covenant among private parties, the
provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance govern.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-1-6: ADOPTION:
   (A)   Adoption Of DuPage County Countywide Stormwater And Floodplain
Ordinance: It is hereby adopted by the Village for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, use and occupancy,
location and maintenance of land development and building construction in
accordance with proper floodplain and stormwater controls, including permits
and penalties, that certain code known as the DuPage County Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance being particularly the May 14, 2019, edition thereof, and
all subsequent amendments, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions
as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended per section 12-1- 4 of this
chapter, of which one copy has been and now is filed in the Office of the
Village Clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length therein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the Village.
   (B)   Adoption of Flood Insurance Study: Adoption of the Flood Insurance
Study dated August 1, 2019.
   (C)   Adoption Of Flood Insurance Rate Map: Adoption of the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, DuPage County, Illinois, and incorporated areas, County number
17043C, map numbers 0153, 0154, 0161, 0162, 0163, 0164, 0166, and 0168, dated
August 1, 2019, and all subsequent revisions.
   (D)   Adoption Of DuPage County Stormwater Management General
Certifications: It is hereby adopted by the Village for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, use and
occupancy, location and maintenance of land development and building
construction in accordance with proper floodplain and stormwater controls,
including permits and penalties, the DuPage County stormwater management
general certifications effective April 23, 2013, and any and all amendments and
additions thereto that may, from time to time, be adopted by the County of
DuPage of which one copy has been and now is filed in the Office of the Village
Clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length therein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the Village.
   (E)   Adoption of Village of Lisle Design Manual: It is hereby adopted by
the Village for the purpose of establishing uniform engineering practices,
specifications, and design standards for public and private improvements, that
certain manual known as the Village of Lisle Design Manual being particularly
the May 10, 2023 edition thereof, as may be amended from time to time by the
Village Engineer, of which one copy has been and now is filed in the Office of
the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2021-4935, 11-15-2021; amd. Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-1-7: AMENDMENTS TO THE DUPAGE COUNTY COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN
ORDINANCE:
   (A)   Section 15-16.B of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing
it with the following:
      1.   The Village of Lisle corporate authorities are designated as the
oversight committee for purposes of this ordinance.
   (B)   Section 15-23.B.2 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
      1.   15-23.B.2. Proposed developments that are listed on the official
list of exempt developments for the village of Lisle are those lists attached
as exhibits to village of Lisle resolutions no. 91-1017, 92-1035, 2000-2026,
and 2003-2433. All such developments on the list shall have met at least one of
the following criteria:
         (a)   15-23.B.2.a. Building permits for such development were issued
prior to February 15, 1992; or
         (b)   15-23.B.2.b. Engineering of all stormwater facilities for such
development was submitted to and approved by the village engineer prior to
February 15, 1992; or
         (c)   15-23.B.2.c. Annexation agreements or ordinances or other
agreements were recorded or executed prior to February 15, 1992 which
specifically exempt such development from community codes; or
         (d)   15-23.B.2.d. For other developments, contractual agreements
executed prior to February 15, 1992 which specifically exempt such development
from community codes; or
         (e)   15-23.B.2.e. Approvals resulting from judicial decrees preclude
application of this ordinance.
   (C)   Section 15-28 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing
it with the following:
      1.   15-28. Building Protection
         (a)   15-28.A. Within the boundary of the regulatory flood plain and
in areas outside the boundary of the regulatory flood plain, all usable space
in new buildings, or added to existing buildings, shall either be elevated,
flood proofed, or otherwise protected such that the lowest entry shall be at
least two feet above the nearest base flood elevation to prevent the entry of
surface stormwater. Floodproofing devices shall be operational without human
intervention. If electricity is required for protection against flood damage,
there shall be a backup power source which will activate without human
intervention. Floodproofing measures shall be certified by a professional
engineer.
         (b)   15-28.B. All usable space in new buildings or added to existing
buildings adjacent to a major stormwater system, site runoff storage facility
overflow path or site runoff storage facility, shall be elevated, flood
proofed, or otherwise protected to at least two feet above the design elevation
to prevent the entry of surface stormwater. The design elevation is the higher
elevation of either article X or the elevation associated with the design rate
as determined in section 15-81.B.2.
         (c)   15-28.C. Other building protection standards for structures that
may be implemented in the flood plain are listed in section 15-81.B in article
X.
         (d)   15-28.D. FEMA technical bulletin 10-01, titled “Ensuring That
Structures Built On Fill In Or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably
Safe From Flooding” and dated May 2001, shall be followed for all structures or
additions to structures constructed with a lowest floor below the FPE or less
than two feet above the design elevation of a stormwater facility high water or
overflow path, for structures or additions to structures built on a site
elevated by fill so that the ground surface is above the BFE, and where a
letter of map change based on fill (LOMR-F or LOMA-F) has been issued by FEMA
to remove the site from the floodplain.
         (e)   15-28.E. FEMA technical bulletin 10-01, titled “Ensuring That
Structures Built On Fill In Or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably
Safe From Flooding” and dated May 2001, and as amended herein, shall be
followed for all structures or additions to structures constructed with a
lowest floor below the FPE or less than two feet above the design elevation of
a stormwater facility high water or overflow path; for structures or additions
to structures built outside the floodplain whose lowest floor, including
basement, is less than the FPE; or for structures or additions to structures
located within fifty feet of the high water line of a major stormwater
facility, site runoff storage facility or overflow path, and whose lowest
floor, including basement, is less than the FPE, as determined in the as-built
or approved engineering plans for the development, or section 15-73. In these
cases, technical bulletin 10-01 shall be amended as follows:
            (1)   Page 15, paragraph 3: Change to “The setback is the distance
from the edge of the SFHA to the nearest wall of the basement. The minimum
allowable setback distance is 20 feet in the front or rear yard and 10 feet in
the side yard”.
            (2)   Page 15, paragraph 4: Change to “The ground around the
building must be compacted fill; the fill material - or soil of similar
classification and degree of permeability - must extend horizontally at least
five feet around the foundation, from the bottom of the aggregate layer beneath
the basement floor to one foot below the finished grade”.
         (f)   15-28.F. For new buildings required to comply with section 15-
28.D., the spot survey must include the elevation of the top of the footing.
   (D)   Section 15-42 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by adding the following:
      1.   15-42.F. Village of Lisle grading permit fees shall be as set forth
in
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
   (E)   Section 15-72.D of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by adding the following:
      1.   15-72.D.8. For sites where depressional storage exists, existing
depressional storage shall be provided on a one-to-one basis in addition to the
required on-site storage.
   (F)   Section 15-72.E of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing
it with the following:
      1.   15-72.E. The details of the design of a site runoff storage
facility, which includes a site runoff storage control structure in accordance
with section 15-73 (side slopes, depths, etc.), will be in accordance with any
applicable ordinances of the village of Lisle, including but not limited to the
following:
      2.   15-72.E.1. The top of bank of stormwater storage or flow channel
facilities shall not be closer than five feet to any public right-of-way or
closer than ten feet to any back of curb of street pavement.
      3.   15-72.E.2. Maximum slopes in any instance shall be limited to 3-1.
      4.   15-72.E.3. No site runoff storage facility shall have retaining wall
or building structure along more than 50% of the pond perimeter.
      5.   15-72.E.4. Interlocking solid concrete block retaining walls may be
allowed for stormwater storage facilities provided they are less than two feet
in height or otherwise provided with a proper railing or protection in
accordance with the building code of the village. For all walls over two feet
high, the interlocking, solid, concrete block shall be 8" wide, 5.50" high,
15.75" deep, slope block Mark IV, as manufactured by Unilock or approved equal.
For walls two feet high and less, the interlocking solid concrete block shall
be 8" wide, 6" high, and 12" deep, Pisa II, as manufactured by Unilock or
approved equal. All other design and construction standards shall be approved
by the village engineer.
      6.   15-72.E.5. Dry storage facilities shall have a minimum bottom ground
slope of two percent (2%) regardless if an underdrain system is provided.
      7.   15-72.E.6. In all retention facilities, minimum depth from normal
water level to bottom of side slopes shall be four feet. To enhance aquatic
life and provide better water quality management, a minimum of twenty five
percent (25%) of the pond area shall be a minimum of ten feet deep. Suitable
means, satisfactory to the village, shall be provided to prevent water from
becoming stagnant. Where it is determined that basin soils are too permeable to
hold water, the soil shall be sealed by a suitable method such as a clay
blanket or with bentonite. Sealings shall not be unduly detrimental to natural
ground water recharge.
      8.   15-72.E.7. Storm water storage areas shall be permitted underground
subject to the following:
         (a)   15-72.E.7.a. Storm water storage areas shall be constructed of
concrete pipe, concrete boxes, concrete vaults or approved equal as determined
by the village engineer. All other design and construction standards shall be
approved by the village engineer;
         (b)   15-72.E.7.b. A storm water management and facilities maintenance
agreement shall be entered into with the property owner to ensure that the
underground storm water facility is properly maintained. Maintenance of the
facility is the responsibility of the owner of the land on which the storm
water facilities are constructed unless the responsibility is assigned to an
entity acceptable to the village of Lisle; and
         (c)   15-72.E.7.c. In order to ensure that the storm water facility is
functioning and operating appropriately, inspection of the underground storm
water storage area will be required every three years or more often if
determined to be necessary by the village engineer or stormwater administrator.
The inspection shall be performed at the expense of the property owner, by a
qualified inspector. The inspector shall be a licensed professional engineer in
the state of Illinois and specializing in the practice of civil engineering, or
other qualified professional as approved by the village engineer or stormwater
administrator. A written copy of the inspection report shall be submitted to
the village of Lisle community development department. Written notification
will be sent to the property owner if corrective maintenance is necessary or
required as a result of these field observations.
      9.   15-72.E.8. Pumping for stormwater facilities will not be permitted.
      10.   15-72.E.9. Piping for a storage system facility shall not be less
than 12" in diameter and said pipe shall meet all design and material
requirements of the Lisle Village Code.
      11.   15-72.E.10. Properties located in the area generally bounded by
Ogden Avenue on the north, Burlington Avenue on the south, Center Avenue on the
east and Route 53 on the west may purchase off-site storm water storage and/or
compensatory storage in the Garfield Basin, at a fee specified in the annual
fee ordinance under the guidelines adopted by the village of Lisle board of
trustees in accordance with resolution 2008-2887 and as approved by the village
engineer.
      12.   15-72.E.10.a. Any property owner desiring to use the Garfield Basin
for off-site stormwater storage and/or compensatory storage must submit to, and
receive approval from the village engineer, an engineering plan that depicts,
without limitation, the estimated flow of stormwater and the conveyance system
proposed to be used to direct stormwater to the off-site Garfield Basin
facility, and/or the volume of compensatory storage required, before obtaining
a building permit.
      13.   15-72.E.10.b. Priority for use of the Garfield Basin shall be given
to those properties with final approved engineering plans. In the event that
there is inadequate capacity in the Garfield Basin to accommodate the estimated
stormwater flow or compensatory storage from one or more properties, any such
property or properties shall be required to provide an on-site stormwater
storage and/or compensatory storage facility as otherwise required in this
chapter.
   (G)   Section 15-80.H of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing
it with the following:
      1.   15-80.H. The flood protection elevation (FPE) is the base flood
elevation (BFE) plus two feet of freeboard.
      2.   Sections 15-81.B.2, 15-81.B.3, 15-81.B.4, and 15-81.B.5 of the
DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance are hereby amended
by deleting those sections and replacing them with the following:
         (a)   15-81.B.2. New construction or substantial improvements of all
structures within a SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least the
FPE and that the fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having
a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Adequate drainage shall be
provided.
         (b)   15-81.B.3. Reserved.
         (c)   15-81.B.4. Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within the SFHA on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has
incurred substantial damage be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured homes to at least the FPE, be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation,
collapse and lateral movement in accordance with the rules and regulations for
the Illinois mobile home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. adm. code 870,
provide adequate access and drainage and if pilings are used for elevation,
applicable design and construction standards for pilings shall be met.
         (d)   15-81.B.5. Reserved.
   (H)   Section 15-81.B.7 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting sections 15-81.B.7.f, 15-
81.B.7.g, and 15-81.B.7.h. and adding the following:
      1.   15-81.B.7.f. The accessory structure must be less than five hundred
seventy-six (576) square feet.
      2.   15-81.B.7.g. Shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning.
      3.   15-81.B.7.h. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint,
insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the FPE. A sign shall be
permanently mounted on the interior of the accessory structure indicating the
level of the FPE and prohibiting storage of these items below that level.
      4.   15.81.B.7.i. All construction below the FPE shall be flood resistant
materials.
      5.   15.81.B.7.j. Accessory structures permitted under this code section
shall be subject to annual inspection to ensure continued compliance with
permit and code requirements.
   (I)   Section 15-81.B.8 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by adding the following:
      1.   15-81.B.8. New structures other than buildings shall either be
elevated to at least the FPE or designed for protection against physical flood
damages. Structures that are flood proofed shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; use flood resistant
materials below the FPE; locate electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities above the FPE; and provide
adequate drainage. Floodproofing devices shall be operational without human
intervention. If electricity is required for protection against flood damage,
then there must be a backup power source that will activate without human
intervention. The floodproofing shall be certified by a professional engineer.
   (J)   Section 15-81.C.1 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing
it with the following:
      1.   15-81.C.1. Temporary or permanent storage in the flood plain of the
following are prohibited unless elevated or flood proofed to the FPE:
         (a)   15-81.C.1.a. Items susceptible to flood damage; or
         (b)   15-81.C.1.b. Unsecured buoyant materials or materials that may
cause off-site damage including bulky materials, firewood, building materials,
flammable liquids, chemicals, explosives, pollutants, or other hazardous
materials; or
         (c)   15-81.C.1.c. Landscape wastes.
   (K)   Section 15-97 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing
it with the following:
      1.   15-97.A. Where a variance to the site runoff storage requirements of
section 15-72 is granted, payment into the village of Lisle’s site runoff
storage variance fee program shall be made prior to the issuance of a building
permit as a condition of the variance.
      2.   15-97.B. The village of Lisle site runoff storage variance fee
program shall operate as follows:
      3.   15-97.B.1. Payment of a site runoff storage variance fee for the
varied storage shall be made to the village of Lisle and is determined by
applying the first applicable criteria as follows:
         (a)   15-97.B.1.a. If the village of Lisle program has an established
off-site storage facility(ies), the fee shall be calculated by multiplying the
per acre-foot cost of the closest off-site storage facility times the varied
storage where:
            (1)   15-97.B.1.a.1. A design concept plan for the facility has
been approved by the village of Lisle’s stormwater committee and the village
board containing an estimate of the per acre-foot cost of constructing the
storage, including operation and maintenance costs; and
            (2)   15-97.B.1.a.2. A formula has been developed to determine that
any investment in the facility shall be at least equal to the cost of planning,
acquiring of lands, constructing, operating, and maintaining the facility; and
         (b)   15-97.B.1.a.3. The facility is located in the same watershed
planning area as the variance, or within the village of Lisle.
         (c)   15-97.B.1.b. Where the Village of Lisle program has not
established off- site storage facility(ies) in accordance with sub-parts
B.1.a.1 through B.1.a.3 above, the site runoff storage variance fee shall be
charged in accordance with an adopted fee schedule, as set out in the annual
fee ordinance. The fees set forth in the annual fee ordinance shall identify
reasonable and rational costs to provide site runoff storage in the same
watershed planning area as the subject variance. It is hereby determined that
the fee as set out in the village of Lisle’s annual fee ordinance includes the
village of Lisle’s cost of planning, acquiring land, construction, operation,
and maintenance.
         (d)   15-97.B.2. Fee in lieu funds collected shall be accounted for in
separate development or watershed planning accounts. Funds shall be used in the
same watershed planning area as collected or in the village of Lisle to enhance
existing site runoff storage facilities and related components, construct off-
site facilities and related components, provide maintenance of stormwater
facilities, or undertake other development that provides a watershed benefit.
         (e)   15-97.B.3. The finance director shall provide accounting on an
annual basis of all funds deposited in each development or watershed planning
account and shall account for each fund on a first-in, first-out basis.
         (f)   15-97.B.4. The corporate authorities may prioritize and allocate
funds on an annual basis within each development or watershed planning account.
The community development director or the stormwater administrator may make a
request to the corporate authorities for funds within the accounts for uses
identified in section 15-97.B.2.
         (g)   15-97.B.5. All site runoff storage variance fees shall be
refunded to the person who paid the fee, or to that person’s successor in
interest, in accordance with section 15-97.B.6, whenever the village of Lisle
fails to encumber fees collected within 10 years from the date on which such
fees were collected.
         (h)   15-97.B.6. Refunds shall be made provided that the person who
paid the fee, or that person’s successor in interest, files a petition with the
village of Lisle within one year from the date on which such fees are required
to be encumbered.
         (i)   15-97.C. Funds collected in the village of Lisle shall be used
within the village of Lisle, or within the watershed planning area in which the
fee was collected. All accounting records shall be made available to the DuPage
County stormwater committee upon request.
   (L)   Section 15-98 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing
it with the following:
      1.   15-98. Post Construction BMP Fee-In-Lieu Program
         (a)   15-98.A. With the approval of the stormwater administrator, and
provided the conditions of section 15-63 apply, the applicant may be allowed or
required to pay a PCBMP fee-in-lieu payment. Payment into a PCBMP fee-in-lieu
program shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit. For purposes
of this section, payment of a VCBMP fee-in-lieu is interchangeable with payment
of PCBMP fee-in-lieu.
         (b)   15-98.B. The village of Lisle shall operate a PCBMP fee-in-lieu
program as follows:
            (1)   15-98.B.1. PCBMP fee-in-lieu payment shall be made to the
village of Lisle. A BMP fee-in-lieu payment shall be calculated by applying the
adopted fee schedule as set out in the annual fee ordinance that identifies
reasonable and rational cost to construct and maintain similar PCBMPs for those
areas of the development that remain without effective water quality treatment.
For VCBMP, fee-in-lieu payment shall be as set out in the annual fee ordinance.
            (2)   15-98.B.2. PCBMP and VCBMP funds collected shall be
separately accounted for in watershed planning area accounts. Funds shall be
used in the same watershed planning areas as collected solely to design,
construct, and maintain water quality or runoff volume reduction improvements.
Funds may not be used to fulfill obligations required by the ordinance.
            (3)   15-98.B.3. The finance director shall provide accounting on
an annual basis of all funds deposited in each watershed planning account and
shall account for each fund on a first-in, first-out basis.
            (4)   15-98.B.4. The corporate authorities may prioritize and
allocate funds on an annual basis within each watershed planning account. The
community development director or the stormwater administrator may make a
request to the corporate authorities by March 30 of each year for funds within
the accounts for uses identified in section 15-98.B.2.
            (5)   15-98.B.5. All BMP fee-in-lieu payments shall be refunded to
the person who paid the fee, or to that person’s successor in interest, in
accordance with section 15-98.B.6, when the village of Lisle fails to encumber
that development’s fees collected within ten (10) years of the date on which
such fees were collected.
            (6)   15-98.B.6. Refunds shall be made provided that the person who
paid the fee, or that person’s successor in interest, files a petition with the
village of Lisle within one year from the date on which such fees are required
to be encumbered.
      2.   15-98.C. Funds collected in the village of Lisle shall be used
within the village of Lisle, or within the watershed planning area in which the
fee was collected. All accounting records shall be made available to the DuPage
County stormwater committee upon request.
   (M)   Section 15-117.E of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing
it with the following:
      1.   All variance petitions filed pursuant to this article XVI shall be
filed with the stormwater administrator of the village of Lisle. The fee shall
be as established by Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
   (N)   Appendix A, Definitions of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting those definitions for “flood
protection elevation” and “substantial improvement” and replacing them with the
following:
      1.   Flood Protection Elevation (FPE). The base flood elevation plus two
feet of freeboard. If an approved FEQ watershed plan model produces a higher
elevation than the regulatory BFE, the FPE shall be the FEQ flood of record
elevation plus two feet of freeboard.
      2.   Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or improvement of a structure taking place during a ten year period,
in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty (50)
percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair
is started.
      Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done. The term does not,
however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
(2) any alteration of a “historic structure” listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
(Ord. 2019-4831, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-4935, 11-15-2021; Ord. 2022-4981,
10-17-2022; Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-1-8: SAVING CLAUSE:
   (A)   Separability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
   (B)   Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by
this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
historical records, engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that areas outside the prescribed floodplain boundaries
or land uses permitted within such floodplains will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages which may
result from reliance on this chapter or on any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
(Ord. 2019-4831, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-4935, 11-15-2021; Ord. 2024-5099,
10-7- 2024)
CHAPTER 2
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Permit Required
12-2-2: Work Exempt From Permit
12-2-3: Application For Permit
12-2-4: Validity Of Permit
12-2-5: Expiration Of Permit
12-2-6: Design Plans
12-2-7: Inspections
12-2-8: Certificate Of Compliance
12-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall commence or
perform any clearing, grading, stripping, mining, dredging, paving, drilling,
excavating or filling of land; alter an existing land grade, contour, discharge
of stormwater, or drainage pattern; or perform any other land disturbing
activity without having first obtained a site development permit pursuant to
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-2-2: WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
   (A)   At the discretion of the Village Engineer, clearing, grading,
stripping, mining, dredging, paving, drilling, excavating or filling of land
that does not alter the existing land grade, contour, discharge of stormwater,
or drainage pattern may be exempt from the permit requirements of this Chapter
under all of the following conditions:
      1.   The site does not contain regulatory floodplain;
      2.   The site does not contain a wetland or wetland buffer;
      3.   The disturbed land area is less than five thousand (5,000) square
feet; and
      4.   The activity does not result in two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of net new impervious surface.
   (B)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this Chapter shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in a manner in violation
of the requirements of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or any other
code or ordinance of the Village of Lisle.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-2-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   (A)   Applications required under this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance
must be submitted in a form and in such manner as required by the Village
Engineer.
   (B)   Applications must include materials and information as may be required
by the Village Engineer to establish that the proposed activity complies with
all applicable requirements of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.
   (C)   The Village Engineer shall examine or cause to be examined
applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after
filing. If the application or required plans do not conform to the requirements
of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, the Village Engineer shall reject
such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Village
Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the applicable
requirements of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, the Village Engineer
shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
   (D)   An application for permit shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180-
days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good
faith or a permit has been issued. The Village Engineer is authorized to grant
one or more extensions of time for additional period not exceeding 90 days
each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-2-4: VALIDITY OF PERMIT:
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for,
or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Stormwater
and Floodplain Ordinance or any other code or ordinance of the Village of
Lisle. Permits presuming to give authority to violation or cancel the
provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or any other code or
ordinance of the Village of Lisle shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit
based on required plans and other data shall not prevent the Village Engineer
from requiring the correction of errors in the required plans and other data.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7- 2024)
12-2-5: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized
by such permit is commenced within ninety (90) days after its issuance, or if
the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a
period of ninety (90) days after the time the work is commenced. If the work on
site authorized by such permit is not completed within one (1) year from the
date of issuance, the permit shall become invalid. The Village Engineer is
authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods
not more than ninety (90) days each. The extension shall be requested in
writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-2-6: DESIGN PLANS:
   (A)   The Village Engineer is authorized to determine what design plans are
required to demonstrate compliance with this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance, the Village of Lisle Design Manual, and any other code or ordinance
of the Village of Lisle.
   (B)   Design plans are to be prepared by an Illinois licensed Professional
Engineer where required by statute.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-2-7: INSPECTIONS:
Construction pursuant to a permit issued under this Chapter shall be subject to
inspection and such construction or work shall remain visible and able to be
accessed for inspections purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an
inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the
provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or any other code or
ordinance of the Village of Lisle. Inspections presuming to give authority to
violate or cancel the provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or
any other code or ordinance of the Village of Lisle shall not be valid. It
shall be the duty of the owner or owner's authorized agent to cause work to
remain visible and able to be accessed for inspection purposes. The Village
Engineer nor the Village of Lisle shall not be liable for the expense entailed
in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
   (A)   Preliminary Inspection: Before the issuance of a permit, the Village
Engineer is authorized to examine or cause to be examined the site for which an
application has been filed.
   (B)   Required Inspections: The Village Engineer is authorized to make or
require inspections of any construction or work when such inspection is
necessary to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance or any other codes or ordinance of the Village of Lisle.
   (C)   Inspection Agencies: The Village Engineer is authorized to accept
reports inspections agencies, provided that such agencies satisfy the
requirements as to qualifications and reliability as determined by the Village
Engineer.
   (D)   Inspection Requests: It shall be the duty of the permit holder or
their authorized agent to notify the Village Engineer when work is ready for
inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and
means for inspections of such work that are required by this Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance.
   (E)   Inspection Approval Required: Work shall not be done beyond the point
indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining approval of the
Village Engineer. The Village Engineer, upon notification, shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction
that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or the permit
holder's authorized agent wherein the same fails to comply with this Stormwater
and Floodplain Ordinance. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected
and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the
Village Engineer.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-2-8: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
After the Village Engineer inspects the site and does not find a violation of
the provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or any other code or
ordinance of the Village of Lisle, the Village Engineer shall issue a
certificate of compliance that contains the following:
   (A)   The permit number.
   (B)   The address or location description of the site.
   (C)   The name and address of the owner of the site for which the
certificate is issued.
   (D)   A statement that the site has been inspected for compliance with the
requirements of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.
   (E)   The edition of the Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance under which the
permit was issued.
   (F)   Any special stipulations and conditions of the certificate.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-3-1: Village Board
12-3-2: Village Engineer
12-3-3: Appeals
12-3-4: Text Amendments
12-3-5: Violations, Penalties, And Enforcement
12-3-6: Fees And Securities
12-3-1: VILLAGE BOARD:
The Village Board is responsible for establishing the regulations and
procedures of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance and carrying out those
specific decision-making duties assigned by this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-3-2: VILLAGE ENGINEER:
   (A)   General Powers and Duties: The Village Engineer has primary
responsibility for administration of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance,
including the following general powers and duties:
      1.   Authority to Enter: Where it is necessary to conduct an inspection
to enforce provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, or where the
Village Engineer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a
structure or upon property a condition that is contrary to or in violation of
this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, the Village Engineer or Village
employee charged with the enforcement of this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance is authorized to enter the structure or property at reasonable times
to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance, provided that if such structure or property be occupied that
credentials be presented to the occupant and entry be requested. If such
structure or property is unoccupied, the Village Engineer shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control
of the structure or property and request entry;
      2.   Ordering the discontinuance of any work regulated by this Stormwater
and Floodplain Ordinance being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions
of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance;
      3.   Ordering the restoration or abatement of any work performed in a
manner contrary to the provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance;
      4.   Receiving and processing all applications for permits and
development approvals under this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance;
      5.   Providing technical assistance and support to the Village Board,
staff, boards and commissions; and
      6.   Exercising other powers and performing other duties as specified or
necessarily implied by the provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance.
   (B)   Promulgation of Administrative Rules: The Village Engineer is
authorized to render interpretations of this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the
application of provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance. Such
interpretations, policies, and procedures shall be compliant with the intent
and purpose of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance. Such policies and
procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically
provided for in this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-3-3: APPEALS:
   (A)   The Village Board is authorized to hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there has been an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Village Engineer in the administration,
interpretation, or enforcement of provisions of this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance.
   (B)   An appeal application shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted.
      1.   Exception: Appeals of any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Village Engineer relative to the DuPage County
Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance shall adhere to the applicable
appeal procedures as set forth in the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance.
   (C)   Application Filing:
      1.   Appeals must be filed with the Village Engineer.
      2.   Appeals must be filed within forty five (45) days of the date of the
order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed.
   (D)   Effect of Filing: The filing of an appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed, unless the Village Engineer certifies to
the Village Board, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in
the certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property, in
which case the proceedings will not be stayed unless by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Village Board or by a court of record based on due
cause shown.
   (E)   Record of Decision: Upon receipt of an application of appeal, the
Village Engineer must transmit to the Village Board all papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed is taken.
   (F)   Final Decision:
      1.   The Village Board must hold a hearing and act, via resolution by
simple majority of the quorum, on the appeal within forty five (45) days of the
date that the appeal is filed.
      2.   In acting on the appeal, the Village Board must grant the Village
Engineer the presumption of correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of
error on the appellant. The Village Board shall not have the authority to waive
requirements of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10- 7-2024)
12-3-4: TEXT AMENDMENTS:
The text of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance may be amended at the
discretion of the Village Board.
   (A)   The Village Engineer may recommend initiation of a text amendment. No
application for a text amendment shall be filed by the Village without Village
Board authorization.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-3-5: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Responsibility for enforcement: The Village Engineer has the primary
responsibility of enforcing this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.
   (B)   Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance, state law, or federal law, any violation of a provision of this
Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance - including but not limited to all of the
following- may be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this
Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance and as established by
Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle Village Code.
      1.   To engage in any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or filling
of land; alter an existing land grade, contour, or drainage pattern; or perform
any other land disturbing activity without having first obtained a permit or
approval pursuant to this Chapter;
      2.   To engage in any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or filling
of land; alter an existing land grade, contour, or drainage pattern; or perform
any other land disturbing activity requiring a permit or approval in any way
inconsistent with any such permit or approval or any conditions imposed on the
permit or approval;
      3.   To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or any condition imposed on the permit or
approval;
      4.   To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or
otherwise given under this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance;
      5.   To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under
this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance;
      6.   To discharge any sump pump, downspout or other piped discharge
across less than a minimum of ten feet (10') of pervious surface prior to
leaving the site;
      7.   To cause surface, storm water sump pump or roof drainage which
creates a structural, safety or health hazard, or any other nuisance to the
owners or occupants of adjacent premises or to the public by reason of
discharge into, onto or across any adjacent building, premises or public
thoroughfare; or
      8.   To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation.
   (C)   Continuing Violation: Each day that a violation remains uncorrected
after receiving notice of the violation from the Village constitutes a separate
violation of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.
   (D)   Remedies and Enforcement Powers: The Village has all remedies and
enforcement powers allowed by Illinois law, including the following:
      1.   Stop Work: With or without revoking permits, the Village Engineer
may stop work on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of a
provision of this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or of a permit or other
form of authorization issued under this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.
      2.   Injunctive Relief: The Village may seek an injunction or other
equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance or of a permit, certificate or other form of authorization
granted under this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance.
      3.   Abatement: The Village may seek a court order in the nature of
mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the
condition in which they existed prior to the violation.
      4.   Cumulative Remedies: The remedies and enforcement powers established
in this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance are cumulative, and the Village may
exercise them in any combination or order.
   (E)   Non-Emergency Enforcement Procedures: In the case of violations of
this Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance that do not constitute an emergency or
require immediate attention, the Village Engineer must give notice of the
nature of the violation to the property owner or to any other person who is
party to the agreement, or to any applicant for any relevant permit, after
which the persons receiving notice have twenty one (21) days to correct the
violation before further enforcement action may be taken. Notice must be given
in person, by US Mail, or by posting notice on the premises. Notices of
violation must state the nature of the violation and the time period for
compliance and may state the corrective steps necessary and the nature of
subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the situation not be
corrected.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
12-3-6: FEES AND SECURITIES:
   (A)   Schedule of permit fees: Where a permit is required, a fee for each
permit shall be paid in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 20, of the Lisle
Village Code.
      1.   Work commencing before permit issuance. Permit fees shall double for
any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits.
      2.   Refunds. Plan review fees are nonrefundable. Fifty percent (50%) of
permit fees may be refunded if the permit is cancelled and no work has been
performed. Permit fees are nonrefundable if the permit has expired (ninety (90)
days or more from the date of permit issuance). Permit fees are nonrefundable
when work has been performed.
   (B)   Securities: Performance or development securities shall be provided
for in accordance with the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5099, 10-7-2024)
 
