MACON COUNTY, ILLINOIS
CODE
2025 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for Macon County, Illinois, shall be designated as
the Macon County Code and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD or COUNTY BOARD. The governing body of Macon County.
   COUNTY. Macon County, Illinois.
   COUNTY, MUNICIPALITY, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. Macon County, irrespective
of its population or legal classification.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Macon County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT. 
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(5 ILCS 70/1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at
any time after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1995, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, city, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies
thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized
public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THE MACON COUNTY CODE. The Macon County Code hereby adopted, and as
hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new titles,
chapters, or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic, and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law, it
shall be:
      (1)   In the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Electronic Commerce
Security Act, 5 ILCS 175/1-101 et seq., except as otherwise provided by law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord”.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all those acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more county
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the County
Board may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, insofar as they are the same as those
of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the county shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision, and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until the Macon County Code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as the new Macon County Code by
the County Board.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the county exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. These references
shall also include the designee or agent of the officer or office, unless the
law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of the Macon County
Code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the county; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in the
Macon County Code, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the County
Board or a certain county officer or employee to make additional regulations
for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all regulations of
a similar nature serving that purpose, effected prior to the codification and
not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to those technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the county. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
      § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The county shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
      Statutory reference:
         Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
county for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $1,000 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty does not
restrict the imposition of civil penalties provided for failure to make returns
or pay any taxes levied by the county.
Statutory reference:
   Limitations on penalties, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1113
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
      
31.   FINANCES
      
32.   TAXATION
      
33.   COUNTY POLICIES
      
34.   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
CHAPTER 30: COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Emergency Telephone System Board
   
30.01   Definitions
   
30.02   Membership
   
30.03   Powers and duties
   
30.04   Compensation
   
30.05   Funding
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD
§ 30.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   9-1-1 BOARD.  Emergency Telephone System Board authorized by the Emergency
System Telephone Act, as amended, 50 ILCS 750/15.4, 1994.
(Ord. O-38-11-96, passed 11-14-1996)
§ 30.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Appointment. The County Board Chairperson shall appoint members of the
9-1-1 Board, with the advice and consent of the County Board.
   (B)   Composition of members. The number of members of the Board shall
consist of not fewer than five, one of whom must be a public member who is a
resident of the local exchange service territory included in the 9-1-1 coverage
area, and at least three of whom shall be representative of the 9-1-1 public
safety agencies, including but not limited to police departments, fire
departments, emergency medical services providers, and emergency services and
disaster agencies, and appointed on the basis of their ability and experience.
Elected officials are also eligible to serve on the Board.
   (C)   Term of office. The term of office of the initial appointees shall be
as follows: two members shall serve a term of two years, two members shall
serve a term of three years, and the remaining members shall serve a term of
four years. All subsequent appointees shall serve a term of four years.
(Ord. O-38-11-96, passed 11-14-1996)
§ 30.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The members of the 9-1-1 Board shall exercise those powers and duties
defined by ordinance of the county and as provided by the Emergency Telephone
System Act of the State Compiled Statutes, being 50 ILCS 750/; the powers and
duties shall include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Planning a 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading, or
maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems;
      (3)   Receiving monies from the surcharge, and from any other source, for
deposit into the Emergency Telephone System Fund;
      (4)   Authorizing all disbursements from the Fund; and
      (5)   Hiring any staff necessary for the implementation or upgrade of the
system.
   (B)   All monies received by the 9-1-1 Board pursuant to a surcharge shall
be deposited into a separate, interest-bearing Emergency Telephone System Fund
account. The County Treasurer shall be custodian of the Fund. All interest
accruing on the Fund shall remain in the Fund. No expenditures may be made from
the Fund except upon the direction of the 9-1-1 Board by resolution passed by a
majority of all members of the 9-1-1 Board. Expenditures may be made only to
pay for the costs associated with the following:
      (1)   The design of the emergency telephone system;
      (2)   The coding of an initial Master Street Address Guide database, and
update and maintenance thereof;
      (3)   The repayment of any monies advanced for the implementation of the
system;
      (4)   The charges for automatic number identification and automatic
location identification equipment, and maintenance, replacement, and update
thereof;
      (5)   The non-recurring charges related to installation of the emergency
telephone system and the ongoing network charges;
      (6)   The acquisition and installation, or the reimbursement of costs
therefor to other governmental bodies that have incurred those costs, of road
or street signs that are essential to the implementation of the emergency
telephone system and that are not duplicative of signs that are the
responsibility of the jurisdiction charged with maintaining road and street
signs; and
      (7)   Other products and services necessary for the implementation,
upgrade, and maintenance of the system and any other purpose related to the
operation of the system, including costs attributable directly to the
construction, leasing, or maintenance of any buildings or facilities or costs
of personnel attributable directly to the operation of the system. Costs
attributable directly to the operation of an emergency telephone system do not
include the costs of public safety agency personnel who are and equipment that
is dispatched in response to an emergency call.
   (C)   The 9-1-1 Board shall complete the database before implementation of
the 9-1-1 system. The error ratio of the data base shall not at any time exceed
1% of the total data base.
(Ord. O-38-11-96, passed 11-14-1996)
§ 30.04 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the 9-1-1 Board shall serve without compensation, but shall
be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses (see 50 ILCS 750/15.4).
(Ord. O-38-11-96, passed 11-14-1996)
§ 30.05 FUNDING.
   Funding shall be provided from the surcharge authorized by statute and
ordinance (see §
31.01).
(Ord. O-38-11-96, passed 11-14-1996)
CHAPTER 31: FINANCES
Section
   
31.01   9-1-1 surcharge
   
31.02   Annual fee on payers of child support and maintenance
   
31.03   Cable/video service provider fee and PEG access support fee
   
31.04   Court services fee
Cross-reference:
   Host fee for pollution control facilities, see
Ch. 51
§ 31.01 9-1-1 SURCHARGE.
   (A)   As authorized by the Emergency Telephone System Act, 50 ILCS 750/1 et
seq., a surcharge is hereby imposed, subject to the provisions of division (B)
below, upon all telephone subscribers passed through telecommunication carriers
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity
originating within the corporate limits of this county and terminating within
this state for funding a 9-1-1 emergency telephone system.
   (B)   A referendum shall be placed by the County Clerk on the November 5,
1996 ballot for all legal voters residing in the county to vote upon the
following question:
      Shall the County of Macon impose a surcharge of up to $1.25 per month per
network connection, which surcharge will be added to the monthly bill you
receive for telephone or telecommunications charges for the purpose of
installing or improving a 9-1-1 emergency system?
      ___________________ yes    _______________ no
   (C)   The ACT states that a county may at any time by ordinance change the
rate of the surcharge imposed if the new rate does not exceed the rate
specified in the referendum. An increased surcharge is hereby imposed on all
monthly billed subscribers of telecommunications carriers residing within the
county at a rate of $1.25 per month per in-service network connection, as
hereinafter defined.
   (D)   A monthly billed subscriber shall be deemed to reside within the
surcharge jurisdiction if the service address, as hereinafter defined, is
located within the county.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ENHANCED 9-1-1 or E9-1-1. An emergency telephone system that includes
dedicated network, selective routing, database, ALI, ANI, selective transfer,
fixed transfer, and a call-back number.
      NETWORK CONNECTION. A voice grade communication channel directly between
a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier’s public switched network without
the intervention of any other telecommunications carrier’s switched network,
that would be required to carry the subscriber’s interpremises traffic and
which connection is capable of providing access through the public switched
network to a 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System.
      NEXT GENERATION 9-1-1 or NG9-1-1. A system comprised of managed IP-based
networks, gateways, functional elements, and databases that augment or
replicate present-day E9-1-1 features and functions and provide new
capabilities. NG9-1-1 is designed to provide access to emergency services from
all sources, and to provide multimedia data capabilities for PSAPs and other
emergency service organizations.
      SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of the primary use of the network
connection or connections.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Shall have the same meaning as specified in §
13-202 of the Public Utilities Act, including those carriers acting as
resellers of telecommunications services. For the purpose of 9-1-1 service,
this definition shall include telephone systems operating as mutual concerns. A
telecommunications carrier under the Public Utilities Act may provide
competitive or noncompetitive local exchange telecommunications services or any
combination of the two as defined in § 13-204 of the Public Utilities Act.
   (F)   (1)   The County Board shall have the authority to exempt network
connections assigned to governmental units, charitable organizations, and 9-1-
1 system providers from the imposition of the surcharge. The County Board shall
provide the County Clerk with the information concerning what network
connections are to be exempt.
      (2)   The County Clerk shall provide any telecommunications carrier
collecting the surcharge with a certified list of those network connections
assigned to the county to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge. The
certified list may be revised by the county on 60-days’ prior written notice
provided to the telecommunications carriers.
   (G)   Each telecommunications carrier is hereby authorized and instructed to
deduct 3% from the gross amount of surcharge collected prior to remittance
under division (H) below in reimbursement for the expense of accounting and
collecting the surcharge.
   (H)   The amount of surcharge collected by the telecommunications carrier
shall be paid to the County Treasurer not later than 30 days after the
surcharge is collected, net of any network or other 9-1-1 or enhanced or next
generation 9-1-1 system charges then due the particular telecommunications
carrier, as shown on an itemized bill and the 3% accounting and collection
charge described in division (G) above.
   (I)   Simultaneously with the remittance described in division (H) above,
each telecommunications carrier shall make a return to the County Treasurer for
the period to which the remittance applies, stating as now specified in Title
83: Public Utilities, Chapter I: Illinois Commerce Commission, Subchapter f:
Telephone Utilities, Part 725: Standards of Service Applicable To 9-1-
1 Emergency Systems. Each entity collecting and remitting surcharges shall
provide to the 9-1-1 authority a detailed monthly listing of the actual number
of network connections, including the number of residential, business,
payphone, Centrex, PBX, and exempt lines, and the number of residential and
business subscriptions.
   (J)   If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was
not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against
any surcharge due, or to become due, under this section; provided that no
amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited. Ninety days’ prior notice shall be given to the
Emergency Telephone System Board on any credit against a surcharge due.
   (K)   No action to recover any amount of surcharge due under the provisions
of this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
the amount.
(Ord. O-32-6-96, passed 6-13-1996; Ord. O-108-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 31.02 ANNUAL FEE ON PAYERS OF CHILD SUPPORT AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   In maintenance and child support matters, the Clerk may deduct from
each payment an amount equal to the United States postage to be used in mailing
the maintenance or child support check to the recipient.
   (B)   In these cases, the Clerk may collect an annual fee of up to $36 from
the person making the payment for administering the collection and distribution
of maintenance and child support payments. This sum shall be in addition to and
separate from amounts ordered to be paid as maintenance or child support and
shall be deposited in a separate Maintenance and Child Support Collection Fund
of which the Clerk shall be the custodian, ex officio, to be used by the Clerk
to further maintenance and child support collection efforts in his or her
office.
   (C)   The Circuit Clerk of the county is hereby directed to deposit these
fees, when received, with the County Treasurer, the Treasurer being hereby
directed to deposit the same in the General Corporate Fund of the county.
(Ord. O-21-3-89, passed 3-14-1989)
§ 31.03 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
         (a)   Video programming, or
         (b)   Other programming service; and
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service.
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the county.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and
repair charges.
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges.
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges,
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
county. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
county divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to division (1)(i) below.
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(l)(vi).
         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the county and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a county, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21 -801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this division (C) and 220 ILCS
5/21-801(d) by the holder to the county for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under division (B) and 220 ILCS 5/21-
801 by the holder to a county for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public Internet.
   (B)   Cable/video service provider fee imposed.
      (1)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the county.
      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of
the holder's gross revenues.
      (3)   Notice to the county. The holder shall notify the county at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the county.
      (4)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the
service provider fee to the county. The holder's liability for the fee shall
commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt
of the ordinance adopted in this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopted
in this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed
on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to
the county.
      (5)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due
on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
      (6)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the county in which a fee is paid.
      (7)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects
to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301 (c) with
credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of
such credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B)(2).
   (C)   PEG access support fee imposed.
      (1)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the County in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to division (B).
      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed
hereby shall be 1% of the holder's gross revenues.
      (3)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
County. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on
the date set forth in division (B)(4).
      (4)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due
on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
      (5)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects
to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay,
at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that
would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees
that that operator owes under division (C)(2).
   (D)   Applicable principles. All determinations and calculations under this
chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
   (E)   No impact on other taxes due from holder. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the county, including any tax that is or may later be required to
be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video
service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the
holder with respect to payment of any county telecommunications tax or any
other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A
state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with
respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or
charges.
   (F)   Audits of cable/video service provider.
      (1)   Audit requirement. The county will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the county imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
county. If all local franchises between the county and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the county pursuant
to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No
acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the
amounts are correct.
      (2)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall
be paid within 30 days after the county's submission of an invoice for the sum.
   (G)   Late fees/payments. All fees due and payments which are past due shall
be governed by ordinances adopted by this county pursuant to the Local
Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
   (H)   Effective date. This chapter shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage and approval and publication as required by law.
(Ord. O-100-11-12, passed 11-8-2012)
§ 31.04 COURT SERVICES FEE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide funds to defray
court security expenses.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority granted the County Board by Section 25.37 of
“an Act to revise the law in relation to counties,” approved March 31, 1874, as
now or hereafter amended (Ill. Rev. Statutes Ch. 34, § 429.31) there is hereby
created and enacted for Macon County, Illinois, a court services fee, including
without limitation court services provided pursuant to Section 19 of “An Act to
revise the law in relation to Sheriffs’,” approved January 27, 1874, as now or
hereafter amended, (Ill. Rev. Statues Ch. 125, § 19).
   (C)   (1)   Such fee shall be paid in civil cases by each party at the time
of filing of the first pleading, paper or other appearances; provided that no
additional fee shall be required if more than one part is represented in a
single pleading, paper or other appearance.
      (2)   In criminal, local ordinance, county ordinance, traffic and
conservation cases, such fee shall be assessed against the defendant upon a
plea of guilty, stipulation of facts or findings of guilt resulting in a
judgment of conviction or order of supervision or sentence of probation without
entry of judgment pursuant to Section 10 of the Cannabis Control Act and
Section 410 of the Controlled Substances Act. No fee shall be imposed or
collected, however, in traffic, conservation and ordinance cases in which fines
are paid without a court appearance.
      (3)   The fees imposed by this resolution shall be collected in the
manner in which all other court fees or costs are collected and shall be
deposited into the County General Fund, in a separate account designated “Court
Security Services Fee Account,” and shall be used for payment solely of costs
incurred by the Sheriff in providing Court Security, including, but not limited
to, salaries and compensation for Court Security personnel.
      (4)   To assure adequate court security, the County Board directs that,
at all times the Macon County Courthouse is open for public business, and any
other time that court is in session, the Sheriff shall provide at least one
deputy or appropriate person, properly attired in police uniform and invested
with full police powers and authority, to be physically present in the
Courthouse. Said person or persons shall provide security and attend the Courts
as provided in Section 19 of “An Act to revise the law in relation to
Sheriffs,” approved January 27, 1874, as now or hereafter amended ( Ill. Rev.
Statutes Ch. 125, § 19).
   (D)   The fees which are imposed and are to be collected pursuant to this
resolution, are as follows:
I - CIVIL CASES
 PL/PET Def/Res
I - CIVIL CASES
                                                                                PL/PET   Def/
                                                                                         Res
(a)   Law (L) over $15,000.00                                                   $10$7.50
(b)   Law (LM) $15,000.00 or Less                                               $10$7
(c)   Chancery (CH)                                                             $10$5
(d)   Miscellaneous Remedy (MR)                                                 $10
(e)   Eminent Domain (ED)                                                       $10
(f)   Tax (TX)                                                                  $5
(g)   Municipal Corporation (MC)                                                $5
(h)   Mental Health (MH)                                                        $5
(i)   Dissolution/Separation, and Invalidity of Marriage, suits for Custody (   $15
(j)   Family (F)                                                                $5
(k)   Juvenile (J)                                                              $5
(1)   Small Claims (SC)                                                         
      Over $1,500                                                            $7.$3
      $0 - $1,500                                                            $5 $3
(m)   Probate (P)                                                               $10
(n)   Probate/Small Estate                                                      $5
II - CRIMINAL CASES
(a)   Felony (CF)                                                               $15
(b)   Misdemeanor (CM)                                                          $10
III - TRAFFIC AND OTHER CASES
(a)   Driving while under the influence and all other violation of the motor    $10
vehicle code which are classified as Class A Misdemeanors (TR)
(b)   All other violation of the motor vehicle code, violations of county,
state and local ordinances and conservation cases (TR), (OV) and (CV) except       $5
such cases in which fines are paid without a court appearance
 
   (E)   This section should become effective upon its passage and approval by
the County Board, and upon the concurrence if and approval by the County Board,
and upon the concurrence of and approval by the Chief Judge of the sixth
judicial circuit of the differential rates established herein.
(Ord. O-22-5-89, passed 5-9-1989)
CHAPTER 32: TAXATION
Section
   
32.01   County school facility occupation taxes
   
32.02   Supplementary retailers’ occupation tax
   
32.03   Special county retailer’s occupation tax for public safety
   
32.04   Supplementary service occupation tax
   
32.05   Supplementary use tax
   
32.06   Cannabis retailers’ occupation tax
   
32.07   Single bidder tax rule
§ 32.01 COUNTY SCHOOL FACILITY OCCUPATION TAXES.
   (A)   Incorporation of preambles. The County Board hereby finds that all of
the recitals contained in the preambles to Ordinance O-89-1-11 are full, true,
and correct and does incorporate them into this section by this reference.
   (B)   County school facility occupation taxes imposed. The county hereby
imposes the following taxes (herein defined as the county school facility
occupation taxes):
      (1)   Retailers’ occupation tax.  Except as otherwise provided in
division (B)(3) of this section, there is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the county in the business of selling tangible personal property,
other than personal property titled or registered with an agency of the
government of this state, at retail within the county, a retailers’ occupation
tax at a rate equal to 1.0% of the gross receipts of the sales made in the
course of the business.
      (2)   Service occupation tax. Except as otherwise provided in division
(B)(3) of this section, there is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
county in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to
making those sales of service, transfer tangible personal property within the
county as an incident to a sale of service, a service occupation tax at a rate
equal to 1.0% of the selling price of tangible personal property so transferred
within the county.
      (3)   Exclusions from tax.  The retailers’ occupation tax and the service
occupation tax imposed pursuant to this section shall not be imposed on the
sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has
been prepared for immediate consumption), prescription and nonprescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes, and needles used by diabetics.
   (C)   Revenues derived from the county school facility occupation taxes. The
revenues derived from the county school facility occupation taxes if, as, and
when received by school districts within the county, shall be used by the
school districts solely for the acquisition, development, construction,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, improvement, financing, architectural planning,
and installation of capital facilities consisting of buildings, structures, and
durable equipment and for the acquisition and improvement of real property and
interest in real property required, or expected to be required, in connection
with the capital facilities, including fire prevention, safety, energy
conservation, disabled accessibility, school security, and specified repair
purposes set forth under § 17-2.11 of the School Code of the state, being 105
ILCS 5/17-2.11, as amended.
   (D)   Transmittal to Department of Revenue. The County Clerk is hereby
expressly directed to transmit both a certified copy of this section and the
results of the election to the Department of Revenue of this state (the
“Department”) not later than April 1, 2011, for administration and enforcement
by the Department commencing on July 1, 2011.
   (E)   Effective date. The taxes imposed in division (B) above shall not take
effect until July 1, 2011.
(Ord. O-89-1-11, passed 1-13-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Retailer’s Occupations Tax Act, see 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
   School Facility Occupation Tax Act, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1006.7
   Service Occupation Tax Act, see 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
§ 32.02 SUPPLEMENTARY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A county supplementary retailers’ occupation tax at a rate of 0.25% is
hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property at retail within this county.
   (B)   The persons in administering and accounting for the tax are subject to
the same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and duties, and the
same conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties, and definitions of
terms, and the same mode of procedures as found in the Retailers’ Occupation
Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq., as are now or hereafter amended.
   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect on July 1, 1986.
(Ord. O-11-2-86, passed 2-11-1986)
§ 32.03 SPECIAL COUNTY RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX FOR PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   Tax imposed.
      (1)   Tax imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than personal property titled or registered
with an agency of this state’s government, at retail in this county at the rate
of 0.50% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in this county in the business of making sales of service, at
the rate of 0.50% of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. These
special county occupation taxes for public safety shall not be applicable to
the sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that
has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-
prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing
materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
      (2)   The imposition of these public safety taxes is in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of Counties Code, §§ 5-1006.5(a) and 5-1006.5(b)
(55 ILCS 5/5-1006.5(a) and 55 ILCS 5/5-1006.5(b)).
   (B)   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer. The taxes hereby
imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto,
shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of
Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Clerk to file section with Illinois department of Revenue. The County
Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this section and a
certification of the results of the election authorizing the imposition of the
tax imposed in division (A) with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or
before May 1, 2017.
(Ord. O-126-04-17, passed 4-27-2017)
§ 32.04 SUPPLEMENTARY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A county supplementary service occupation tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service within this
county at the rate of 0.25% of the cost price of all tangible personal property
transferred by the servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property
or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service.
   (B)   The persons in administering and accounting for the tax are subject to
the same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and duties, and the
same conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties, and definitions of
terms, and the same mode of procedures as found in the Service Occupation Tax
Act, being 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq., and Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, being 35
ILCS 120/1 et seq., respectively, as are now or hereafter amended.
   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect on July 1, 1986.
(Ord. O-13-2-86, passed 2-11-1986)
§ 32.05 SUPPLEMENTARY USE TAX.
   (A)   A county supplementary use tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of
using in the county any item of tangible personal property which is purchased
outside this state at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered
with an agency of this state’s government, at a rate of 0.25% of the selling
price of the tangible personal property, as “selling price” is defined in the
Use Tax Act, approved July 14, 1985, as amended. The tax shall be collected
from persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is
given as being within this county.
   (B)   The persons in administering and accounting for the tax are subject to
the same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and duties, and the
same conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties, and definitions of
terms, and the same mode of procedures as found in the Use Tax Act, being 35
ILCS 105/1 et seq., as are now or hereafter amended.
   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect on July 1, 1986.
(Ord. O-12-2-86, passed 2-11-1986)
§ 32.06 CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   Tax imposed; rate.
      (1)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail locations in the county on the
gross receipts from these sales at the following rates:
         (a)   3.75% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course
of that business in unincorporated areas of Macon County; and
         (b)   3.00% of the gross receipts of sales made in a municipality
located in Macon County; and
      (2)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
the County Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax Law (55 ILCS 5/5-1006.8).
   (B)   Collection of tax by retailers.
      (1)   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (the “Department”). Any tax required to
be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a dept owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
      (2)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. O-135-01-20, passed 1-9-2020)
§ 32.07 SINGLE BIDDER TAX RULE.
   (A)   The Treasurer’s office has requested approval to implement the single
bidder tax rule beginning with the November 2022 tax sale.
   (B)   The implementation of the single bidder rule will reduce the workload
on the Macon County Treasurer’s office and County Clerk’s office while
providing a fair process for tax buyers.
   (C)   The county hereby approves the Macon County Tax Sale Single Bidder
Rule as set forth in 35 ILCS 200/21-205.
(Ord. O-140-06-22, passed 6-9-2022)
CHAPTER 33: COUNTY POLICIES
Section
   
33.01   Compensation; wages
   
33.02   Ethics
   
33.03   Travel expense control
   
33.04   Terms of County Board members after reapportionment
   
33.05   Paid leave policy
§ 33.01 COMPENSATION; WAGES.
   (A)   To the extent and as required The Prevailing Wage Act, 820 ILCS 130/
1 et seq., as amended; (hereinafter the "Act"), the general prevailing rate of
wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics, and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of this county is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of labor of the state
as of June 2015, incorporated herein by reference. As required by the Act, any
and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the Department of Labor of
this state shall supersede the Department's June 2015 determination and apply
to any and all public works construction undertaken by the county. The
definition of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in the
aforesaid Act shall be the same as in the Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be constructed to apply the general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the county to the extent required by the aforesaid
Act.
   (C)   The county shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of the County Clerk this determination or
any revisions of the prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or
of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect
shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   (D)   The county shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer,
and to any association of employers and to any person or association of
employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of worker
whose wages will be affected by those rates.
   (E)   The county shall promptly file a certified copy of this section with
both the Secretary of State Index Division and the Department of Labor of the
state.
   (F)   The county shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the area a copy of this section, and the publication shall
constitute notice that the determination is effective and that this is the
determination of this public body.
(Ord. O-33-6-96, passed 6-13-1996; Ord. O-33-6-97, passed 6-12-1997; Ord. O-33-
6-98, passed 6-11-1998; Ord. O-43-6-99, passed 6-10-1999; Ord. O-45-6-00,
passed 6-8-2000; Ord. O-47-6-01, passed 6-14-2001; Ord. O-48-6-02, passed 6-13-
2002; Ord. O-52-6-03, passed 6-12-2003; Ord. O-53-6-04, passed 6-10-2004; Ord.
O-56-6-05, passed 6-9-2005; Ord. O-61-6-06, passed 6-8-2006; Ord. O-73-6-08,
passed 6-12-2008; Ord. O-77-6-09, passed 6-11-2009; Ord. O-86-6-10, passed 6-
10-2010; Ord. O-93-6-11, passed 6-9-2011; O-96-6-12, passed 6-14-2012; O-104-6-
13, passed 6-13-2013; Ord O-111-6-14, passed 6-12-2014; Ord. O-120-6-15, passed
6-11-2015; Ord. O-122-06-16, passed 6-9-2016; Ord. O-127-06-17, passed 6-8-
2017; Ord. O-130-06-18, passed 6-14-2018)
§ 33.02 ETHICS.
   (A)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or
vice-presidential electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
(ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in
furtherance of the person's official duties.
      CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in § 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-
3).
      COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in §
3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
      COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
section, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
      COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
      CONTRIBUTION. The same meaning as that term is defined in § 9-1.4 of the
Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
      EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the County Board, whether on a full-time
or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
      EMPLOYER. The County Board.
      GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking
engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official
position of an officer or employee.
      LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive
(i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits,
and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
      OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
      POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining,
or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
      POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under § 9-
3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county
clerk.
      PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
         (a)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
         (b)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the
purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
         (c)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation o£ or preparing any
document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.
         (d)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll
in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
         (e)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual
voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for
political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
         (f)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any
political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
         (g)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or
a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping
in an effort to get voters to the polls.
         (h)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing,
or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
         (i)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective
office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
         (j)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
         (k)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
         (l)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
         (m)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
         (n)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
         (o)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE./ Any person or entity who:
         (a)   Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
         (b)   Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or
(ii) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
         (c)   Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
         (d)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or
employee.
   (B)   Prohibited political activities.  
      (1)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the County
Board in connection with any prohibited political activity.
      (2)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as
part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment,
or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
      (3)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate
in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or
employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the
form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off continued employment
or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional
compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in
any prohibited political activity.
      (4)   Nothing in this division prohibits activities that are permissible
for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties,
or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary
basis which are not prohibited by this section.
      (5)   No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized
merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for
which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the
federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to
grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure
solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of
a political party, or of a political organization or club.
   (C)   Gift ban.  
      (1)   Gifts. Except as permitted by this division, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as recipients), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined
herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited
source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this division.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)    This division is not applicable to the following:
            1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on
the same conditions as for the general public.
            2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her
spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
            3.   Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election
Code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of
apolitical organization or candidate.
            4.   Educational materials and missions.
            5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
            6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
            7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
            8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding $ 75 per person in value on
a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed
on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For
the purposes of this section, CATERED means food or refreshments that are
purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
            9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other
benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or
employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the
official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily
provided to others in similar circumstances.
            10.   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the
purpose of this Act, INTRA-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an officer
or employee from another officer or employee, and INTER-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
            11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
            12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
         (b)   Each of the exceptions listed in this division is mutually
exclusive and independent of every other.
      (3)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or
an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not
violate this section if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to
return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under § 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or
hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
   (D)   Ethics Advisor.
      (1)   The Chairperson of the County Board, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Macon County shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the County
Board The duties of the Ethics Advisor may be delegated to an officer or
employee of the County Board, unless the position has been created as an office
by the Board of Macon County.
      (2)   The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the County Board concerning the interpretation of and compliance
with the provisions of this section and state ethics laws. The Ethics Advisor
shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the Board of Macon
County.
   (E)   Ethics Commission.
      (1)   Created. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the
Ethics Commission of the County Board. The Commission shall be comprised of
three members appointed by the Chairperson of the Macon County Board with the
advice and consent of the Board of Macon County. No person shall be appointed
as a member of the Commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up
to the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the County Board. No
more than two members of the Commission shall belong to the same political
party at the time such appointments are made. Party affiliation shall be
determined by affidavit of the person appointed.
      (2)   Terms and chairperson.
         (a)   At the first meeting of the Commission, the initial appointees
shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two commissioners shall serve
two-year terms, and the third commissioner shall serve a one-year term.
Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two-year terms.
Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
         (b)   At the first meeting of the Commission, the commissioners shall
choose a chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of
the chairperson or any two commissioners. A quorum shall consist two
commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require the
affirmative vote of two members.
      (3)   Removal of commissioner. The Chairperson of the County Board, with
the advice and consent of the Board of Macon County, may remove a commissioner
in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office after service
on the commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of
the written charges against the commissioner and after providing an opportunity
to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than ten-days' notice.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
      (4)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
         (a)   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of
its duties and the exercise of its powers.
         (b)   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with division (F)(3) below and
refer violations of divisions (B) or (C) above to the appropriate attorney for
prosecution. The Commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a
written complaint alleging a violation of this section and not upon its own
prerogative.
         (c)   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this section.
         (d)   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the
production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the
obligation of all officers and employees of the County Board to cooperate with
the Commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to
cooperate with requests by the Commission shall constitute grounds for
discipline or discharge.
         (e)   The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this section.
      (5)   Complaints.
         (a)   Complaints alleging a violation of this section shall be filed
with the Ethics Commission.
         (b)   Within three business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three business days after receipt by the Commission. The notices to the
respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and
place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
         (c)   1.   Upon not less than 48-hours' public notice, the Commission
shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is
deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this section, to determine whether
there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant, to
proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by
the Open Meetings Act. The Commission shall issue notice to the complainant and
the respondent of the Commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint
and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed within seven business days
after receiving the complaint.
            2.   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of
division (C) above and there is a determination of probable cause, then the
Commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled
within four weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the Commission
may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate
authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the complaint be
adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a
violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be
made public.
            3.   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of
division (B), then the Commission shall notify in writing the attorney
designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and shall
transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the
custody of the Commission concerning the alleged violation.
         (d)   On the scheduled date and upon at least 48-hours' public notice
of the meeting, the Commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and
shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The
hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the Open Meetings
Act.
         (e)   Within 30 days after the date the hearing or any recessed
hearing is concluded, the Commission shall either (i) dismiss the complaint or
(ii) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the
Chairperson of the County Board, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any
fine imposed shall be a matter of public information.
         (f)   If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file
a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven business
days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a
fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within 14 days after receiving the demand, the
Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least 48-
hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to
present testimony and evidence. Within seven days thereafter, the Commission
shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the
Chairman of the Macon County Board or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
         (g)   If a complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding the date of
any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the Commission shall
render its decision as required under division (E)(5)(e) within seven days
after the complaint is filed, and during the seven days preceding that
election, the Commission shall render such decision before the date of that
election, if possible.
         (h)   The Commission may fine any person who intentionally violates
any provision of division (C) above in an amount of not less than $1,001 and
not more than $5,000. The Commission may fine any person who knowingly files a
frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this section in an amount of not
less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000. The Commission may recommend any
appropriate discipline up to and including discharge.
         (i)   A complaint alleging the violation of this Act must be filed
within one year after the alleged violation.
   (F)   Penalties.
      (1)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of division (B)
above may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in
an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (2)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of division (C)
above is subject to a fine in an amount of not less man $1,001 and not more
than $5,000.
      (3)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this section to the local enforcement
authorities, being the State's Attorney or any other law enforcement official,
may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (4)   (a)   A violation of division (B) above shall be prosecuted as a
criminal offense by an attorney for the County Board by filing in the circuit
court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The
prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure.
Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond
a reasonable doubt.
         (b)   A violation of division (C) maybe prosecuted as a quasi-criminal
offense by an attorney for the County Board, or, if an Ethics Commission has
been created, by the Commission through the designated administrative
procedure.
      (5)   In addition to any other penalty that maybe applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of divisions (B) or (C) above is subject to discipline or discharge.
(Res. G-2669-5-04, passed 5-13-2004)
§ 33.03 TRAVEL EXPENSE CONTROL.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
      BOARD or COUNTY BOARD. The Macon County Board.
      EMPLOYEE OF THE COUNTY. Any person who is employed by:
         (a)   The County of Macon or the County Board;
         (b)   An official of the county. For the purposes of this definition,
“employed by” shall include employees who may be hired, terminated or
disciplined by a department head who qualifies as an official of the county
under the definition for OFFICIAL OF THE COUNTY.
      ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of program or
event.
      OFFICIAL OF THE COUNTY OR OFFICIAL. Any person elected to county-wide
office, excluding judges or persons elected to multi-county office; any
department head appointed by the Chair of the County Board or by the whole
County Board; or any department head of a department whose annual budget is
required to be adopted by the County Board. OFFICIAL OF THE COUNTY does not
include a department head of a department whose annual tax levy is determined
or ratified by the County Board, but whose annual budget is required to be
adopted by a governing board other than the Board.
      TRAVEL. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officials of the county or by wards or charges of the county involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
   (B)   Official business for which expenses may be reimbursed. Officials of
the county and employees shall be entitled to reimbursement for travel,
including meals or lodging, related to the following types of official
business:
      (1)   Education and training conferences related to the duties of the
official of the county or employee;
      (2)   Site visits to current or potential vendors of the county;
      (3)   Site visits to current or potential clients, patients or others
receiving county services; or
      (4)   Any other business which is reasonable and necessary for the
performance of the official or employee's job duties.
   (C)   Maximum allowable reimbursement for expenses. Unless otherwise
excepted herein, the maximum allowable reimbursement for an employee or
official of the county for:
      (1)   Lodging, meals and incidental expenses shall be those rates set by
the United States General Services Administration (GSA), found in 41 C.F.R. Ch.
3.01, (41 C.F.R. § 3.01 et seq.), in effect at the time the expense was
incurred. Such rates may be found on the web at http://www.gsa.gov/perdiem;
      (2)   Travel shall be as follows:
         (a)   Airfare. The best available rate for air fare must be obtained.
The employee or official should submit with their request for reimbursement not
less than three quotes from travel booking services or airlines. Employees and
officials are required to travel in the lowest-cost fare class (e.g., economy
or coach) unless such class is unavailable.
         (b)   Rental vehicle. The best available rate for rental vehicle
travel must be obtained. If possible, the employee or official should submit
not less than three quotes from travel booking services or rental vehicle
companies. Employees are required to rent the lowest cost rental option. The
nature of the travel and number of passengers should be taken into account in
determining the most appropriate type of vehicle to rent.
         (c)   Mileage. Employees or officials who drive personal vehicles for
work purposes may be reimbursed at the mileage rate adopted by the County Board
which was in effect at the time of travel.
            1.   Exceptions:
               A.   The costs of conference fees, supplies, and books for
educational or training purposes are not subject to this section.
               B.   Only the GSA's reimbursement amounts are incorporated into
this section by reference.
            2.   To the extent that 41 C.F.R. § 3.01 concerns matters beyond
the maximum dollar amount of allowed expense, those matters are expressly not
incorporated into this section.
   (D)   Approval of expenses.
      (1)   The respective official of the county who oversees the department
in question, or his or her designee, shall approve all requests for
reimbursements for travel, including meals or lodging. Said Official, or his or
her designee, may approve expenses up to 105% of the maximum allowable
reimbursement amount.
      (2)   The Board must approve the following reimbursements for travel,
including meals or lodging, by a roll call vote at an open meeting of the
Board:
         (a)   Any expense of any official or employee that exceeds 105% of the
maximum allowable reimbursement amount; or
         (b)   Any expense of any member of the Board.
   (E)   Documentation of expenses. 
      (1)   Before any reimbursement for travel, including meals or lodging,
may be approved pursuant to division (D), a standardized form for submission of
travel, meal, and lodging expenses supported by the following minimum
documentation shall first be submitted to the person or entity required to
approve such expenses:
         (a)   An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if expenses
have not been incurred or a receipt of the cost of the travel, meals, or
lodging if the expenses have already been incurred;
         (b)   The name of the individual who received or is requesting the
travel, meal, or lodging expense;
         (c)   The job title or office of the individual who received or is
requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense; and
         (d)   The date or dates and nature of the official business in which
the travel, meal, or lodging expense was or will be expended.
      (2)   All documents and information submitted under this §
33.03 are public records subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information
Act, 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq., unless any records or portions thereof are exempt
from disclosure pursuant to law.
   (F)   Entertainment expenses. No employee or official of the county shall be
reimbursed by the county for any entertainment expense.
(Ord. O-124-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 33.04 TERMS OF COUNTY BOARD MEMBERS AFTER REAPPORTIONMENT.
   The following procedure shall be used to determine the terms of the County
Board members elected at the general election immediately following a decennial
reapportionment and their successors.
   (A)   The members of each district shall be divided into three groups in the
manner set forth below.
      (1)   Members in group A will serve terms of two years, four years, and
four years.
      (2)   Members in group B will serve terms of four years, two years, and
four years.
      (3)   Members in group C will serve terms of four years, four years, and
two years.
   (B)   At the organizational meeting of the County Board held following the
general election immediately following a decennial reapportionment, the County
Clerk shall prepare an opaque bag containing three balls of the same color,
shape, size, and material. The balls shall be distinctly and separately labeled
A, B, and C. The Clerk shall ensure that no person reaching into the bag can
see or detect the label of the ball he or she might pick.
   (C)   The members from District 1 shall come forward and select one ball
each from the bag. Members shall draw in the order of their vote share in the
most recent general election. The member who received the highest number of
votes shall draw first; the member who received the second highest number of
votes shall draw second, and so forth. In the event that members received an
identical number of votes, the members shall draw in alphabetical order by last
name. If those members have the same last name, the order will be determined by
a coin flip conducted by the County Clerk.
   (D)   After the members of District 1 draw, the balls shall be placed back
into the bag and members of District 2 shall draw and continue in order of
districts until all members have been divided into groups.
   (E)   All drawings must occur in full view of the others members of the
Board and any other persons present at the meeting.
   (F)   The County Clerk shall record the letter drawn by each member and use
the information to determine the seats up for election in future elections.
(Ord. O-142-12-22, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 33.05 PAID LEAVE POLICY.
   Pursuant to § 15(p) of the Paid Leave for All Workers Act (820 ILCS 192/1 et
seq.), the county hereby adopts its current paid leave policy for all county
employees as set forth in the this code of ordinances, Employee Handbook,
annual salary ordinances, any collective bargaining agreements to which the
county is a party and all other binding legislative actions governing paid
leave adopted by the Macon County Board of Trustees, as the same may be amended
from time to time. However, in no event shall the county, as an employer,
provide less than one day of paid leave per year to any county employee.
(Ord. O-149-12-23, passed 12-14-2023)
CHAPTER 34: PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
Section
   
34.01   Public transportation provided
§ 34.01 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION PROVIDED.
   The county shall provide public transportation within the county limits.
(Ord. O-99-10-12, passed 10-11-2012)
TITLE V: ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES; SITING
      
52.   WATER REGULATIONS
      
53.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
54.   GEOTHERMAL EXCHANGE SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
Refuse
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Refuse collection
   
50.03   Refuse hauling license
   
50.04   Rules and regulations
   
50.05   Appeal
   
50.06   Macon County Environmental Management Fund
Tipping Fee
   
50.20   Definitions
   
50.21   Amount of tipping fee surcharge
   
50.22   Exemptions
   
50.23   Reports and payments
   
50.24   Solid Waste Management Fund
   
50.25   Effective date
 
   
50.99   Penalty
REFUSE
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT, THE. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act, as amended from time to
time.
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA).
   COMPOSTING. The managed process by which microorganisms decompose organic
waste, producing a humus-like material commonly referred to as compost.
   COUNTY. Macon County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The Macon County Board and/or its designee.
   DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, dumping or placing of any waste or refuse
on any land or water so that such waste or refuse may enter the environment.
   DWELLING. Any enclosed space wholly or partly used, or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   DEPARTMENT. Macon County Environmental Management Department (MCEM)
including the person designated by the county to serve as the Environmental
Inspector.
   ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT. The Macon County Environmental
Management Department.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Waste materials resulting from normal lawn care such as
leaves, grass clippings, brush/tree branches, and the like.
   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY (PCF). Waste disposal, storage, or transfer
facilities as defined in the Act.
   RECYCLABLES. Source separated, commingled, and/or unsorted including but not
limited to paper and paper products, glass, plastics, and ferrous and non-
ferrous metals to be processed for recycling.
   REFUSE. Includes garbage resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food and produce; combustible and non-combustible rubbish
including but not limited to paper, glass, metal, and plastic packaging and
containers, rubble resulting from construction and demolition activities, bulky
wastes such as autos and auto parts, furniture, and appliances, ashes and other
residues, wood and textile waste, disposed or abandoned; and other putrescible
and non-putrescible wastes. This definition does not include recyclables
destined for a recycling processing facility.
   REFUSE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility that accepts waste refuse for
disposal or transfer. This term includes any facility covered under the Solid
Waste Inspection/Enforcement Delegation Agreement between Macon County and the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA). This term generally includes
any sanitary landfill, transfer station, and compost facility.
   REFUSE HAULER. Any person, persons, firm or corporation who engages in the
business of collecting or transporting/hauling refuse.
   REFUSE HAULING VEHICLE. Any vehicle of any kind used to collect and/or
transport waste to any refuse management facility (located inside or outside of
Macon County) at any time, except such vehicles owned or operated by any
incorporated city, village, or town, such vehicles used by a business for whom
the hauling of waste is incident to their normal provision of services, and
such vehicles used by persons hauling municipal waste or other refuse from
their own residence for proper disposal, recycling or processing.
   SANITARY LANDFILL REFUSE DISPOSAL METHOD. That method of disposal involving
a permitted landfill operation that compacts refuse upon deposit and, which
completely covers the refuse received daily at the close of each days
operations using an approved daily cover.
   SINGLE STREAM RECYCLING. Acceptable recyclables that are commingled or
single-sorted into one collection container instead of being sorted into
separate commodities.
   SOLID WASTE. Refuse, garbage, recyclables, landscape wastes, and other
wastes except sewage.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. The same as POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   WASTE. Refuse.
(Ord. O-60-6-06, passed 6-8-2006; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
§ 50.02 REFUSE COLLECTION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee, or occupant of any
dwelling, tenement house, lodging house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, or
other person, persons, firm or corporation, on whose premises kitchen and
household refuse accumulates, to subscribe to regular refuse collection
service, to provide at all times, containers of sufficient size and quantity to
hold all refuse between collections. Such containers shall be water tight and
have a tight fitting lid or closure. Containers should be of such size as to be
handled/lifted by one person unless the licensed hauler is equipped with
automated collection equipment. The minimum refuse removal frequency for each
property with an occupied dwelling shall be once per month.
   (B)   Any tenant, lessee, or occupant of any dwelling who does not maintain
regular trash disposal shall be fined $50 for each reported and verified
offense.
   (C)   Bulky trash should be bundled or broken down into pieces of such size
that they can be handled by one person unless special arrangements have been
made with a licensed hauler.
(Ord. O-60-6-06, passed 6-8-2006; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
§ 50.03 REFUSE HAULING LICENSE.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of
regularly collecting refuse or operate a refuse hauling vehicle as defined in §
50.01 on the streets or roads of Macon County without having first obtained an
annual refuse hauling license from the Macon County Environmental Management
Department.
   (B)   (1)   Within 30 days after the filing of each application, the
Department shall either deny or issue the requested license. In making a
decision, the Department shall consider the following factors, as well as other
factors deemed appropriate:
         (a)   The areas the applicant intends to serve.
         (b)   Whether the equipment to be used by the applicant meets the
requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   The past history of the applicant.
      (2)   No such granting of a license shall be construed as a monopoly,
exclusive privilege, immunity, or franchise.
   (C)   In the event that an application for license is denied, another such
application for license by the same applicant may not be filed within a period
of one year from the date of such denial unless upon approval of the Chairman
of the County Board following a showing of a change of circumstance which would
warrant a reconsideration. The granting of an annual refuse hauling license may
be refused to any person who, or any firm or corporation, or any officer of
which, has been found in violation of this chapter within three years preceding
the date of application for the license.
   (D)   Before a refuse hauling license shall be issued, each applicant shall
file with Macon County, a financial assurance bond in the penal sum of $1,000.
This bond shall be held to ensure that at all times, the applicant will observe
and comply with the ordinances and regulations of Macon County relative to the
license issued hereunder, and that licensee will pay any and all fines,
penalties and costs incurred associated with any violation of this chapter, and
that he or she will provide to his or her customers with the service for which
they have paid, and that the applicant will pay any and all fines, penalties
and costs incurred associated with any violation of this chapter.
   (E)   If during the period covered by the license granted, the licensee
shall permit his or her equipment to fall into disrepair or other such state
that does meet the standards of this chapter, or licensee fails to obey any
provisions of this chapter, the license may be revoked in the manner provided
in and by this chapter.
   (F)   The applicant for license must designate in his or her application,
the location(s) where he or she intends to dispose of the refuse collected by
the licensee. Any change in disposal location shall be immediately reported to
the Inspector and then noted on the license application. All refuse hauling
performed in accordance with this chapter shall be disposed of at the Valley
View Landfill or other location approved by the county.
   (G)   The licensee shall keep accurate records and provide to Macon County
Environmental Management, as requested, information pertaining to quantity and
location of refuse, collected, disposed, and quantity and location of material
recycled.
   (H)   The licensee shall at all times keep an accurate list of the names and
addresses of customers, and shall upon request, deliver a copy of customer list
to Macon County Environmental Management.
   (I)   Each licensee, so far as it is feasible, shall serve customers in
compact areas in order to prevent more refuse vehicles than is necessary from
traveling the same streets and areas for collection.
   (J)   The rates for hauling refuse should be fair and reasonable. Each
applicant must disclose their current schedule of fees to Macon County
Environmental Management at the time of application. Any adjustment in the fee
schedule must be reported at least one month prior to implementing new fee
schedule.
   (K)   Each licensee must offer the following minimum service level to
residential customers:
      (1)   Weekly refuse removal (a less frequent option may be offered in
extreme cases in which the dwelling is not continually occupied and the hauler
is willing).
      (2)   Weekly landscape waste removal for six weeks in the spring
beginning April 1 and for six weeks in the fall beginning November 1 of each
year. Landscape waste may include accumulations of grass, shrubbery cuttings,
leaves, tree limbs and other landscape materials accumulated on the customer’s
residence as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.
      (3)   Customers will be permitted three separate large item pick-ups
annually. Each of these pick-ups may include removal of one household appliance
such as a refrigerator, oven or dishwasher and not more than two other items,
none of which are able to be placed in an approved container, and all of which
items must be placed at the curb by the customer. If no household appliance is
placed for removal, each large item pick-up shall have no more than three
items. A $20 surcharge will be assessed for any pick-up of an appliance with
refrigerant. Large item pick-ups exceeding this three-item parameter will be
assessed a fee added to their bill. All large item pick-ups should be scheduled
in advance with the hauler.
   (L)   All licensees and licensed equipment (vehicles) used in the collection
and/or hauling of refuse shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Vehicles shall be thoroughly cleaned as frequently as needed so as
not to give off offensive or obnoxious odors when empty, parked, or stored.
      (2)   Vehicle beds shall be in good operating condition and shall be
metal, watertight, and covered to prevent refuse from blowing, falling, or
spilling from the vehicle.
      (3)   Vehicles shall not be overloaded.
      (4)   Vehicles shall be kept neatly painted at all times and permanently
marked on both sides, either on the door of the cab or in the center of the
side of the bed, in letters no smaller than three inches in height, with the
name, address, and phone number of the hauler or hauling business. These
letters must be of a color that makes them easily legible.
      (5)   Vehicles shall be available for inspection upon request from Macon
County Environmental Management Inspector prior to the issuing of an annual
refuse hauling license.
   (M)   At the time of issuance of an annual refuse hauling license, a decal
will be provided approximately three inches by three inches. The face of the
decal shall bear the following:
      (1)   The words: Licensed Refuse Hauler.
      (2)   Current year of hauling license.
      (3)   The words: Macon County, Illinois.
      (4)   An individual identification number.
      (5)   The decal shall be affixed to the lower left side of the
appropriate vehicle’s windshield for the duration of the license. The color of
the decal shall be changed each year. No decal nor license shall be
transferable from owner to owner or vehicle to vehicle.
   (N)   All applications for licensing shall be accompanied by an annual fee
of $300 plus $50 for each vehicle to be operated during the license year. All
licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. Trucks taken out of service and/
or replaced during the course of the year must be reported to the county. A new
license shall be issued at a pro-rated amount for new truck put into service.
   (O)   Licensees hereunder shall make collections with a minimum of noise and
disturbance to the customer. Refuse containers shall be handled carefully and
shall be thoroughly emptied and then left where they were placed for
collection. Any refuse spilled by the licensee shall be picked up immediately
and the area left clean. Residential refuse collection shall not commence
before 6:00 a.m. each day.
   (P)   Each licensee hereunder shall maintain an office and telephone
service, which telephone number shall be plainly denoted on all vehicles. The
licensee shall maintain reasonable office hours, and have a method for
customers to speak to an employee of the licensee.
   (Q)   Macon County reserves the right to deny or suspend any license, with
or without cause, within the requirements of Illinois law.
(Ord. O-60-6-06, passed 6-8-2006; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025) Penalty,
see §
50.99
§ 50.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge, deposit, dump, or
place any refuse, or cause or permit the discharging, depositing, dumping, or
placing of any refuse, on any premises in the county other than an area or
facility that is permitted by the Agency at the time of the discharging,
depositing, dumping, or placing of refuse. Exempt from this rule are private
property owners composting waste that was generated on the property in question
as allowed by law, clean demolition debris as allowed by law, and recycling
facilities accepting one or more of the following clean materials for
recycling: paper and paper products, glass, plastics, ferrous and non-ferrous
metals.
   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation, owning, controlling or operating any
vehicle used for the purpose of collecting, carrying, transporting, or hauling
refuse in Macon County shall cause or permit any vehicle to be so loaded, out
of repair, constructed or operated so that any refuse with which such vehicle
is loaded shall blow, fall, drop, spill, or otherwise leave the vehicle in any
place other than at a permitted refuse disposal facility.
   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation shall burn any refuse or cause or
permit the burning of any refuse in the county except at a state permitted and/
or licensed incineration facility, and only those materials specified in the
permit may be burned. Also, landscape waste including brush, tree limbs, and
other unprocessed wood waste may be burned on the property at which the waste
was generated, so long as it is done in such a manner that does not present a
fire hazard nor is offensive to any occupants of any nearby dwelling. The fire
must at all times be monitored by a responsible party and must not violate the
orders of any Fire Department officials or state or local laws governing open
burning.
   (D)   Clean concrete (no re-bar or other debris), asphalt, brick, or rock
that is dumped at a licensed refuse disposal facility may be set aside to be
used for road improvements only on the permitted premises. All other refuse
must be deposited in the designated disposal area.
   (E)   All-weather operations roads shall be provided for vehicular movement
within the area of any permitted disposal facility. When necessary to prevent
dust, operational roads shall be surfaced or treated. licensed refuse hauling
vehicles shall be inspected by Macon County Environmental Management to verify
proper licensing and operating requirements. Any discovery of unsafe or
unsanitary conditions or violations of this ordinance by the inspector shall be
communicated immediately verbally to the owner of the vehicle, and then in
writing as soon as is possible with a time limit for correction of the
condition(s) in violation. The annual refuse hauling license may not be issued
or may be suspended if the seriousness of the violation so warrants based on
the opinion of Macon County Environmental Management Department Inspector.
   (G)   Reasonable extensions of the time limit to correct violations may be
granted by the Environmental Management Department Inspector or the County
Board Chairman upon request in writing, and upon proof of good cause for
extension or that an honest effort is being made to correct the violation(s).
   (H)   The Macon County Environmental Management Department shall keep a
record showing the date and findings/results of each inspection of refuse
hauling vehicles and shall keep a record of any enforcement action and follow
up taken against the same.
   (I)   The Macon County Environmental Management Department shall have the
right to enter any premises or facility for the purposes of conducting a
regular inspection or special inspection in response to a complaint at any time
during regular operating hours.
(Ord. O-60-6-06, passed 6-8-2006; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025) Penalty,
see §
50.99
§ 50.05 APPEAL.
   (A)   An appeal may be taken from the decision of the Department in any case
covered by this chapter, by the person aggrieved by the decision. The appeal
shall be taken within a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of issuance
of the decision being appealed. The appeal shall be filed with the Macon County
Clerk and shall specify the grounds for the appeal.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Clerk shall notify the
Chairman of the County Board who shall then place the matter upon the agenda of
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the County Board. The Clerk shall then
notify the parties involved of the date, place, and time of the meeting.
   (C)   The Macon County Board may uphold, reverse, or modify the decision of
the Macon County Environmental Management Department as necessary in the Boards
opinion. However, no decision of the Department shall be reversed without at
least a two-thirds favorable vote by the Board members present and voting.
(Ord. O-60-6-06, passed 6-8-2006; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
§ 50.06 MACON COUNTY ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FUND.
   Payments collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited in a
separate fund, designated as the Macon County Environmental Fund, and shall be
expended only for Environmental Management purposes, consistent with the Solid
Waste Management Act and the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act.
(Ord. O-60-6-06, passed 6-8-2006; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
TIPPING FEE
§ 50.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The Illinios Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA).
   COUNTY. Macon County, Illinois.
   SOLID WASTE.  Includes demolition materials, food and industrial processing
waste, garden trash, land cleaning wastes, mixed refuse, non-combustible
refuse, rubbish and trash, as those terms are defined in §§ 3.01 through 3.06
of the Solid Waste Disposal District Act (70 ILCS 31.05/3.01 et seq.).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility in which solid waste is
disposed.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
(Ord. O-23-6-89, passed 6-13-1989)
§ 50.21 AMOUNT OF TIPPING FEE SURCHARGE.
   All host fees between the county and Veolia ES Valley View Landfills, Inc.
shall be governed exclusively by the host agreement under Resolution No. G-
3239-10-08, or any subsequent host agreement.
(Ord. O-23-6-89, passed 6-13-1989; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
§ 50.22 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The surcharge set forth in §
50.21 above shall not apply to:
      (1)   Waste which is hazardous waste.
      (2)   Waste which is pollution control waste.
      (3)   Waste from recycling, reclamation, or reuse processes which have
been approved by the Agency as being designed to remove any contaminant from
wastes so as to render the wastes reusable, provided that the process renders
at least 50% of the waste reusable.
      (4)   Non-hazardous solid waste that is received at a sanitary landfill
and composted or recycled through a process permitted by the agency.
      (5)   Any landfill which is permitted by the Agency to received only
demolition or construction debris or landscape waste.
      (6)   Solid waste meeting all of the following criteria:
         (a)   Permanent disposal of the solid waste is pursuant to a written
contract between the owner or operator of the sanitary landfill and some other
person, or transport of solid waste is pursuant to a written contract between
the transporter and some other person;
         (b)   The contract for permanent disposal or transport of solid waste
was lawfully executed on or before December 31, 1986, and by its express terms
continues beyond January 1, 1987, or was lawfully executed during 1987 or 1988
and by its express terms continues beyond January 1, 1989;
         (c)   The contract for permanent disposal or transport of a solid
waste establishes a fixed fee or compensation, does not allow the operator or
transporter to pass the fee through to another party, and does not allow
voluntary cancellation or renegotiation of the compensation or fee during the
term of the contract; and
         (d)   The contract was lawfully executed on or before December 31,
1986 and has not been amended at any time after that date, or was lawfully
executed during 1987 or 1988 and has not been amended on or after January 1,
1989.
      (7)   Solid waste meet all of the following criteria:
         (a)   The waste is non-putrescible and homogenous and does not contain
free liquids;
         (b)   Combustion of the waste would not provide practical energy
recovery or practical reduction in volume; and
         (c)   The applicant for exemption demonstrates that it is not
technologically and economically reasonable to recycle or reuse the waste.
   (B)   Even though the waste (identified in division (A)(6) above) is exempt
from the fee imposed by the state pursuant to an exemption granted under 415
ILCS 5/, this surcharge shall apply to the permanent disposal of solid waste
under any contract lawfully executed before June 1, 1986 under which more than
150,000 cubic yards (or 50,000 tons) of solid waste is to be permanently
disposed of.
   (C)   Only those exemptions (identified in division (A) above) which have
been approved by the Agency shall be honored by the county. It shall be the
responsibility of the owners or operators of all solid waste disposal
facilities in the county to provide proof to the county of the Agency’s
approval of any claimed exemption. This proof is to be included with the
quarterly report and payment to the county as detailed in §
50.23.
(Ord. O-23-6-89, passed 6-13-1989; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
§ 50.23 REPORTS AND PAYMENTS.
   (A)   All owners or operator of solid waste disposal facilities shall make
quarterly reports and payments, except those exempted in division (B) below.
These shall be due on January 15, April 15, July 15, and October 15 of each
year and shall cover the preceding three months.
   (B)   Owners or operators of solid waste disposal facilities which are
permitted by the Agency to receive only demolition or construction debris or
landscape waste are exempt from the reports and payments required by this
section.
   (C)   The required quarterly report shall contain a summary of all wastes
received at the site during the three-month period for which the report is
submitted. This report shall specify the total amount of non-hazardous solid
waste permanently disposed of at the site, the amount that is subject to the
county’s surcharge, the amount that is exempt, and the basis for the exemption.
The report shall also contain computations showing the total surcharge to be
paid for the quarter.
   (D)   Computation of surcharge.
      (1)   As shown in §
50.21, this surcharge is based on categories which are determined by the total
number of cubic yards of non-hazardous solid waste permanently disposed of at
the site in a calendar year. If the amount of waste is measured using an Agency
certified scale, then the weight of the waste must be multiplied by 3.3 cubic
yards per ton in order to convert this to cubic yards. (This is the standard
conversion rate used by the Agency. If the Agency has approved a different
conversion rate for a disposal facility, this rate should be used and noted in
the report.) In the following computations, use either the cubic yards, or the
weight converted to cubic yards, whichever is appropriate, in determining which
surcharge rate category is applicable.
      (2)   For payments made for the first three quarters of the calendar year
(due April 15, July 15, and October 15):
         (a)   Multiply the total cubic yards of non-exempt solid waste for the
quarter by four to estimate the user’s yearly cubic yards. Use this estimated
yearly figure to find the user’s surcharge rate category in §
50.21;
         (b)   If the user fall into category “A”, then multiply the amount of
non-exempt solid waste for the quarter, measured either in cubic yards or tons,
by the appropriate rate to calculate the required payment for the quarter; and
         (c)   If the user falls into categories “B” through “E”, then simply
divide the appropriate annual surcharge by four to calculate the required
payment for the quarter.
   (E)   Payment of the surcharge shall be made on a quarterly basis in
conjunction with the required reports, as described above. The payment shall be
in the form of a check or money order payable to the “Treasurer, County of
Macon.”
   (F)   The required reports and payments shall be delivered to the office of
the County Board Chairperson, at the following address: Room 501, Macon County
Building, 141 S. Main Street, Decatur, IL 62523.
(Ord. O-23-6-89, passed 6-13-1989; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
§ 50.24 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FUND.
   (A)   Payments collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited in a
separate fund, designated as the Solid Waste Management Fund, and shall be
expended only for solid waste management purposes, including long-term
monitoring and maintenance of landfills, planning, implementation, inspection,
enforcement, and other activities consistent with the Solid Waste Management
Act, being 415 ILCS 20/1 et seq., and the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act, being
415 ILCS 10/1 et seq.
   (B)   The Agency shall conduct an annual audit of the expenditures made from
this Fund to ensure that the expenditures have been made for the prescribed
purposes.
(Ord. O-23-6-89, passed 6-13-1989; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
§ 50.25 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect on February 13, 2025.
(Ord. O-23-6-89, passed 6-13-1989; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor (petty
offense according to 55 ILCS 5/5-8006, chapter 34, par. 5-8006) and may be
punishable by a suspension of any license (length of suspension to be
determined) held under the provisions herein or by a fine of not less than
$150, nor more than $500 for each offense. Offenses that continue beyond a
single day shall be considered separate offenses for each day the offense
continues. The penalties or remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and
resolution of any one or more shall be no defense to prosecution of another.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalty or action provided for or authorized
by this chapter, the county may institute any action or proceeding to prevent
any violation hereof, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to
prevent the operation of any refuse disposal facility and/or vehicle in
violation of this chapter.
(Res. O-60-6-06, passed 6-8-2006; Res. G-5757-02-25, passed 2-13-2025)
CHAPTER 51: POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES; SITING
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Host county requirements
Siting for Facilities
   
51.15   Introduction
   
51.16   Definitions
   
51.17   Procedure for filing an application for approval of a pollution control
facility
   
51.18   Application for site location approval
   
51.19   Hearings
   
51.20   County Board approval
   
51.21   Appeals
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 HOST COUNTY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In addition to the federal, state, and local requirements for siting
and permitting pollution control facilities, it shall be the policy of the
county to require an applicant proposing the expansion of an existing pollution
control facility or the siting of a new pollution control facility located in
an unincorporated area of the county to enter into a host agreement with the
county prior to filing a siting application pursuant to § 39.2 of the State
Environmental Protection Act.
   (B)   The host county agreement may include but not be limited to the
following provisions:
      (1)   No regulated hazardous waste shall be accepted for final disposal
at the pollution control facility;
      (2)   A guarantee of extended disposal capacity for the county’s non-
hazardous solid waste and non-hazardous special waste (contingent upon the
pollution control facility having proper permits from the EPA). The duration of
the capacity guarantee will be agreed upon by the pollution control facility
applicant and the county;
      (3)   A property value protection program for existing homes within a
site specific distance;
      (4)   A domestic water well protection plan for existing water wells
within a site specific distance;
      (5)   An indemnification agreement that will indemnify and hold harmless
the county and its officers, agents, employees, and other appropriate parties
from liability associated with any and all operations at the pollution control
facility;
      (6)   Payment of a host fee to the county, which shall be calculated as a
percentage of revenues or on a per ton basis. If the fee is calculated on a per
ton basis, the per ton host fee will be adjusted annually based on the
appropriate Consumer Price Index for the county. The host fee may be in
addition to the local solid waste management surcharge as allowed under § 22.1;
      (7)   An assignment of rights clause that will allow the County Board
authority to approve or disapprove any transfer of ownership or other interest
in the pollution control facility;
      (8)   If the pollution control facility is not publicly owned, an
environmental contingency fund or an alternative environmental protection plan
must be established. The environmental contingency fund or environmental
protection plan is in addition to the financial assurance requirements of the
state and federal regulations;
      (9)   A procedure for enforcing the terms of the host county agreement;
and
      (10)   Other provisions to be negotiated.
(Ord. O-31-12-95, passed 12-14-1995)
SITING FOR FACILITIES
§ 51.15 INTRODUCTION.
   The State Environmental Protection Act (45 ILCS 5/39.2) gives the power for
approving or disapproving requests for siting pollution control facilities in
unincorporated areas of the county to the County Board, and establishes the
criteria that can be utilized in reviewing siting requests and the process by
which requests are handled. All rules and regulations herein are adopted by the
County Board, pursuant to the provisions of the State Environmental Protection
Act (415 ILCS 5/39.2).
(Ord. O-75-9-08, passed 9-11-2008)
§ 51.16 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of words and phrases set out in the State Environmental
Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) are hereby incorporated by reference.
(Ord. O-75-9-08, passed 9-11-2008)
§ 51.17 PROCEDURE FOR FILING AN APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A POLLUTION CONTROL
FACILITY.
   (A)   It is the applicant’s duty to comply with all notice requirements set
forth in the Environmental Protection Act, being 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
   (B)   The applicant shall:
      (1)   No later than 14 days prior to filing an application for site
location approval with the County Clerk, cause written notice of the
application to be served either in person or by registered mail, return receipt
requested, on the owners of all property within the subject area not solely
owned by the applicant, and on the owners of all property within 250 feet in
each direction of the lot line of the subject property, the owners being those
persons or entities which appear from the authentic tax records of the county;
provided that the number of all feet occupied by public roads, streets, alleys,
and other public ways shall be excluded in computing the 250-foot requirement;
provided further, that in no event shall this requirement exceed 400 feet,
including public streets, alleys, and other public ways.
      (2)   The written notice shall also be served upon members of the General
Assembly from the legislative district in which the proposed facility is
located and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county.
      (3)   The written notice must contain the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The location of the proposed site;
         (c)   The nature and size of the development;
         (d)   The nature of the activity proposed;
         (e)   The probable life of the proposed activity;
         (f)   The date when the request for site approval will be submitted to
the County Clerk; and
         (g)   The right of persons to comment, in writing or in person, at a
public meeting.
(Ord. O-75-9-08, passed 9-11-2008)
§ 51.18 APPLICATION FOR SITE LOCATION APPROVAL.
   (A)   In order to request siting approval for a pollution control facility
in this county, an applicant must file an application with the County Clerk,
with a minimum of 20 original copies with 11-inch by 17-inch size attachments,
two full-sized attachments, and 30 copies in electronic format. The request
shall include the substance of the applicant’s proposal and all documents, if
any, submitted as of that date to the state EPA pertaining to the proposed
facility, except trade secrets as determined under § 7.1 of the Environmental
Protection Act. Two copies of documents submitted to the IEPA shall be
submitted and may be in electronic format.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall deposit, in the form
of a certified check or negotiable money order, with the County Treasurer at
the time of filing the application for approval of a pollution control
facility, a filing fee in the amount listed below for the type of proposed
facility.
      (1)   For pollution control facilities including hazardous waste
landfills and transfer stations, and municipal solid waste landfills, $200,000
shall be deposited with the County Treasurer to be held in retainer by the
county. All expenses duly and properly charged will be billed out on a monthly
basis to be promptly paid from the funds in retainer. If at any time the funds
in retainer are less than $50,000, an additional $50,000 shall be deposited
with the County Treasurer. After the application hearing and all appeals are
completed and all related expenses have been paid, all remaining retainer funds
(if any) will be refunded to the applicant. The County Auditor shall supply an
accounting of the expenditures, including copies of invoices, upon request of
the applicant.
      (2)   For pollution control facilities including non-hazardous waste
transfer stations, $100,000 shall be deposited with the County Treasurer to be
held in retainer by the county. All expenses duly and properly charged will be
billed out on a monthly basis to be promptly paid from the funds in retainer.
If at any time the funds in retainer are less than $50,000, an additional
$50,000 shall be deposited with the County Treasurer. After the application
hearing is completed and all related expenses have been paid, all remaining
retainer funds (if any) will be refunded to the applicant.
      (3)   The County Board may reduce the application fee upon petition by
the applicant setting forth the reasons why a reduction is justified. The
County Board must make a finding that the reduced fee will not jeopardize the
ability of the county to conduct a complete and impartial public hearing. The
applicant will be responsible for any cost above the reduced fee.
      (4)   Each modification to an application that has been submitted but not
yet approved shall require additional funds to be deposited with the County
Treasurer such that the funds in retainer are always greater than $50,000. The
additional funds shall be applied against the reasonable and necessary costs as
set forth herein above.
   (C)   No pollution control facility site application shall be accepted until
the appropriate filing fee is paid and accompanied by a notarized statement of
the appropriate corporate officials, or official legal representative of the
applicant, that the applicant will pay to the county additional fees to
reimburse the county monies expended in excess of the filing fee in preparing
for, processing, reviewing, and evaluating the application to its final
resolution.
   (D)   The fees collected hereunder shall be used only to defray the costs
incurred by the county in connection with applications for site approval filed
under the provisions of 415 ILCS 5/39.2. Any remainder after the final
resolution of the application will be refunded to the applicant.
   (E)   The County Board has the sole discretion to determine which deposit
amount is required based on how engineering intensive and/or expensive to
develop a proposed pollution control facility will be.
(Ord. O-75-9-08, passed 9-11-2008)
§ 51.19 HEARINGS.
   (A)   The application and all documents submitted with the application shall
be made available for public inspection at the office of the County Clerk and
may be copied upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
   (B)   Any person may file written comments on the application with the
County Clerk.
      (1)   The County Clerk shall date stamp the written comment and
immediately deliver one copy, with the postmarked envelope in which the comment
was received, to the Chairperson of the County Board, and Chair of the
Environment, Education, Health, and Welfare Committee.
      (2)   Copies of the written comments shall be made available for public
inspection in the office of the County Clerk and members of the public shall be
allowed to obtain a copy of any written comments upon payment of the actual
cost of reproduction.
      (3)   Any written comment postmarked or received by the County Clerk not
later than 30 days after the date of the last public hearing shall be made part
of the record.
      (4)   The County Board shall consider all written comments in making its
determination concerning the application for site approval.
   (C)   At least one public hearing shall be held by the County Board no
sooner than 90 days, but no later than 120 days from the receipt of the request
for site approval.
      (1)   The applicant shall cause to be published a notice in a newspaper
of the largest general circulation in the county of the date, time, and
location of the public hearing no later than 14 days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   The applicant shall notify, by certified mail, all members of the
General Assembly from the district where the proposed site is located, the
state EPA and the applicant for site approval of the pollution control facility
of the date, time, and location of the public hearing.
      (3)   The County Board shall ensure that a court reporter will be present
at any public hearing for purposes of establishing a record and a transcript of
the proceedings.
         (a)   The transcript of the public hearing shall be made available for
public inspection at the office of the County Clerk. Interested persons may
obtain copies of the transcription upon payment of the actual cost of
reproduction.
         (b)   The office of the County Clerk will maintain the transcript and
make it part of the site approval file.
      (4)   The Chairperson of the Board shall appoint a hearing officer to
preside over the public hearing and a simple majority of the members of the
EEHW Committee shall be a quorum. The Chairperson of the County Board may also
request that representatives of the County State’s Attorney’s Office and the
County Health Department be present at the hearing to assist the hearing
officers.
         (a)   The presiding officer of the hearing shall not arbitrarily limit
testimony, but may exclude matters which are irrelevant, scurrilous,
slanderous, or unnecessarily repetitive. The presiding officer of the hearing
may establish reasonable time limits for each witness.
         (b)   The hearing officer may, by a majority of those members present,
vote to continue the public hearing if they find additional time for testimony
is necessary. A continuance of time, date, and place shall be determined
immediately and announced to all present.
      (5)   Any exhibits that a participant, other than the applicant,
anticipates using during the public hearing shall be submitted to the county at
least five days prior to its anticipated use. All participants shall submit at
least five copies of all exhibits. A copy shall be furnished to the applicant
by the county. All participants, other than the applicant, must register with
the County Clerk at least ten days prior to the start of the public hearing.
All other parties will be limited to public comment during the public comment
time of the public hearing or to written comment through the written comment
period.
      (6)   Members of the public who speak during the public comment time of
the public hearing shall submit any exhibits they expect to use to the county
prior to the time designated for the public to speak. At least three copies of
all the exhibits shall be submitted. The applicant will be provided one of the
three copies.
      (7)   Any additional exhibits to be used by the applicant during the
public hearing and not a part of the application shall be submitted at least 24
hours prior to the commencement of the public hearing, if possible. If
additional exhibits are used by the applicant that could not previously have
been anticipated, but are in response to issues raised during the course of
questions that were asked in the applicant’s case in chief or upon any other
party’s case, they shall be submitted as soon as practicable. At least five
copies of all additional exhibits shall be submitted. Any additional exhibit
used by the applicant, that in any way changes information provided with the
application, or provides information not submitted as part of the application,
shall be considered an amendment to the application and all sections of this
subchapter pertaining to amendments shall take effect.
      (8)   Any exhibits, other than those included in the application,
submitted by the applicant or any participant must be on paper no larger than
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size. If larger exhibits are
submitted, they must also be submitted in the requested reduced-size format.
      (9)   The time limits for submission of evidence may be waived by the
member of the EEHW Committee presiding over the hearing if he or she determines
that the participant could not have reasonably anticipated the use of the
exhibit at the time that the submission was due.
      (10)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the person(s) submitting an
exhibit or written public comment at the hearing to place it on file with the
County Clerk’s office in accordance with this section.
   (D)   After reviewing the application, written comments, transcript of the
public hearing(s) and other pertinent documents, the Committee shall make
recommendations on site approval to the full County Board no sooner than 30
days, but no later than 60 days after the last public hearing.
(Ord. O-75-9-08, passed 9-11-2008)
§ 51.20 COUNTY BOARD APPROVAL.
   (A)   No sooner than 30 days after the last public hearing, but no later
than 180 days from receipt of the request for site approval, the County Board
shall, at a regular or special meeting, approve or deny the application for a
pollution control facility site.
   (B)   After receiving the recommendation of the EEHW Committee and reviewing
the application, written comments, transcripts of the public hearing(s), and
other pertinent documents, the County Board shall base its decision on the
application for a pollution control facility only in accordance with the nine
criteria established in the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/39.2).
   (C)   In granting approval for an application, the County Board may include
conditions that are reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purpose of §
39.2 of the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/39.2) and that are
consistent with Pollution Control Board regulations.
   (D)   A statement of the decision, reasons for the decision based on the
nine criteria, and conditions imposed by the County Board shall be made in
writing.
      (1)   The state EPA and the applicant shall be notified by registered
mail of the County Board’s decision and the conditions imposed.
      (2)   The decision, reasons for the decision, and the conditions imposed
by the County Board shall be made available for public inspection at the office
of the County Clerk and may be copied upon payment of the actual cost of
reproduction.
(Ord. O-75-9-08, passed 9-11-2008)
§ 51.21 APPEALS.
   All appeals of the County Board decision (by applicant or other hearing
participant) must be filed with the State Pollution Control Board within 35
days of the announcement of the County Board’s decision.
(Ord. O-75-9-08, passed 9-11-2008)
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
Water Supply Well Setback Zone
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Prohibitions
   
52.04   Waivers, exceptions, and certificates of minimal hazard
   
52.05   Exclusions
   
52.06   Identification of regulated setback zones
   
52.07   Enforcement
Water Well Permit and Water Supply
   
52.20   Preamble
   
52.21   Definitions
   
52.22   Public water supply use
   
52.23   Water supply location, construction, and repair
   
52.24   Disinfection and analysis
   
52.25   Water lines
   
52.26   Responsibility clause
   
52.27   Permit required
   
52.28   Application for permit
   
52.29   Required inspections
   
52.30   Licensing of well drillers and pump installers
   
52.31   Enforcement
Closed Loop Wells
   
52.45   Application of regulations; adoption of state code
   
52.46   Definitions
   
52.47   Registration requirements for closed loop contractors
   
52.48   Closed loop well system permit requirements and registration
   
52.49   Use of food grade propylene glycol
   
52.50   Closed loop well system construction
   
52.51   Septic system and well setbacks
   
52.52   Variances
   
52.53   Abandonment of a closed loop well system
   
52.54   Revocation
   
52.55   Issuance of notices
   
52.56   Hearings
   
52.57   Emergencies
 
   
52.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Minimum and Maximum Setback Zone Maps and Descriptions
WATER SUPPLY WELL SETBACK ZONE
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by 55 ILCS 5/5-15016 (1996); 415 ILCS 5/
14.2, and 415 ILCS 5/14.3 (1996); and in the interest of securing the public
health, safety, and welfare; to preserve the quality and quantity of
groundwater resources in order to assure a safe and adequate water supply for
present and future generations; and to preserve groundwater resources currently
in use and those aquifers having a potential for future use as a public water
supply, the provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all properties located
within the minimum setback zone established under § 14.2 of the Environmental
Protection Act (“Act”) (415 ILCS 5/14.2 (1996)) and this subchapter, and the
maximum setback zone established under § 14.3 of the Act (415 ILCS 5/14.3
(1996)) and this subchapter.
(Ord. O-41-2-98, passed 2-11-1998)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as stated in this subchapter, and unless a different meaning of a
word or term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in
this subchapter shall be the same as those used in the Act and the State
Groundwater Protection Act (415 ILCS 55/1 (1996)):
   ACT. The Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 (1996)).
   AGENCY. The State Environmental Protection Agency.
   BOARD. The State Pollution Control Board.
   COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY. A public water supply which serves or is intended to
serve at least 15 service connections used by residents or regularly serves at
least 25 residents.
(415 ILCS 5/3.05)
   MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE. The area around a community water supply well
established under § 14.3 of the Act and this subchapter, and identified in §
52.06 and described in
Appendix A of this chapter.
   MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE. The area around a community water supply well
established under § 14.2 of the Act and this subchapter, and identified in §
52.06 and described in
Appendix A of this chapter.
   POTENTIAL PRIMARY SOURCE.  
      (1)   Any unit at a facility or site not currently subject to a removal
or remedial action which:
         (a)    Is utilized for the treatment, storage, or disposal of any
hazardous or special waste not generated at the site;
         (b)   Is utilized for the disposal of municipal waste not generated at
the site, other than landscape waste and construction and demolition debris;
         (c)   Is utilized for the landfilling, land treating, surface
impounding or piling of any hazardous or special waste that is generated on the
site or at other sites owned, controlled, or operated by the same person; or
         (d)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 75,000 pounds above
ground, or more than 7,500 pounds below ground, of any hazardous substances.
      (2)   A new POTENTIAL PRIMARY SOURCE is:
         (a)   A potential primary source which is not in existence or for
which construction has not commenced at its location as of January 1, 1988;
         (b)   A potential primary source which expands laterally beyond the
currently permitted boundary, or if the primary source is not permitted, the
boundary in existence as of January 1, 1988; or
         (c)   A potential primary source which is part of a facility that
undergoes major reconstruction. The reconstruction shall be deemed to have
taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components constructed
within a two-year period exceed 50% of the fixed capital cost of a comparable
entirely new facility.
      (3)   Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal,
state, and local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been
initiated and proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
(415 ILCS 5/3.59)
   POTENTIAL ROUTE. Abandoned and improperly plugged wells of all kinds,
drainage wells, all injection wells, including closed-loop heat pump wells, and
any excavation for the discovery, development, or production of stone, sand, or
gravel.
      (1)   A new POTENTIAL ROUTE is:
         (a)   A POTENTIAL ROUTE which is not in existence or for which
construction has not commenced at its location as of January 1, 1988; or
         (b)   A POTENTIAL ROUTE which expands laterally beyond the currently
permitted boundary or, if the potential route is not permitted, the boundary in
existence as of January 1, 1988.
      (2)   Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal,
state, and local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been
initiated and proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
(415 ILCS 5/3.58)
   POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE.  
      (1)   Any unit at a facility or a site not currently subject to a removal
or remedial action, other than a potential primary source, which:
         (a)   Is utilized for the landfilling, land treating, or surface
impounding of waste that is generated on the site or at other sites owned,
controlled, or operated by the same person, other than livestock and landscape
waste, and construction and demolition debris;
         (b)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 but not more
than 75,000 pounds above ground, or more than 2,500 but not more than 7,500
pounds below ground, of any hazardous substances;
         (c)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 gallons above
ground, or more than 500 gallons below ground, of petroleum, including crude
oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise specifically listed or
designated as a hazardous substance;
         (d)   Stores or accumulates pesticides, fertilizers, or road oils for
purposes of commercial application or for distribution to retail sales outlets;
         (e)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 50,000 pounds of any
de-icing agent; or
         (f)   Is utilized for handling livestock waste or for treating
domestic wastewaters other than private sewage disposal systems as defined in
the Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act.
      (2)   A new POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE is:
         (a)   A POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE which is not in existence or for
which construction has not commenced at its location as of July 1, 1988;
         (b)   A POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE which expands laterally beyond the
currently permitted boundary or, if the secondary source is not permitted, the
boundary in existence as of July 1, 1988, other than an expansion for handling
of livestock waste or for treating domestic wastewaters; or
         (c)   A POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE which is part of a facility that
undergoes major reconstruction. The reconstruction shall be deemed to have
taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components constructed
within a two-year period exceed 50% of the fixed capital cost of a comparable
entirely new facility.
      (3)   Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal,
state, and local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been
initiated and proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
(415 ILCS 5/3.60)
   UNIT. Any device, mechanism, equipment, or area (exclusive of land utilized
only for agricultural production). This term includes secondary containment
structures and their contents at agrichemical facilities.
(415 ILCS 5/3.62)
(Ord. O-41-2-98, passed 2-11-1998)
§ 52.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §§
52.04 and
52.05, no person shall place a new potential primary source, new potential
secondary source, or new potential route within a minimum setback zone.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
52.04, no person shall place a new potential primary source within a maximum
setback zone.
(Ord. O-41-2-98, passed 2-11-1998) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 WAIVERS, EXCEPTIONS, AND CERTIFICATES OF MINIMAL HAZARD.
   (A)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(b) of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential route is
granted a waiver by the Agency, the owner shall be deemed to have a waiver to
the same extent from §
52.03(A).
   (B)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(c) of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source (other than landfilling or land treating), new potential
secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by the Board,
the owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent from §
52.03(A).
   (C)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(c) of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source (other than landfilling or land treating) is granted an
exception by the Board, the owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the
same extent from §
52.03(B).
   (D)   If, pursuant to § 14.5 of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential route is
issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the Agency, the owner shall not be
subject to §
52.03(A) to the same extent that the owner is not subject to § 14.2(d) of the
Act.
(Ord. O-41-2-98, passed 2-11-1998)
§ 52.05 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Section
52.03(A) shall not apply to new common sources of sanitary pollution, as
specified pursuant to § 17 of the Act and the regulations adopted thereunder by
the Agency, including but not limited to the following: privies, septic tanks,
cesspools, sewers (storm, sanitary, combined, and sewer service connections),
subsurface seepage-disposal lines, pits, or ponds receiving fluids such as
surface waters, oils, and grease, and flood waters.
   (B)   However, no common sources may be located within the applicable
minimum distance from a community water supply well specified by the
regulations.
(Ord. O-41-2-98, passed 2-11-1998)
§ 52.06 IDENTIFICATION OF REGULATED SETBACK ZONES.
   Whereas the regulations and technical requirements of the State
Environmental Protection Agency have been met for the establishment of setback
zones for the following community water supply wells; and whereas the Agency
has reviewed and confirmed the application, and authorized the county to
officially establish setback zones for these wells; therefore, setback zones
are hereby established for community water supply wells in the county as
follows:
   (A)   Village of Blue Mound: Minimum and maximum setback zones are hereby
established for the community water supply wells of the Village of Blue Mound,
as shown/described in Appendix A to this chapter.
   (B)   City of Macon: Minimum and maximum setback zones are hereby
established for the community water supply wells of the City of Macon, as
shown/described in Appendix A to this chapter.
   (C)   Long Creek Township: Minimum and maximum setback zones are hereby
established for the community water supply wells of Long Creek Township, as
shown/described in Appendix A to this chapter.
(Ord. O-41-2-98, passed 2-11-1998)
§ 52.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   The County Planning and Zoning Department shall be the agency responsible
for the administration and enforcement of the regulations of this subchapter.
The County State’s Attorney shall prosecute violations of this subchapter for
the county.
(Ord. O-41-2-98, passed 2-11-1998)
WATER WELL PERMIT AND WATER SUPPLY
§ 52.20 PREAMBLE.
   This subchapter is established to eliminate disease transmission and
chemical poisons through provision of a safe, potable, adequate supply of water
for drinking, culinary, and sanitary purposes for every individual within the
health jurisdiction.
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health or its authorized
representative.
   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system which serves at least 15
service connections used by residents or regularly serves at least 25 residents
at least 60 days a year.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The person or persons who have been designated by the
Board of Health to administer the affairs of the County Health Department.
   NON-COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system that is not a community
water system, that has at least 15 service connections used by nonresidents, or
regularly serves 25 or more nonresident individuals daily for at least 60 days
a year.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. A system for the provision to the public of piped water
for human consumption, if the system has at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days
per year. The term PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM includes any collection, treatment,
storage, and distribution facilities under control of the operator of the
system and used primarily in connection with the system and any collection or
pretreatment storage facilities not under that control which are used primarily
in connection with the system.
   SEMI-PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. A water supply which is not a public water
system, yet which serves a segment of the public other than an owner-occupied
single-family dwelling.
   WATER WELL. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, driven, dug, or
otherwise constructed for the division, artificial recharge or acquisition of
groundwater, but does not include wells for the purpose of obtaining or
prospecting for oil, natural gas, minerals, or products of mining or quarry or
for inserting media to re-pressure oil or natural gas-bearing formations or for
storing petroleum products, or monitoring wells.
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.22 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY USE.
   In those locations where a public water supply is reasonably available, that
supply shall be the sole source of water for drinking and culinary purposes.
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.23 WATER SUPPLY LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION, AND REPAIR.
   (A)   Water wells. Except as otherwise herein provided, the location,
construction, repair, and disinfection of water wells, and the installation of
water well pumps, shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth by the
most recent editions on file with the Secretary of State of the State
Department of Public Health State Water Well Construction Code (77 Ill. Adm.
Code 920), and State Water Well Pump Installation Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 925),
which are hereby made part of this subchapter by reference. Copies of the
Regulations shall be available at the Health Department and the County Clerk’s
offices. Wells that are abandoned shall be sealed in a manner prescribed by the
State Water Well Construction Code.
   (B)   Surface water supplies. All water systems which receive their source
of water from ponds, lakes, streams, rivers, or other surface collectors of
water shall be designed, constructed, and operated in accordance with the most
recent edition of the State Department of Public Health Surface Source Water
Treatment Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 930).
   (C)   Cisterns. Cisterns shall not be used for a water supply except where
adequate groundwater resources are not available. Cistern water and surface
water supplies shall receive treatment in accordance with the most recent
edition of the State Department of Public Health Surface Source Water Treatment
Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 930).
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.24 DISINFECTION AND ANALYSIS.
   Owners of newly constructed wells or other types of water supplies which
supply a semi-private water system shall have the water from their semi-private
water supply analyzed and approved by either the laboratory of the State
Department of Public Health or a laboratory approved by the State Department of
Public Health before the well or other water supply is placed into service. A
copy of the analysis shall be filed with the Health Department. The water
obtained from a surface supply shall meet the nitrate, turbidity, and
bacteriological requirements contained in §§ 900.50, 900.60, and 900.70 of the
most recent edition of the State Department of Public Health Drinking Water
Systems Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 900), and the water obtained from a well shall
meet the nitrate and bacteriological requirements of §§ 900.50 and 900.70 of
the Drinking Water Systems Code.
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.25 WATER LINES.
   Except as otherwise herein provided, the location, construction, and
material standards of all water lines of the distribution system shall be in
accordance with the requirements set forth by the most recent edition of the
State Department of Public Health’s Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code Chapter I
890).
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.26 RESPONSIBILITY CLAUSE.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of any rental property,
mobile home park, apartment building, and the like to provide a potable water
supply for their tenants (as set forth in §§
52.24 and
52.25). All drinking water systems shall meet the design capacity requirements
of Table B of the State Department of Public Health’s Drinking Water Systems
Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 900).
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.27 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    A permit to construct, deepen, modify or seal a water well shall be
obtained from the Health Department prior to the start of work. No water well
shall be constructed or deepened in this county, except in accordance with
these regulations and it shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction of
a potable water well without first obtaining a permit from the Health
Department. All wells and pumps shall be maintained in good operating order by
the owner. A non-community public water supply shall not be operated without
first obtaining a permit from the State Department of Public Health. The
requirement for permit in this subchapter shall not be applicable to wells
intended to serve a community public water supply system, and to monitoring
wells.
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007; Ord. O-133-11-18, passed 11-8-2018)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.28 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
    Applications for permits shall be in writing and in a form that shall be
prescribed by the Health Department. The Board of Health may set fees to be
collected by the Health Department to offset the cost of administering the
program pursuant to this subchapter. Permit fees for units of government or
school districts are waived. If the well is unsatisfactory for the purpose
intended, a new application for permit shall be filed to properly seal the
well. A new application for permit to construct, modify, or deepen shall be
submitted, along with appropriate fee, for any new well. A permit to construct
is valid for a period of six months from date of issuance. If construction has
not started within this period, the permit is void. The well permit fee is
nonrefundable.
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007; Ord. O-133-11-18, passed 11-8-2018)
§ 52.29 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Department shall be notified by telephone or in writing at least
48 hours prior to the commencement of any work to construct or deepen a water
well for which a permit has been issued, or to seal a water well, boring, or
monitoring well. The Health Department shall be allowed access to any property
for the purpose of performing inspection of water well construction or to
inspect the sealing of wells or to investigate abandoned wells.
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.30 LICENSING OF WELL DRILLERS AND PUMP INSTALLERS.
   All individuals who construct water wells and install well pumps shall be
licensed by the State Department of Public Health in accordance with the Water
Well and Pump Installation Contractor’s License Act Chapter III, par. 7101 et
seq., latest edition. However, the owner/occupant or lessee/occupant of a
single-family residence may construct a water well and/or install a well pump,
provided that all work complies with all rules and regulations of the current
State Department of Public Health State Water Well Construction Code (77 Ill.
Adm. Code 920), and the State Department of Public Health State Water Well Pump
Installation Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 925).
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
§ 52.31 ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Health Authority in accordance with
the current State Department of Public Health State Water Well Construction
Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 920), the State Department of Public Health State Water
Well Pump Installation Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 925), the State Department of
Public Health Surface Source Water Treatment Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 930), and
the State Department of Public Health Drinking Water Systems Code (77 Ill. Adm.
Code 900).
(Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007)
CLOSED LOOP WELLS
§ 52.45 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS; ADOPTION OF STATE CODE.
   (A)   All closed loop well system installations within the boundaries of
Macon County, Illinois are subject to the rules and regulations set forth by
this subchapter and the Illinois Department of Public Health Water Well
Construction Code (77 Illinois Administrative Code, Part 920). This subchapter
is enacted to establish standards to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of Macon County.
   (B)   In addition to those provisions set forth herein, this subchapter
hereby adopts by reference the current edition and any and all subsequent
revisions of the Illinois Department of Water Well Construction Code.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 52.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Board of Health of the Macon County Health Department.
   CLOSED LOOP HEAT PUMP WELL. Has the same meaning as “Closed Loop Well.”
   CLOSED LOOP WELL. A sealed, watertight loop of pipe buried outside of a
building foundation intended to re-circulate a liquid solution through a heat
exchanger but is limited to the construction of the borehole and the grouting
of the borehole and does not include the piping and appurtenances used in other
capacity.
   CLOSED LOOP WELL CONTRACTOR. Any person who installs closed loop wells for
another person. CLOSED LOOP WELL CONTRACTOR does not include the employee of a
closed loop contractor.
   CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM. A clustered group of closed loop wells that serve
the same facility.
   DEPARTMENT. The Macon County Health Department.
   FOOD GRADE PROPYLENE GLYCOL. The coolant added to a closed loop well system.
The product container shall be labeled “Propylene Glycol USP” or equivalent.
Any product not containing the letters “USP” will not be acceptable for this
use, unless vendor documentation is produced to demonstrate equivalency.
   HORIZONTAL CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM. Any open cut excavation where a
watertight loop of pipe is buried outside of a building foundation that is
intended to re-circulate a liquid solution through a heat exchanger.
   IDPH. The Illinois Department of Public Health.
   MODIFICATION. The alteration of the structure of an existing water well,
including but not limited to, deepening, elimination of a buried suction line,
installation of a liner, replacing, repairing, or extending casing, or
replacement of a well screen. Pertaining to closed loop wells, MODIFICATION
also means any alteration to the construction of the borehole of an existing
closed loop well, including, but not limited to, regrouting and installation of
additional boreholes.
   POND CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM. A closed loop well system constructed where
horizontal piping is placed within a pond or lake.
   POTENTIAL PRIMARY SOURCE. Any unit at a facility not currently subject to a
removal or remedial action which:
      (1)   Is utilized for the treatment, storage, or disposal of any
hazardous or special waste (as defined in Section 3 of the Environmental
Protection Act) not generated at the site;
      (2)   Is utilized for the disposal of municipal waste not generated at
the site, other than landscape waste (as defined in Section 3 of the
Environmental Protection Act) and construction and demolition debris;
      (3)   Is utilized for the land filling, land treating, surface impounding
or piling of any hazardous or special waste (as defined in Section 3 of the
Environmental Protection Act) that is generated on the site or at other sites
owned, controlled, or operated by the same person; or
      (4)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 75,000 pounds above
ground, or more than 7,500 pounds below ground, of any hazardous substances.
(Section 3.345 of the Environmental Protection Act).
   POTENTIAL ROUTE. Abandoned and improperly plugged wells of all kinds (i.e.,
those wells not plugged in accordance with this subchapter), drainage wells,
all injections wells, including closed loop heat pump wells, and any excavation
for the discovery, development, or production of stone, sand, or gravel. This
term does not include closed loop heat pumps using United States Pharmacopeia
(USP) food grade propylene glycol. (Section 3.350 of the Environmental
Protection Act.)
   POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE. Any unit at a facility or a site not currently
subject to a removal or remedial action, other than a potential primary source,
which:
      (1)   Is utilized for the land filing, land treating, or surface
impounding of waste that is generated on the site or at other sites owned,
controlled, or operated by the same person, other than livestock and landscape
waste, and construction and demolition debris;
      (2)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 but not more
than 75,000 pounds above ground, or more than 2,500 but not more than 7,500
pounds below ground, of any hazardous substances;
      (3)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 gallons above
ground, or more than 500 gallons below ground, of petroleum, including crude
oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise specially listed or
designated as a hazardous substance;
      (4)   Stores or accumulates pesticides, fertilizers, or road oils for
purposes of commercial application or for distribution to retail sales outlets;
or stores or accumulates at anytime more than 50,000 pounds of any de-icing
agent; or
      (5)   Is utilized for handling livestock waste or for treating domestic
wastewaters other than private sewage disposal systems as defined in the
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act. (Section 3.355 of the Environmental
Protection Act.)
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 52.47 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS FOR CLOSED LOOP CONTRACTORS.
   All individuals who install or excavate a closed loop well system in the
county, must be registered with the Illinois Department of Public Health, and
must show a valid certificate. A copy of this certificate must be filed
annually with the County Health Department.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.48 CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   No closed loop well system shall be installed in the county, without a
valid permit. A permit to construct, modify, or seal a closed loop well system
shall be obtained from the County Health Department prior to performing any
work.
   (B)   Applications for a closed loop permit shall be made on the forms
provided by the Department. All applications for permits shall include the
following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the owner of the closed loop well system;
      (2)   Closed loop well contractor’s name and registration number;
      (3)   The location of the closed loop well system, geographical location
of the site using GPS equipment and a description of the county, city, street
address, subdivision lot number, township range, section, and directions to the
site (i.e., highway number, secondary roads, signs to follow, etc.). Changes in
location of the closed loop well system shall be approved by issuing party
prior to construction;
      (4)   Type of facility to be served (e.g., single-family residence,
apartment building, business, factory, school);
      (5)   The number and depth of the closed loop boreholes;
      (6)   A drawing indicating lot size, location of property lines, and
distances from proposed closed loop well system construction to water wells,
septic tanks, abandoned wells, property lines, seepage fields, sewers, and all
other sources of contamination, it they are within 200 feet of any closed loop
well; and
      (7)   Prior to the approval of the inspection application, the County
Health Department, at its discretion, may require additional information, and/
or inspect the property and neighboring properties.
   (C)   After the application is approved and a permit is issued, no
modifications shall be made without reapplying to the County Health Department.
   (D)   A permit to install a closed loop well system shall be void if
construction has not commenced within one year of the date of issuance.
   (E)   Each application for the registration and the inspection of a closed
loop well system shall be accompanied by a fee set forth by the County Board of
Health. This fee shall not be refundable in the event that an individual
decides not to construct or modify the closed loop well system.
   (F)   Any closed loop well contractor who constructs, modifies, or seals a
closed loop well for which a permit has been issued shall notify the Department
by telephone or in writing at least two days prior to commencement of the work.
   (G)   Within 30 days after a closed loop well system is completed or
abandoned and sealed, the closed loop well contractor shall submit a report of
the completion or sealing on a form provided by the Department.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.49 USE OF FOOD GRADE PROPYLENE GLYCOL.
   All closed loop well heat exchange systems shall use USP or food grade
propylene glycol as the coolant in the county.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.50 CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.
   For each closed loop well, the borehole, containing the heat exchanger
piping, shall be grouted from the bottom of the borehole to the bottom of the
header-piping trench and, in the case of directional bores, the surface of the
ground. IDPH will maintain a list of approved closed loop well grouts. Closed
loop wells that are constructed in a manner that leaves casing in the ground
shall be grouted in a manner consistent with water wells. Closed loop wells
shall not be located closer to water wells and sources of contamination than
the minimum separation distances specified in § 920 Table C of the Illinois
Department of Public Health’s Water Well Construction Code.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.51 SEPTIC SYSTEM AND WELL SETBACKS.
   (A)   In order to protect the sewage disposal system and the closed loop
well system, there shall be a minimum set back of 75 feet between the septic
field and the closed loop well system, and a minimum set back of 50 feet
between the septic tank and the closed loop well system.
   (B)   Closed loop well systems shall not be located closer than 200 feet to
a water well, except when the well is a private water system well and when the
owner is the same for both the water well and the closed loop well system, in
which case the water well shall not be closer than 75 feet from the closed loop
well system. (Section 920 Table C, Illinois Department of Public Health’s Water
Well Construction Code)
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.52 VARIANCES.
   (A)   If conditions exist at a proposed installation site which precludes
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter, a variance shall be
requested and shall be approved prior to beginning any construction. The closed
loop well contractor must make written request outlining a specific proposal to
be used in lieu of compliance with this subchapter. The request shall include a
plot plan of the property, showing lot size, the locations of sewers, septic
tanks, buildings, seepage fields, and other sources of contamination on the
property and adjacent property, with distances shown to the proposed closed
loop well. A description of geologic and soil conditions shall also be
included, A County Health Department official will review the requested
variance, and may ask for additional information. If in the opinion of the
County Health Department official a health hazard or nuisance will not result
from this variance, the variance shall be granted. The County Health Department
will notify the closed loop well contractor in writing of its decision either
to grant or deny the variance.
   (B)   A variance shall not be granted for a potential route distance.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 52.53 ABANDONMENT OF A CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM.
   Closed loop well systems being abandoned shall be sealed in accordance with
the Illinois Water Well Construction Code. The County Health Department shall
be notified by telephone or in writing at least 48 hours prior to the
commencement of any work to abandon a closed loop well system. After a closed
loop well system has been sealed, a report for the sealing shall be in writing
and in such form as shall be provided by the County Health Department, and
shall be submitted to the County Health Department within 30 days after such
closed loop well system is sealed.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.54 REVOCATION.
   (A)   If after the permit has been issued the County Health Department finds
that the information submitted on the application was falsified or inaccurate,
or if the violations found during the inspection are not corrected, or if the
Department is interfered with in the performance of its duties, the permit may
be revoked. Prior to such action, the Department will notify the closed loop
well contractor in writing, stating the reason for which the permit is subject
to revocation.
   (B)   The County Health Department may provide an opportunity for the closed
loop well contractor to show cause why the Department shall not proceed with
permit revocation. Should the Department proceed with the permit revocation;
the Department will notify the closed loop well contractor in writing that the
permit is revoked five days following the serving of said notice. Such
revocation shall then be effective unless a request for a hearing has been
filed with the Department by the closed loop well contractor within a five-day
period.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 52.55 ISSUANCE OF NOTICES.
   (A)   Whenever the County Health Department determines that a violation of
any provision of this subchapter has occurred, the Department shall give notice
to the person responsible for such violation.
   (B)   Notices provided for under this section shall be deemed to have been
properly served when written notice has been delivered personally to the person
responsible, or such notice has been sent by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the person.
   (C)   A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the
Department.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 52.56 HEARINGS.
   Hearings held pursuant to this section shall be held within ten working days
after receipt of the request for hearing. Such hearings shall occur at the
Macon County Health Department before the Macon County Board of Health. The
Board of Health shall receive evidence from the Department and from the
requester, if the requester chooses to present evidence. Upon a finding that
the Department has proved, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a violation
of this subchapter has occurred, the Board shall affirm the revocation, or it
may modify the terms of said revocation as it deem necessary to promote the
public safety and welfare.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 52.57 EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Whenever the County Health Department finds that an emergency
regarding a violation of this subchapter exists, which requires immediate
action to protect public health, it may without any administrative procedure
and without notice or hearing bring action for temporary injunction to require
that such action be taken as the court may deem necessary to meet the
emergency.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, such order
shall be effective immediately. Such action will be brought to the attention of
the State’s Attorney of Macon County.
   (C)   When the emergency conditions are abated, the Department may request
that the temporary injunction be cancelled.
(Ord. O-116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation, or agent, employee, or contractor
thereof, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or
who resists enforcement of any provision of §§
52.01 through
52.07 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both, for each
offense. Each week a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
52.20 through
52.31, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500.
Each day the violation continues shall constitute a distinct and separate
offense. There shall be no incarceration for violations of that subchapter.
   (D)   Violations of §§
52.45 through
52.57 shall constitute an offense pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5 - 1052, punishable by
a fine not to exceed $500. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
distinct and separate offense. Further, violations of different sections of §§
52.45 through
52.57 may be prosecuted as separate and distinct violations and each day a
violation of any section thereof continues shall be considered a distinct and
separate offense.
(Ord. O-41-2-98, passed 2-11-1998; Ord. O-65-4-07, passed 4-12-2007; Ord. O-
116-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
APPENDIX A: MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE MAPS AND DESCRIPTIONS
Community Water Supply Well Regulated Setback Zones
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-18.jpg]
Village of Blue Mound Wells, Location Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-20.jpg]
Blue Mound Wells Setback
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-22.jpg]
City of Macon Wells - Location Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-24.jpg]
Macon Wells Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-26.jpg]
Long Creek Township Wells – Location Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-28.jpg]
Long Creek Township Wells - Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-30.jpg]
CHAPTER 53: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
Private Sewage Disposal System
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Requirements for individual sewage disposal systems
   
53.03   Access to property
   
53.04   Insanitary conditions
   
53.05   Permits
   
53.06   Variances
   
53.07   Contractor’s registration
   
53.08   Compliance and performance
   
53.09   Subdivisions
   
53.10   Subsurface seepage fields
   
53.11   Aerobic treatment plants
   
53.12   Holding tanks
   
53.13   National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit
   
53.14   Common drains
   
53.15   Adoption by reference
   
53.16   Enforcement
   
53.17   Issuance of notice
   
53.18   Revocation of contractor’s registration
   
53.19   Hearings
   
53.20   Conflict of ordinance, effect on partial invalidity
 
   
53.99   Penalty
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in the Illinois Department of
Public Health’s Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code, for the purpose
of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. The legally designated Administrator or the
Acting Administrator of the Macon County Health Department, and shall include
those persons designated by the Administrator or Acting Administrator to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   BEDROOM. Any room equipped with a closet that might be reasonably used as a
sleeping room. A room that can be readily converted into a bedroom must be
classified as a bedroom for the purposes of accurately sizing the private
sewage disposal system. Rooms intended for use as kitchens, bathrooms, or
laundry rooms, and rooms with large doorways or half walls, such as family
rooms and living rooms, are excluded from the definition.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The Macon County Board of Health or its authorized
representative(s).
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Wastewater derived principally from dwellings, business or
office building, institutions, food service establishments, and similar
facilities.
   EFFLUENT. Liquid waste discharged from a private sewage disposal system or a
component of a private sewage disposal system.
   GREY WATER. Wastewater such as a dishwasher, laundry waste, shower waste,
and other wastewater not containing fecal matter.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Macon County Board of Health or an authorized
representative thereof.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Macon County Health Department, an agency of the
Macon County Board of Health, acting through its administrator or the other
authorized representative.
   HOME OWNER. A person who holds legal title to a residential structure which
is to be used, or is used, for his or her personal, single-family residence.
   HOME OWNER INSTALLED SYSTEM. A private sewage disposal system installed by a
home owner for his or her personal single family residence.
   HUMAN WASTES. Undigested food and by-products of metabolism which are passed
out of the human body.
   INSTALL. The act of installation, as defined in this section.
   INSTALLATION. Construction, alteration, modification, repair, replacement,
or extension.
   MODIFY. Any change in the design or components of a private sewage disposal
system.
   PERMIT. A written permit issued by the Board of Health or its authorized
representative permitting the construction of an individual sewage disposal
system under this subchapter.
   PERSON. An individual, group of individuals, association, trust,
partnership, corporation, person doing business under an assumed name, the
State of Illinois or any Department thereof, or any other entity.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. An average waste loading, equivalent to that amount
of waste produced by one person which is defined as 100 gallons per day or that
amount of waste containing 0.17 pounds BOD5 (Biochemical Oxygen Demand 5-day
test).
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. Any sewage handling or treatment facility
receiving domestic sewage from less than 15 people or population equivalent,
and having a ground surface discharge, or any sewage handling or treatment
facility receiving domestic sewage and having no ground surface discharge.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR. Any person
constructing, installing, repairing, modifying, or maintaining private sewage
disposal systems.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSTALLATION CONTRACTORS AND PUMPERS
REGISTRATION. An annual registration certificate issued by the Macon County
Health Department to all private sewage disposal contractors and pumpers
engaged in the installation and/or servicing of the private sewage disposal
systems within the limits of Macon County.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PUMPING CONTRACTOR. Any person who cleans or
pumps waste from a sewage disposal system, or hauls or disposes of waste
therefrom.
   PROPERTY LINE. The geographic line of the parcel or lot upon which a
dwelling exists or may be lawfully constructed; except that where any portion
of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be
deemed to be the abutting street or alley right-of-way line.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person in whose name the legal title to the real estate
is recorded.
   PUBLIC HEALTH HAZARD. A condition that is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to
public health resulting from exposure to raw, untreated, or improperly treated
wastewater or effluent.
   SANITARY SEWER. Any sewage handling or treatment facility operating and
maintained under permit from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. May
also be referred to as “Public Sewer System” and/or “Community Sewer Program.”
   SEPTAGE. The solid and liquid waste removed from a private sewage disposal
system.
   SOIL CLASSIFIER. One of the following:
      (1)   A certified soil classifier of the Illinois Soil Classifiers
Association (ISCA), or a certified soil classifier with the American Registry
of Certified Professionals in Agronomy, Crops, and Soils (ARCPACS); or
      (2)   A person who is a full member or associate member of the Illinois
Soil Classifiers Association (ISCA), provided that the direct supervision is
provided to this person by an ISCA or ARCPACS certified soil classifier who
accompanies the person on at least 25% of the soil investigations and reviews
and signs all of that person’s soil investigation reports.
   WASTE. Either human waste or domestic sewage or both.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 53.02 REQUIREMENTS FOR INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Property owners of all buildings and places where people live, work,
or assemble shall provide for the sanitary disposal of domestic sewage. This
subchapter shall establish minimum standards designed to ensure that the waste
discharged to various individual sewage disposal systems:
      (1)   Do not contaminate any drinking water supply;
      (2)   Are not accessible to insects, rodents, or other possible carriers
of diseases which may come into contact with food or drinking water;
      (3)   Do not pollute or contaminate the waters of any bathing beach, fish
breeding grounds, or stream used for public or domestic water supply purposes
or for recreational purposes;
      (4)   Are not a public health hazard;
      (5)   Are not accessible to children;
      (6)   Do not give rise to a nuisance due to odor or unsightly appearance;
or
      (7)   Will not violate any other laws or regulations governing water
pollution or sewage disposal.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged untreated
wastewater or the effluent from private sewage disposal systems, directly or
indirectly, to any stream, ditch, lake, pond, bathing area, ground surface, or
abandoned well, or maintain or operate an onsite wastewater treatment system in
a manner that it becomes offensive, dangerous, or prejudicial to public health.
Repeated pumping of a septic because of system failure is not an acceptable
solution.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 ACCESS TO PROPERTY.
   The Board of Health or authorized representative of the Board of Health
shall have the authority to enter any property or building at any reasonable
time to inspect for health and sanitation purposes, and make the necessary test
including but not limited to, dye test on any private sewage disposal system to
determine compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 53.04 INSANITARY CONDITIONS.
   A person who owns property upon which a private sewage disposal system is
located shall:
   (A)   Not allow, or permit to allow, domestic sewage to gain access to the
ground surface except as provided in this subchapter;
   (B)   Not allow, or permit at allow, domestic sewage to gain access to
either used or abandoned wells, the aquifer, field drain tiles, basements, or
other underground areas accessible to humans; and
   (C)   Not allow, or permit to allow, domestic sewage to gain access to any
area aboveground or underground beyond the property owned by said person.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 PERMITS.
   (A)   In accordance with the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code
77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 905, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or
repair a private sewage disposal system within Macon County, unless said person
holds a valid permit issued by the Board of Health or its authorized
representative. The construction or repair of a private sewage disposal system
may not commence until a permit is first obtained from the County Health
Department.
      (1)    It is the responsibility of the property owner to obtain a permit
before any construction or repair of a private sewage disposal system
initiated. Failure by the property owner to obtain a permit before
construction, repair, or alteration of a private sewage disposal system begins
shall be considered a violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the Illinois licensed private
sewage disposal system installation contractor to ensure that a permit has been
issued for said construction or repair, and to follow the conditions of the
permit.
   (B)   All applications for permits granted under this provision of this
subchapter shall be made to the Health Department.
   (C)   A permit shall only be issued to an Illinois licensed private sewage
disposal installation contractor or a home owner installing his or her own
residential sewage disposal system.
   (D)   Application for permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the
Illinois licensed private sewage disposal contractor and the property owner,
and shall include the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant and location of the proposed
construction, repair, alteration, or extension. The address of the proposed
construction shall be the 911 address of the location; and
      (2)   Complete plan of the proposed private sewage disposal system with
substantiating data, if necessary, attesting to its compliance with the minimum
standards stated hereunder in this subchapter.
   (E)   A complete plan for the purpose of obtaining a permit to be issued to
the County Health Department shall include:
      (1)   The number, location, and size of all private sewage disposal
systems to be constructed, altered, or extended;
      (2)   The location of water supplies, water supply piping, existing
private sewage disposal systems, if any, building and/or dwelling, property
lines and adjacent lot lines, drawn in relation to true north;
      (3)   Plans of the proposed private sewage disposal systems to be
constructed, altered, or extended. Upon completion of such installation, as-
constructed plans shall be provided for the owner, and a copy shall be filed
with the County Health Department; and
      (4)   If applicable, the proposed construction or repair must also meet
all appropriate regulatory requirements, such as national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) general permit for surface discharging private
sewage disposal systems.
   (F)   The County Health Department or its authorized representative may
refuse to grant a permit for the construction of a private sewage disposal
system where sanitary or community sewage systems are available. A sewer shall
be deemed available when sanitary sewer line is in place within any street,
alley, right-of-way, or easement that adjoins or abuts the premises for which a
connection is practical and is permitted by the controlling authority for the
sewer. A reasonable distance for the purpose of this provision shall be deemed
to be not greater than 300 feet for a single-family residence or a non-
residential property with a sewage flow less than 1,500 gallons per day, or
within 1,000 feet of a multi-family dwelling or a non-residential property with
a sewage flow greater than or equal to 1,500 gallons per day.
   (G)   The County Board of Health or its authorized representative shall act
upon all applications within 14 days of receipt thereof.
   (H)   There shall be a fee charged for the initial construction permit,
alteration, or extension of an individual sewage system. If a permit is denied
the fee is non-refundable. The fee shall be established by the County Health
Department and may be increased whenever deemed necessary. The current fee
schedule will be available from the Health Department upon request.
   (I)   Said permit to construct is valid for a period of six months from date
of issuance. If construction has not started within this period the permit is
void.
   (J)   (1)   Applications will not be considered for approval if any part of
the application is incomplete, including appropriate signatures.
      (2)   Notice of incomplete application will be provided to the homeowner
and the contractor.
    (K)   Any changes to the original application and/or permit must be
approved prior to construction or installation. The approved modifications to
the application shall be submitted to the Health Department within seven days
of completion.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.06 VARIANCES.
   If circumstances exist which make compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter impractical or impossible, a person may request the Health Authority
to review a proposal for modification of the requirements. Such request shall
be made by submitting the following:
   (A)   A written request describing why the variance from the subchapter
requirements is necessary;
   (B)   A plan drawn to scale;
   (C)   Pertinent data to support the request;
   (D)   A written plan describing how deviation from the subchapter
requirement will still maintain adequate protection against potential public
health hazards;
   (E)   The owner’s and Illinois licensed private sewage disposal installation
contractor’s signatures on the variance request application; and
   (F)   The variance application fee.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 53.07 CONTRACTOR’S REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All private sewage disposal system installation and/or pumping
contractors operating within Macon County shall be licensed by the State of
Illinois and registered annually with the County Health Department. All such
registrations shall expire at the end of each calendar year.
   (B)   A private sewage disposal system installation and/or pumping
contractor desiring to be registered within Macon County shall apply to the
Health Department upon an application form supplied by the Health Department.
This form shall be completed and signed by each applicant.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08 COMPLIANCE AND PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   All private sewage disposal systems within the limits of Macon County
shall be installed, modified, or serviced by an Illinois licensed private
sewage disposal system installation contractor; and all such systems shall be
pumped, cleaned, and the contents hauled and disposed of by an Illinois
licensed private sewage disposal system pumping contractor; provided, however,
that a homeowner may install and/or service a private sewage disposal system
which serves his or her own personal single-family residence.
   (B)   All private sewage disposal systems shall have a soil investigation.
Soil investigations shall be the sole method for determining the absorption
capacity of the soil. Percolation test results will no longer be accepted. Soil
investigations shall be conducted in the following manner.
      (1)   Determination of soil characteristics on site proposed for
development with private sewage disposal systems shall be based on soil boring
data collected by a soil classifier or an Illinois licensed professional
engineer.
      (2)   There shall be a minimum of three borings per soil absorption
system site. The soil borings shall be at least 50 feet, and the proposed
subsurface seepage system shall be located within the area where the soil
borings were located. More soil borings may be necessary for accurate and
appropriate evaluation of a site where there is some concern about the
consistency of the soil materials. One of the borings shall be made at the
lowest elevation of the proposed absorption field area. Borings shall extend a
minimum of 60 inches below the natural ground surface. An observation pit shall
be used in gravelly materials.
      (3)   Observation and determination of soil characteristics also may be
determined from a pit dug by a backhoe or other excavating equipment. The
County Health Department may require soil pits (backhoe excavation) in cases
where there has been previous or current fill material, cutting of soils, or
where gravelly soils were encountered. Such soil pits shall be prepared at the
perimeter of the expected soil absorption area to minimize damage to natural
soil structure. Soil pits shall extend a minimum of 60 inches below the natural
ground surface.
      (4)   Site characteristics to be described include zones of seasonal and
permanent water saturation, U.S.D.A. soil textural changes, U.S.D.A. soil
structural features, slope, compaction and depth, soil coloration, depth of
limiting layer, depth of soil mottling (depth to low chroma equal to or less
than 2 and a value of 4 or more- Munsell Color System), internal drainage
classification, permeability range, and other limiting soil characteristics
that may reduce permeability.
      (5)   Soil investigations shall be performed within three years prior to
permit application. In the event that the area undergoing soil analysis is
altered after the soil investigation is performed, the County Health Department
may require an additional soil investigation to ensure that the results have
not been affected.
   (C)   All septage disposal sites within the county shall be inspected by the
Health Department to determine compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter. If the disposal sites are determined to be unacceptable, the Health
Department shall issue written notice to the users and owners of that site
informing them that the site shall not be used for disposal of septage.
   (D)   A private sewage disposal system pumping contractor or homeowner
servicing his or her personal residence system shall supply a list of all
septage disposal sites utilized by either the contractor or homeowner to the
County Health Department.
   (E)   The private sewage disposal system installation contractor, the
private sewage system pumping contractor, and the homeowner who constructs,
installs, repairs, modifies, or maintains private sewage disposal systems, or
cleans or pumps waste from private sewage disposal systems shall perform work
in accordance with the standards promulgated under authority granted in the
Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code, as from time to time
amended.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Soil investigations shall be conducted for all proposed subdivisions
in Macon County. A minimum of one soil boring will be required for each of the
proposed lots in the subdivision. A copy of the soil investigations report must
be submitted to the County Health Department for review and approval before
approval of the final subdivision plat.
   (B)   The developer/engineer of any proposed subdivision shall provide a
written private sewage disposal plan (that will become part of the subdivision
construction plat) that describes how the integrity of the reserve areas for
primary and secondary subsurface seepage systems are to be protected during the
property development. The plan shall specify how the original native soils
intended for private sewage disposal are to be protected from the following
activities: vehicular compaction, site grading, site excavation, soil staging,
site leveling, filling, and coring. The plan shall also state that the reserved
areas will be marked or flagged off in order to prevent the above activities
from disturbing the original native soil conditions.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.10 SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE FIELDS.
   Where a subsurface seepage field is installed as a component part of a
private sewage disposal system, the seepage area provided shall be in
accordance with Appendix A, Illustration H, Exhibits A and B of the Private
Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code, as from time to time amended. A minimum
of 200 square feet of seepage area shall be provided and unless serial trenches
are used, a minimum of two individual seepage lines are required.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.11 AEROBIC TREATMENT PLANTS.
   (A)   Aerobic treatment plants approved under this subchapter shall
discharge to one of the following:
      (1)   A subsurface discharging system designed and constructed to be at
least two-thirds the size determined necessary by soil evaluation.
      (2)   Other approved subsurface treatment system.
   (B)   Private sewage disposal systems (buried sand filter, re-circulating
sand filters, waste stabilization ponds, and class I aerobic treatment plants)
with effluent that discharges to the ground surface and also leaves the
property, will not be permitted.
   (C)   Final inspection will include audible and visual signals, including
test functions, of the alarm system.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.12 HOLDING TANKS.
   (A)   Holding tank shall be approved according to the Illinois Department of
Public Health’s Private Sewage Disposal Code.
   (B)   Holding tanks shall include an audio and visual high level alarm, and
shall be installed and maintained.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.13 NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.
   (A)   For those surface discharging private sewage disposal systems from
which effluent enters into waters of the United States, a general NPDES permit
must be obtained from the US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
   (B)   For those surface discharging private sewage disposal systems that
require an NPDES permit, a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) and a proof of
the certified letter, including date that it was mailed to the USEPA, must
accompany the application for the private sewage disposal system.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.14 COMMON DRAINS.
   The use of common drains to move or discharge effluent from a private sewage
disposal system off the property shall be prohibited.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.15 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   This subchapter shall be interpreted and enforced in accordance with
provisions set forth in the unabridged form of the Private Sewage Disposal
Licensing Act and Code, as from time to time amended, three copies of which
shall be on file in the office of the County Clerk, which publication is
incorporated herein and adopted by reference as part of this subchapter.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 53.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   All private sewage disposal systems in use or under construction on
the effective date of this subchapter shall comply with all provisions of this
subchapter unless a variance to this subchapter, in writing, shall be applied
for and received from the County Health Department.
   (B)   The Health Authority is hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this
subchapter.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a property to give
the Health Authority free access to the property at reasonable times for the
purpose of making such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance
with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (D)   No private sewage disposal system shall be covered or placed in
operation until the said installation has been inspected, and written approval
of the said system has been issued by the Health Department.
   (E)   Any person who backfills any portion of a private sewage disposal
system or covers the same with earth, cinders, gravel, shale, or any other
material which will prevent the same from being readily reviewed to determine
the said system meets all requirements of this subchapter before receipt of
written approval by the County Health Department, shall be in violation of this
subchapter and subject to any and all fines and penalties contained herein, and
shall further be responsible for the cost of uncovering said system, whether
uncovered by himself or herself or by the Health Authority.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 53.17 ISSUANCE OF NOTICE.
   Whenever the County Health Department determines that a violation of any
provision of this subchapter has occurred, the Health Department shall give
notice to the person responsible for such violation. The notice shall:
   (A)   Be in writing;
   (B)   Include a statement of the reasons for issuance of the notice;
   (C)   Allow reasonable time as determined by the Health Department for
performance of any act it requires;
   (D)   Be served upon the person responsible for the violation(s); provided
that such notice shall have been properly served upon the person responsible
for the violations when a copy thereof has been sent by registered or certified
mail to his or her last known address as furnished to the Health Department or
when he or she has been served with such notice by other methods such as
posting, publishing, faxing, or electronic mail; and
   (E)   Contain an outline of remedial action which is required to effect
compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.18 REVOCATION OF CONTRACTOR’S REGISTRATION.
   For serious or repeated violations of the requirements of this subchapter or
for interference with the Health Authority in the performance of his or her
duties, the Illinois licensed private sewage disposal installation contractor’s
county registration certificate may be revoked after an opportunity for a
hearing has been provided by the Health Authority. Prior to such action, the
Health Authority shall notify the contractor in writing, stating the reasons
for which the registration certificate is subject to revocation and advising
that the certificate shall be revoked at the end of five days following service
of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the Health
Authority, by the holder, within such five-day period. A registration
certificate may be suspended for cause pending revocation or a hearing relative
thereto.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 53.19 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Hearing before the Health Authority. Any person affected by any order
or notices issued by the County Health Department in connection with the
enforcement of any section of this subchapter may file in the office of the
Health Department a written request for a hearing before the Health Authority.
The Health Authority shall establish the time and place for conducting a
hearing within 30 days from the date on which the request was filed. The
petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of the time and place of the
hearing not less than five days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be
held. If, as a result of the hearing, the Health Authority finds that strict
compliance with the order, or notice would cause undue hardship on the
petitioner, and that the public health would be adequately protected and
substantial justice done by varying or withdrawing the order or notice, the
Health Authority may modify or withdraw the order or notice. The Health
Authority shall render a decision within ten days after the date of the hearing
which shall be reduced to writing and placed on file in the office of the
Health Department as a matter of public record. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Health Authority may seek relief through a hearing before the
Board of Health.
   (B)   Hearing before the Board of Health. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Health Authority rendered as the result of a hearing held in
accordance with this section may file in the office of the County Health
Department a written request for a hearing at a time and place to be
established by the president of the Board of Health within 30 days of the date
on which the written request was filed. The petitioner for the hearing shall be
notified of the time and place of the hearing not less than five days prior to
the date on which the hearing is to be held. If, as a result of facts elicited
at the hearing the Board of Health finds that strict compliance with the
decision of the Health Authority would cause undue hardship on the petitioner,
and that public health would be adequately protected and substantial justice
done by granting variance from the decision of the Health Authority, the Board
of Health may grant a variance. The Board of Health shall render a decision
within the ten days after the date of the hearing which shall be reduced to
writing placed on file in the office of the Health Department and a copy
thereof shall be served on the petitioner personally or by delivery to the
petitioner by certified mail.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 53.20 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCE, EFFECT ON PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   (A)   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance, or code of Macon County existing on the effective date of this
subchapter, the provision which, in the judgment of the Health Authority
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this
subchapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance
or code of Macon County existing on the effective date of this subchapter which
establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people, the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed to
prevail, and such other ordinance or codes are hereby declared to be repealed
to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this subchapter.
   (B)   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this subchapter should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this subchapter which shall
remain in full force and effect and, to this end, the provisions of this
subchapter are hereby declared to be severable.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
53.01 through
53.20 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $100, nor more than $500.
      (2)   Each day’s violation constitutes a separate offense. The State’s
Attorney of Macon County shall bring such actions in the name of the People of
the State of Illinois, or may bring action for an injunction to restrain such
violation, or to enjoin the operation of any such establishment causing such
violation.
(Ord. O-114-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
CHAPTER 54: GEOTHERMAL EXCHANGE SYSTEMS
Section
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Registration requirement
   
54.03   Exemption
   
54.04   Septic system and well setback
   
54.05   Grouting
   
54.06   Location
   
54.07   Application for inspection
   
54.08   Plan review and inspection fee
   
54.09   Registration of geothermal system contractors, drillers, and excavators
   
54.10   Inspections
   
54.11   Use of food grade propylene glycol as coolant
   
54.12   Variances
   
54.13   Abandonment of geothermal systems
   
54.14   Supersession by state law
 
   
54.99   Penalty
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. Macon County Health Department.
   FOOD GRADE PROPYLENE GLYCOL. The coolant added to a geothermal system. The
product container shall be labeled “Propylene Glycol USP” or equivalent. Any
product not containing the letters “USP” will not be acceptable for this use,
unless vendor documentation is produced to demonstrate equivalency.
   GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. A sealed, watertight loop of pipe buried outside of a
building foundation, which is intended to recirculate a liquid solution through
a heat exchanger. May also be referred to as a closed loop system.
   GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM CONTRACTOR. Any individual who is the responsible party
for the design or construction of the geothermal system for another person. The
GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM CONTRACTOR does not include employees of the Geothermal
System Contractor.
   GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM DRILLER. Any individual who installs geothermal systems
for another person. This includes but is not limited to drilling, boring,
jetting, or digging. Installation includes, but is not limited to, the borehole
or trench, installation of the loop piping and grouting.
   HORIZONTAL GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. A geothermal system constructed to contain
horizontal piping and the installation and grouting of the horizontal piping
when such piping does not exceed 20 feet in depth.
   IDPH. Illinois Department of Public Health.
   POND GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. A geothermal system constructed where horizontal
piping is placed within a pond or lake. May also be referred to as a lake
geothermal system.
   VERTICAL GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. Geothermal system constructed to contain
vertical piping and the installation and grouting of the vertical piping
exceeding 20 feet in depth.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 54.02 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.
   No geothermal system shall be constructed or modified in the county, except
in accordance with these regulations, and it shall be unlawful to proceed with
the construction or modification of a geothermal system without first
registering the location and type of geothermal system with the County Health
Department.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.03 EXEMPTION.
   Geothermal systems installed shall be exempt from the inspection requirement
of this chapter provided the municipality has a geothermal system inspection
process in place. In such situations, the County Health Department shall have
the right to review and approve the inspections.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 54.04 SEPTIC SYSTEM AND WELL SETBACK.
   (A)   In order to protect the sewage disposal system and a vertical or
horizontal geothermal system, there shall be a minimum set back of 75 feet
between the septic field and the vertical geothermal system, and a minimum
setback of 25 feet between the septic field and the horizontal geothermal
system.
   (B)   Geothermal systems shall not be located closer than 200 feet to a
water well, except when the well is a private water system well and when the
owner is the same for both the water well and the geothermal system, in which
case the water well shall not be closer than 75 feet from the geothermal
system. (§ 920.180(a) Illinois Water Well Construction Code)
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.05 GROUTING.
   Each geothermal system shall be grouted as required by § 920.90(h) of the
Illinois Water Well Construction Code. Each geothermal system shall be grouted
in the same day as the system was constructed. Only those grouts approved by
IDPH will be accepted.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.06 LOCATION.
   All geothermal systems must meet the minimum location requirements as set
forth in the IDPH Water Well Construction Code § 920.50 subject to penalties as
set forth in § 52.99(C).
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 54.07 APPLICATION FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   Application for inspection for a geothermal system shall be in writing
and in such form as shall be prescribed by the Macon County Health Department.
The geothermal system contractor shall sign every inspection application.
      (1)   The application shall identify the geothermal system contractor,
driller, and/or excavator.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the location
of all existing structures, wells, septic tanks, secondary sewage treatment
units, cesspools, privies, sewers, lakes, ponds, or streams on the applicant’s
property and on neighboring properties, if they are within 200 feet of the
proposed geothermal system(s).
      (3)   The application shall include a borehole layout. The borehole
layout shall include borehole depth, grouting material, placement procedure and
diameter of the geo-loop pipe.
      (4)   Prior to the approval of the inspection application, the County
Health Department, at its discretion, may require additional information, and/
or inspect the property and neighboring properties.
      (5)   Once approved, the application is effective for 12 months.
   (B)   After an application to construct or modify a geothermal system has
been reviewed and approved, a notice to proceed shall be issued to the
geothermal system contractor, driller, and/or excavator. After the application
is approved and a registration is issued, no modifications shall be made
without reapplying to the County Health Department. No construction of a
geothermal system can commence prior to approval of the application by the
County Health Department.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 54.08 PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEE.
   Each application for the registration and the inspection of a geothermal
system shall be accompanied by a fee established from time to time by the
County Board of Health. This fee shall not be refundable in the event that an
individual decides not to construct or modify the geothermal system.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 54.09 REGISTRATION OF GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM CONTRACTORS, DRILLERS, AND
EXCAVATORS.
   All individuals who install or excavate geothermal systems in the county,
shall be registered annually with the County Health Department. A registration
fee established from time to time by the County Board of Health shall accompany
the registration application. The registration shall expire on December 31 of
the year of issue.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 54.10 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The County Health Department shall be notified by telephone or in
writing at least 48 hours prior to the commencement of drilling or excavating
of any geothermal system in the county. Information to be provided to the
County Health Department includes:
      (1)   Date drilling/excavating completed;
      (2)   Name of well driller/excavator;
      (3)   Depth and diameter of drilled holes (if applicable); and
      (4)   Number of bags (including weight of bags) along with what type of
grout used.
   (B)   In the case of a vertical geothermal system, the driller/excavator
shall measure the location of each hole in the geothermal system relative to
one of more physical features, such as corners of a house. In the case of a
vertical geothermal system, the drilling and grouting of the holes should be
witnessed (audited) by a representative of the County Health Department for
each contractor annually.
   (C)   The geothermal system shall be pressure tested at a minimum pressure
of 20 pounds per square inch by the contractor, driller, and/or excavator after
installation to ensure that there are no leaks in the piping or in the
equipment system.
   (D)   Geothermal piping shall conform to § 920.180(d) of the Illinois Water
Well Construction Code. All plastic piping shall be watertight and conform to
ASTM D2447-03 or D3035-08. All joints in plastic piping shall be heat fusion
welded. PVC piping shall not be allowed as it is not compatible for heat
transfer.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.11 USE OF FOOD GRADE PROPYLENE GLYCOL AS COOLANT.
   All geothermal systems shall use USP or food grade propylene glycol as the
coolant in the county.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.12 VARIANCES.
   If conditions exist at a proposed installation site which precludes
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, a variance shall be requested
and shall be approved prior to beginning any geothermal system construction.
The contractor, driller, and/or excavator must make written request outlining a
specific proposal to be used in lieu of compliance with this chapter. A County
Health Department official will review the requested variance, and may ask for
additional information. If in the opinion of the County Health Department
official a health hazard or nuisance will not result from this variance, the
variance shall be granted, The County Health Department will notify the
contractor, driller, and/or excavator in writing of its decision either to
grant or deny the variance. A variance shall not be granted for a potential
route distance.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 54.13 ABANDONMENT OF GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS.
   Geothermal systems being abandoned shall be sealed in accordance with the
Illinois Water Well Construction Code § 920.180. The County Health Department
shall be notified by telephone or in writing at least 48 hours prior to the
commencement of any work to abandon a geothermal system, After a geothermal
system has been sealed, a report for the sealing shall be in writing and in
such form as shall be prescribed by the County Health Department, and shall be
submitted to the County Health Department within 30 days after such geothermal
system is sealed.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.14 SUPERSESSION BY STATE LAW.
   Should any of the provisions of this chapter conflict with a geothermal
state law or code, whether now in force or passed subsequent to this chapter,
the state law or code shall take precedence over this chapter.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   The following offenses shall be punishable by a fine, established from time
to time by the County Board of Health, and shall apply to individuals who
install or excavate geothermal systems in violation of any of the following
requirements:
   (A)   Failure to register with the County Health Department;
   (B)   Failure to meet location requirements as required by § 920.50 of the
IDPH Water Well Construction Code (variance not obtained);
   (C)   Failure to apply for inspection of the geothermal system;
   (D)   Failure to inform the County Health Department of the availability of
a geothermal installation for inspection, with the result that the geothermal
holes are covered without being inspected;
   (E)   Failure of the registered contractor, driller, and/or excavator to be
on site during installation; or
   (F)   Failure to comply with any other requirement set forth by this
chapter.
(Ord. O-109-5-14, passed 5-8-2014)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Speed limitations
   
70.02   Oversize/overweight vehicle permits and fees
§ 70.01 SPEED LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The basic statutory vehicular speed limits established by § 11-601 of
the State Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-601, are greater, or less, than
that considered reasonable and proper on the street or highway for which the
county has maintenance responsibility and which is not under the jurisdiction
of the State Department of Transportation.
   (B)   The Board has caused to be made an engineering and traffic
investigation upon the streets or highways listed in the schedule.
   (C)   By virtue of 625 ILCS 5/11-604 of the above Code and subject to
approval by the Department, the Board determines and declares that reasonable
and proper absolute maximum speed limits upon those streets and highways
described in
Chapter 72, Schedule I shall be as stated therein.
   (D)   By virtue of 625 ILCS 5/11-604 of the above Code, the Department is
hereby requested to review the supporting data and findings of the engineering
and traffic investigation submitted and filed in duplicate for each proposed
speed zone.
   (E)   When the Board is advised that the Department has approved the
proposed maximum speed limits for the zone or zones of the street or highway,
signs giving notice thereof shall be erected in conformance with the standards
and specifications contained in the Illinois Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways.
   (F)   This section shall take effect immediately after the erection of the
signs giving notice of the maximum speed limits.
(Ord. O-19-2-89, passed 2-14-1989; Ord. O-20-2-89, passed 2-14-1989) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 70.02 OVERSIZE/OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   The county establishes a program as set forth in 625 ILCS 5/15-301 et
seq. for the issuance of oversize/overweight permits for vehicles on the county
highway system.
   (B)   The following fee schedules be approved and shall be collected by the
County Highway Department for each oversize/overweight movement permit issued,
said fee to cover the administrative costs of processing the permit and for the
continued maintenance of the county highway system of roads and bridges.
 
Fee Schedule for Oversize/Overweight Vehicles
15-day permit Single vehicle - standard*    $50
              Single vehicle - non-standard $100
Annual permit Single vehicle                $250
              Fleet                         $1,000
*Standard configuration of 8 axles or less and 25,000 lbs. per axle or less.
 
   (C)   Any specialized bridge structural evaluation necessary for a permit
move shall be performed by a licensed structural engineer licensed to practice
in the State of Illinois, and any cost to perform the evaluation shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
   (D)   This program shall be administered by the County Engineer and the fees
collected shall be deposited in the County Highway Fund.
(Ord. O-117-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Standing or Parking of Vehicles on County Highways Generally
   
71.01   Prohibition; towing of vehicles
STANDING OR PARKING OF VEHICLES ON COUNTY HIGHWAYS GENERALLY
§ 71.01 PROHIBITION; TOWING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The roads listed in
Chapter 72, Schedule I shall be posted as no parking areas.
   (B)   The Sheriff is authorized to direct removal by towing of vehicles
parked or standing on the highway in violation of this section.
   (C)   When a vehicle removal is directed by the Sheriff or Deputy, the owner
of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing costs.
   (D)   Vehicles removed from public or private property and stored by a
commercial vehicle relocator or any other towing service in compliance with the
State Vehicle Code shall be subject to a possessory lien for services pursuant
to “An Act concerning liens furnished for chattels”, filed July 24, 1941, as
amended and the provision of § 1 of that Act relating to notice and implied
consent shall be deemed satisfied by compliance with 625 ILCS 5/18a-302 and
subsection (10) of 625 ILCS 5/18a-300 of the State Vehicle Code.
   (E)   In no event shall the lien be greater that the rate established in
accordance with subsection (3) of 625 ILCS 5/18a-200 of the State Vehicle Code.
In no event shall the lien be increased or altered to reflect any charge for
services for materials rendered in addition to those authorized by this
section. Every lien shall be payable by use of any major credit card, in
addition to being payable in cash.
   (F)   When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away under this section, the
Sheriff or Deputy authorizing the towing shall keep and maintain record of the
vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade
name, manufacturer’s series name, body style, vehicle identification number,
license plate year and number, and registration sticker year and number
displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of
tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing, and the name of
the office authorizing the tow.
   (G)   The Sheriff or Deputy authorizing the towing shall further follow the
procedures for notification of the record owner or other legally entitled
person, or if the person cannot be identified, procedures for tracing vehicle
ownership by the state police as set forth in the State Vehicle Code and
procedures for disposing of unclaimed vehicles with or without notice.
   (H)   The county highways listed in division (A) above shall, in the area
affected by the ordinance, be posted with notice of the restrictions,
conditions, and regulations of this section as required by statute and in
addition to the public notice required in the following division (I).
   (I)   This section shall be published in a newspaper having daily
circulation in this county at least five days prior to being enforceable.
(Ord. O-37-10-96, passed 10-10-1996)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking areas
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING AREAS.
   The following areas are designated “No Parking”:
 
Street                   Location of Restriction       Ord. No.   Date Passed
                         From the intersection of
County Highway 22 (Mound Westlawn east to the start of
Road)                    the widened roadway section.  O-37-10-96 10-10-1996
                         This area is located in front
                         of Decatur Auto Auction
 
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NUISANCES
      
91.   FOOD SANITATION
      
92.   STREET NAMING, SIGNAGE, AND STRUCTURE NUMBERING
      
93.   SWIMMING FACILITIES
      
94.   NOISE CONTROL
      
95.   HOME KITCHEN OPERATION
      
96.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
97.   FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 90: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Enforcement
   
90.03   Abatement
   
90.04   Other remedies
   
90.05   Chronic nuisance
Nuisance Categories
   
90.15   Category 1: Refuse accumulation or disposal
   
90.16   Category 2: Inoperable and abandoned vehicles
   
90.17   Category 3: Littering
   
90.18   Category 4: Weeds
   
90.19   Category 5: Unfit structures and unfit premises
   
90.20   Category 6: Noxious smells and conditions
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other vehicle in a state of
disrepair, rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or
any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven
consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. However, ABANDONED
VEHICLES shall not include a motor vehicle that is kept within a building when
not in use or vehicles on the premises of a place of business lawfully engaged
in repair, wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The County Board and its designated departments and
personnel.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Any property upon which two or more nuisance
activities or conditions, as defined in this section, have occurred during any
three year period may be deemed a CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Such CHRONIC
NUISANCE PROPERTY status shall result  either from: (i) two or more distinct
types of nuisance conditions or activities on such property, even if arising
from the same factual circumstances or investigation; (ii) two or more separate
factual events that have been separately investigated by an enforcement officer
involving the same nuisance condition or activity; or (iii) a combination of
two or more conditions, activities, or events as described in (i) and (ii).
   DEBRIS. Refers to trash, litter, etc. DEBRIS does not refer to abandoned or
derelict vehicles.
   DERELICT VEHICLE. Any inoperable, unregistered, discharged motor vehicle,
regardless of title, have lost its character as a substantial property and left
unattended without justification on the owner's land.
   DWELLING. Any enclosed structure wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   GARBAGE. The organic waste and residue of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter
arising from or attending the preparation of meats, fish, fowl, or fruit or
vegetable matter pertaining to food which might feed rodents, vermin, or other
insects.
   JUNK. Includes but is not limited to worn-out, wrecked, and/or abandoned
automobiles, trucks, tractors, machinery of any kind, or any parts thereof:
white goods, refrigerators; stoves; metal drums or other containers; scrap
metal, both ferrous and non-ferrous, and any other equipment that is worn out,
abandoned, or wrecked.
   JUNKYARD. Two or more apparently inoperable or unlicensed vehicles on a
property.
   LITTER. Any discarded, used, or consumed substance or waste, including but
not limited to garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings, or
other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic, or
paper containers or other packaging construction material, furniture, or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature which has been discarded,
abandoned, or otherwise disposed of improperly.
   MANURE. The excrement of all domestic animals and stable bedding.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Any plant so designated by the provisions of the State
Noxious Weed Law (50 ILCS 100/1 et seq.).
   OWNER. Any person or persons who, alone or jointly:
      (1)   Shall have legal title to any premises; or
      (2)   Shall have charge, care, or control of any premises as owner,
agent, administrator, trustee, guardian, or lessee.
   PERSONS. Any person, person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization, or entity of any kind.
   REFUSE. Waste; includes trash, rubbish, garbage, debris, and junk.
   RUBBISH. All non-putrescible waste such as rags, ashes, waste from minor
household repairs, sawdust, paper sacks, boxes, packing materials, and all
refuse from dwellings except sewage, dirt, and manure.
   UNFIT STRUCTURE. Any structure which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe, vermin-infested, or used for illegal purposes that it
creates a hazard to the safety or welfare of residents, occupants, or the
public.
   WASTE. Refuse.
   WEEDS. Includes any weeds, underbrush, and grass.
(Ord. O-25-11-92, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. O-59-4-13-06, passed 4-13-2006; Ord.
O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009; Ord. O-105-7-13, passed 7-11-2013; Ord. O-138-
07-21, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 90.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   The County Planning and Zoning staff shall be charged with the enforcement
of this chapter.
(Ord. O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009)
§ 90.03 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The county shall notify the owner of any premises of the existence of
a condition on the premises which constitutes a nuisance and shall direct the
owner to abate the nuisance within 15 days.
   (B)   Notice is to be made in writing by mailing a copy of the notice to the
last known address of each owner or owners.
   (C)   (1)   In the event the owner fails to abate a garbage and/or debris
nuisance, pursuant to at least 15-days’ notice, the county may enter the
premises and remove the garbage and/or debris.
      (2)   The cost and expense of the removal shall be a lien upon the
property pursuant to the provisions of 55 ILCS, 5/5-1118.
   (D)   (1)   In the event the owner fails to abate a weed nuisance, pursuant
to at least 15-days’ notice, the county may enter the premises and cause the
weeds to be cut.
      (2)   The cost and expense of the cutting shall be a lien upon the
property pursuant to the provisions of 55 ILCS 5/5-1099.
   (E)   Moving or relocating any activity or material from the location or
premises identified in a notice of violation to another location or premises in
unincorporated Macon County where the activity or material constitutes a public
nuisance shall be deemed a failure to abate the original cited nuisance and a
continuation of the original cited nuisance.
(Ord. O-25-11-92, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. O-59-4-13-06, passed 4-13-2006; Ord.
O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009; Ord. O-138-07-21, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 90.04 OTHER REMEDIES.
   The provisions, conditions, penalties, remedies, and abatements set forth in
this statute are in addition to and not in limitation of any other county
ordinance or state statute.
(Ord. O-25-11-92, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. O-59-4-13-06, passed 4-13-2006; Ord.
O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009)
§ 90.05 CHRONIC NUISANCE.
   Upon determination by the County Planning and Zoning staff that a property
is a chronic nuisance as defined in this section, the staff member shall cause
to be served upon the owner of such property a notice that the property has
been found to be a chronic nuisance property. If the owner of such property
cannot be located after reasonable efforts, the notice required by this
provision may be served upon the occupant of the property or upon any person
causing, permitting, or maintaining any then-existing nuisances on the
property, including but not limited to a tenant on the property. The notice
shall direct the recipient of the notice to abate or remove such nuisance
within 72 hours or such time as is deemed reasonable by the county Planning and
Zoning staff, and shall state that if the nuisance is not abated or removed in
such time, the county may take appropriate action to abate or remove such
nuisance at the sole cost and expense of the recipient of the notice, provided
the county may also take such additional rededication steps as provided by law.
Such notice may be personally delivered to a person as described above, or may
be mailed by certified United States mail, return receipt requested, to a
person as described above. Such notice shall be considered effective upon any
of the following: (i) receipt of a hand delivered notice; (ii) four days after
mailing the certified letter; or (iii) upon receipt of a signed returned
receipt, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. O-138-07-21, passed 7-8-2021)
NUISANCE CATEGORIES
§ 90.15 CATEGORY 1: REFUSE ACCUMULATION OR DISPOSAL.
   (A)   No person shall store, accumulate, discharge, deposit, dump or place
any refuse on any premises in the county, other than a refuse disposal area for
which an annual refuse area license issued by the county is in force at the
time of such discharge, deposit, dumping or placing of refuse.
   (B)   The storage of junk is exempt from the provision of this chapter
provided that the zoned lot on which such storage occurs is appropriately zoned
or such storage is permitted under as a special use permit approved by the
County Board.
(Ord. O-25-11-92, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. O-59-4-13-06, passed 4-13-2006; Ord.
O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009; Ord. O-105-7-13, passed 7-11-2013) Penalty, see
§
90.99
§ 90.16 CATEGORY 2: INOPERABLE AND ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   No owner shall store, accumulate, discharge, deposit, dump or place
any abandoned or derelict vehicle or vehicles on any premises if the vehicle or
vehicles meet any one of the following conditions:
      (1)   There is an absence of an appropriate registration plate or, if
there is an appropriate registration plate, if that plate does not display a
current and valid registration sticker.
      (2)   Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, chains, or
other supports.
      (3)   Absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the
lawful operation upon the streets, roads and highways.
   (B)   To be found in violation of this Category 2, such vehicles must
exhibit at least one of the above-described conditions for not less than seven
consecutive days.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalties under the zoning regulations in the
county, it shall be a violation of this chapter if a junkyard is created or
maintained in areas other than those permitted by their zoning classification
to contain junkyards.
   (D)   The storage of trucks, tractors and related machinery for agricultural
purposes, whether or not in functional operational condition, is exempt from
the provisions of this chapter provided that the zoned lot on which such
storage for agricultural purposes and said machinery of the like is used
principally for agricultural purposes.
(Ord. O-25-11-92, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. O-59-4-13-06, passed 4-13-2006; Ord.
O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009; Ord. O-105-7-13, passed 7-11-2013) Penalty, see
§
90.99
§ 90.17 CATEGORY 3: LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall litter from any motor vehicle or otherwise dump,
deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or permit the dumping, depositing,
dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter upon any public or private
property or upon or into any river, lake, pond or other stream of body of water
in the county, unless:
      (1)   The property is duly licensed by the county as a refuse disposal
area; or
      (2)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended
by the owner or tenant, in lawful possession of that property for the deposit
of litter; or
      (3)   The act is done by or under the personal direction of the owner or
tenant in lawful possession of that property and does not create a public
health or safety hazard, public nuisance or fire hazard;
      (4)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
on a special clean-up day; or
      (5)   The person is lawfully acting or re-acting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened and removes and properly
disposes of such litter when the emergency no longer exists.
   (B)   No person shall transport by any means any refuse to and deposit such
material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other receptacles placed
along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
   (C)   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property owned by
or in the control of that person as owner or tenant, in such manner that the
litter may be blown or otherwise carried by the natural elements onto real
property of the public or another person.
   (D)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from a motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, in violation of this chapter, the
rebuttable presumption is created that the operator of the motor vehicle has
violated this chapter by littering.
(Ord. O-25-11-92, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. O-59-4-13-06, passed 4-13-2006; Ord.
O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009; Ord. O-105-7-13, passed 7-11-2013) Penalty, see
§
90.99
§ 90.18 CATEGORY 4: WEEDS.
   (A)   No person or owner shall cause or permit weeds that have grown to a
height in excess of 12 inches on any lot in any subdivision in the
unincorporated area of the county, or on any lot where a residence exists
pursuant to a special use permit granted by the County Board.
   (B)   No person shall cause or permit noxious weeds to grow anywhere in the
county.
(Ord. O-25-11-92, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. O-59-4-13-06, passed 4-13-2006; Ord.
O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009; Ord. O-105-7-13, passed 7-11-2013) Penalty, see
§
90.99
§ 90.19 CATEGORY 5: UNFIT STRUCTURES AND PREMISES.
   No owner shall allow, permit or suffer any structure or premises under iris
control to become unfit by reason of:
   (A)   Structures’ and dwellings’ instability and/or inadequacy, rendering
any structure to be unfit for occupancy or use;
   (B)   Accumulation of garbage, rubbish, standing water, or other condition
which is likely to become an area that promotes and harbors the breeding of
rodents, vermin, mosquitoes, or other harmful insects;
   (C)   Promoting, permitting, or allowing any structure to be used for the
unlawful purpose of illegal sale of controlled substance or for other illegal
activity dangerous to the health or safety of residents of the neighborhood or
to the public;
   (D)   Structures and dwellings instability and/ or in adequacy rendering any
structure to be unfit for occupancy or use;
   (E)   Accumulation of garbage or rubbish or standing water or other
condition which is likely to become an area that promotes and harbors the
breeding of rodents, vermin, mosquitoes or other harmful insects;
   (F)   Promoting, permitting, or allowing any such structure to be used for
the unlawful purpose of illegal sale of controlled substance or for other
illegal activity dangerous to the health or safety of residents of the
neighborhood or to the public.
(Ord. O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009; Ord. O-105-7-13, passed 7-11-2013)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 CATEGORY 6: NOXIOUS SMELLS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall deposit or dump or maintain, or cause or permit the
same, on any land in the county, any refuse, garbage or rubbish which creates a
condition that is foul, odorous, subject to spontaneous combustion, creates a
breeding ground for rodent infestation, or is otherwise detrimental to public
health or safety or conducive to the spread of disease.
   (B)   No person shall keep any chicken coop, corral, animal pen, stable,
grounds or premises in a foul, offensive, nauseous, or filthy condition.
   (C)   All manure waste from animals must be removed from the premises and
stored in a fly tight container or otherwise meet the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) regulations regarding manure storage. No manure storage shall be
closer than 75 feet from all property lines.
   (D)   Farming operations such as cattle, hogs, sheep or poultry, are exempt
from this category.
(Ord. O-105-7-13, passed 7-11-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Each violation of §§
90.15 through
90.18 shall be a criminal offense punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $500; furthermore, each day the violation is allowed to continue
shall be a separate offense.
   (C)   A person found to have a chronic nuisance property shall be fined not
less than $400 nor more than $1,000; furthermore, each day the violation is
allowed to continue shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. O-25-11-92, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. O-59-4-13-06, passed 4-13-2006; Ord.
O-80-12-09, passed 12-10-2009; Ord. O-138-07-21, passed 7-8-2021)
CHAPTER 91: FOOD SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Scope
   
91.03   Application
   
91.04   Adoptions by reference
   
91.05   Public health protection
   
91.06   Definitions
Permits
   
91.20   General permit requirements
   
91.21   Permit categories
   
91.22   Permit posting and issuance
   
91.23   Fees
   
91.24   Pre-operational inspections
   
91.25   Permit suspension
   
91.26   Permit revocation
Inspections
   
91.40   Frequency
   
91.41   Right of entry
   
91.42   Refusal of entry
   
91.43   Examination of records
   
91.44   Inspection report
   
91.45   Determining the status of the food service establishment
   
91.46   Correction of violations
   
91.47   Refusal to sign
   
91.48   Examination and condemnation of food and equipment
   
91.49   Imminent health hazard
   
91.50   When disease transmission is suspected
   
91.51   Food handler and certified food manager classes
   
91.52   Variances
   
91.53   Hazard analysis critical control point plan (HACCP)
   
91.54   Menu limitation
   
91.55   Additional requirements
Temporary Food Establishments
   
91.65   General
   
91.66   Permit
   
91.67   Fees
   
91.68   Inspections and corrections
Administration
   
91.80   Plan reviews
   
91.81   Food establishments outside the jurisdiction of the health authority
   
91.82   Service of notice
   
91.83   Enforcement
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent foodborne illnesses, to promote
safe food handling and hygienic practices, and to protect the general public.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter provides requirements for the review of plans; issuance;
inspections; prohibiting the sale of unsound or mislabeled foods; employee
restrictions; suspension and revocation of permits; and enforcement of this
chapter by the Macon County Health Department. Definitions and standards for
management, personnel, food operations, equipment, and facilities are also
included in this chapter.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.03 APPLICATION.
   This chapter applies to those retail food establishments that are required
to have permits that are issued by the Health Authority, as set forth herein.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.04 ADOPTIONS BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions set forth in the 77 IL Adm. Code 750, and the rules and laws
incorporated therein, as now in force or as may hereafter be revised or
amended, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. In addition,
food establishments are also subject to all other applicable ordinances of the
Health Authority.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.05 PUBLIC HEALTH PROTECTION.
   The Health Authority shall promote its underlying purpose of safeguarding
public health and ensuring that food is safe, unadulterated, and honestly
presented when offered to the general public.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.06 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in the laws, rules, and regulations
referenced in § 91.04, the following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
   ADULTERATED. The condition of any food:
      (1)   If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
quantity which may render it injurious to health;
      (2)   If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious
substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation or in
excess of such tolerance if one has been established;
      (3)   If it consists in whole or part of any decomposed substance or if
it is otherwise unfit for human consumption;
      (4)   If it has been processed, prepared, packed, or held under
insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health;
      (5)   If it is whole or part the product of a diseased animal or animal
which has died otherwise by slaughter; or
      (6)   If its containers are composed in whole or part of any poisonous or
deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health for
food preparation and storage.
   APPLICANT. Any person making application to the Health Authority for a
permit.
   APPROVED. Accepted by the Health Authority based on its determination as to
conformance with principles, practices, and generally recognized standards that
protect public health.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. Those persons designated by the Health Authority
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   BOARD. The Macon County Board of Health.
   BUSINESS DAYS. Monday through Friday from 8:00 am to 4:00 pm, excluding
federal holidays.
   CATEGORY. A classification based on the Illinois Department of Public
Health’s local health protection grant standards for conducting a food
protection program. Each food establishment will be assessed to determine the
relative risks of causing foodborne illness. The minimum number of routine
inspections per year is determined by the food establishment’s risk
classification.
   CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER. A written order issued by the Health Authority which
directs the responsible person to immediately stop doing or allowing a specific
action to occur. A CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER may or may not include a direction to
completely cease operations at a facility. A CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER may include
a timeframe to achieve compliance if there is not an imminent health hazard to
public health and safety.
   CERTIFIED FOOD PROTECTION MANAGER (CFPM). An individual who has completed a
Illinois Department of Public Health approved or ANSI (American National
Standards Institute) accredited training program for food service sanitation
manager certification, inclusive of the examination, and received a passing
score on the examination set by the certification exam provider accredited
under standards developed and adopted by the Conference for Food Protection or
its successor organization, shall be considered to be a certified food service
sanitation manager, and maintains a valid certificate.
   CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP. A change in the permit holder. This means that the
entity that is legally responsible for the operation of the food establishment,
such as the owner or other person, has changed.
   CODE or FOOD CODE. The administrative rules adopted by the Illinois
Department of Public Health pertaining to food establishments. Found at 77
Illinois Administrative Code 750.
   CORE ITEM. A provision in the Code that is not designated as a priority item
or a priority foundation item; includes items that usually relate to general
sanitation, operational controls, sanitation standard operating procedures,
facilities or structures, equipment design, or general maintenance.
   CORE ITEM VIOLATION. A violation of a provision in the Code whose
application supports, facilitates, or enables one or more core items.
   EMPLOYEE. Includes the permit holder, person in charge, a food employee, a
person having supervisory or management duties, a person on the payroll, a
family member, a volunteer, a person performing work under contractual
agreement, or other person working in a food establishment.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any food service establishment; tavern; bar; nightclub;
commissary; catering kitchen; bakery; restaurant; retail food store, mobile
food unit; sidewalk and street food vending unit; temporary food establishment;
private, public or nonprofit organization or institution routinely serving
food; and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food or
drink is prepared, served, or provided for human consumption, on or off
premises, with or without charge. FOOD ESTABLISHMENT does not include an
establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not time/temperature
controlled for safety; a produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh
fruits and vegetables; a kitchen in a private home, such as a small family
daycare provider or a bed and breakfast operation as defined in the Bed and
Breakfast Act (50 ILCS 820) that prepares and offers food to guests.
   FOOD HANDLER/FOOD EMPLOYEE. An individual working with unpackaged food, food
equipment or utensils, or food contact surfaces. Does not include unpaid
volunteers in a food establishment, whether permanent or temporary.
   FOOD PREPARATION. The handling, processing, and/or serving of foods.
   HAZARD ANALYSIS and CRITICAL CONTROL POINT (HACCP). A systematic approach to
identifying, evaluating, and controlling food safety hazards. Food safety
hazards are biological, chemical, or physical agents that are reasonably likely
to cause illness or injury in the absence of their control.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Public Health Administrator of the Macon County Health
Department or his or her authorized representative.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Macon County Health Department.
   HOLD ORDER/EMBARGO. An order issued by the Health Authority that acts as a
temporary isolation or quarantine of food or equipment that the Health
Authority believes, or has reason to believe, is in violation of this chapter.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. Significant threat or danger to health that exists
when there is sufficient evidence to show that a product, practice,
circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires immediate correction
of cessation of operation to prevent injury.
   MENU LIMITATION. A modification or constraint imposed by the Health
Authority on a food establishment’s food preparation based on the type of
operation, menu items, or available equipment.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. Annually licensed food unit that is a readily movable
vehicle (on wheels) that is self-propelled (driven) or can be pulled or pushed
down a sidewalk or street. Designed for service of food from the interior of
the unit. Cannot sit at one physical address for more than two weeks without a
variance being issued by the Health Authority.
   PERMIT. The document issued by the Health Authority that authorizes a person
to operate a food establishment.
      (1)   ANNUAL PERMIT. Valid from January 1 of the current year through
December 31 of the current year.
      (2)   TEMPORARY PERMIT. Issued to a food establishment that operates at a
fixed location for a period of time not to exceed more than 14 consecutive days
in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
   PERSON. An association, corporation, individual, partnership, other legal
entity, government, or government subdivision or agency.
   PERSON IN CHARGE (PIC). The individual present at a food establishment who
is responsible for the operation at the time of inspection.
   PLAN REVIEW. An evaluation process conducted by the Health Authority to
determine whether minimum standards are met for sanitary design, facility
layout, operational and product flow, menu processes and food handling
procedures, construction, operation and maintenance of a food establishment and
its premises.
   PREMISES. The physical structure, its contents, and the contiguous land or
property under the control of the permit holder.
   PRIORITY FOUNDATION ITEM. A provision in the Code that includes those items
that require the purposeful incorporation of specific actions, equipment, or
procedures by industry management to attain control of risk factors that
contribute to foodborne illness or injury such as personnel training,
infrastructure or necessary equipment, HACCP plans, documentation or record
keeping, and labeling.
   PRIORITY FOUNDATION ITEM VIOLATION. A violation of a provision in this
chapter whose application supports, facilitates, or enables one or more
priority foundation items.
   PRIORITY ITEM. A provision in the Code whose application contributes
directly to the elimination, prevention or reduction to an acceptable level,
hazards associated with foodborne illness or injury and there is no other
provision that more directly controls the hazard; includes items with
quantifiable measure to show control of hazards such as food protection,
cooking, reheating, cooling, sanitization, and hand washing.
   PRIORITY ITEM VIOLATION. A violation of a provision in this chapter whose
application supports, facilitates, or enables one or more priority items.
   PUBLIC EVENT. Any event open to the public where food is prepared or served.
An event open to the public that is advertised with fliers, banners, newspaper
articles, radio or television announcements, internet postings, social media,
or by other means is a PUBLIC EVENT and subject to regulation under this
chapter. Any event that is not a PUBLIC EVENT shall be treated as private. The
determination of whether an event shall be regulated as a PUBLIC EVENT is at
the sole discretion of the Health Authority.
   REMODEL. The repair, construction, alteration or installation of new
equipment, modification of existing equipment or fixtures, change in floor plan
layout, the addition of more seating and/or toilet rooms, extensive changes in
surface finishes or lighting, expansion to new space, or significant changes to
use of space or equipment. Generally, a REMODEL does not include redecorating;
cosmetic refurbishing; cleaning surfaces; altering seating design; minimal
repairs of finished surfaces; “like for like” equipment exchanges; equipment or
infrastructure minimal repair, service, or maintenance; and/or additions to
equipment that require no installation or modification of existing fixtures
(such as countertop plug in equipment). A REMODEL requires a plan review to be
performed and approval granted prior to construction and operation of any new
or remodeled establishment when one or more of the following criteria, at the
sole discretion of the Health Authority, are met:
      (1)   Requires a permit from the building authority having jurisdiction;
      (2)   Menu item exchange or additions with the need for different
process, preparation method, equipment or service;
      (3)   Extensive equipment changes;
      (4)   Extensive utility changes or repairs;
      (5)   Extensive repairs after an incident (e.g., fire or flood);
      (6)   Conversion of a building/space/operation from a non-food
establishment to a food establishment;
      (7)   Equipment changes that alter capacity or location that may result
in a reduction of the food establishment capabilities;
      (8)   Change of ownership; or
      (9)   Reopen after closure of business.
   REPEAT VIOLATION. A violation noted on the previous inspection report that
is observed again on the next routine inspection on the same piece of
equipment, same area of facility, or same practice.
   TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY FOOD (TCS). A food that requires time/
temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or
toxin formation.
   UNAPPROVED SOURCE. Any supplier that has not been approved by the Health
Authority may be unsafe. This could include food made in a home kitchen as well
as produce, animals raised or caught in a home environment.
   VARIANCE. A written document issued by the Health Authority that authorizes
a modification or waiver of one or more requirements of this chapter. Any such
modification or waiver is at the sole discretion of the Health Authority.
   WHOLESOME. In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration or
contamination, and otherwise suitable for human consumption.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord.
O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
PERMITS
§ 91.20 GENERAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment
within the jurisdiction of Macon County who does not possess a valid permit
issued to that person. Only a person who complies with the requirement of this
chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit.
   (B)   Permits shall not be transferrable from person to person; permits
shall not be applicable to any location, building, or place other than that for
which the permit was originally issued. Changes may occur after a food
establishment is permitted. Changes that invalidate a permit include change of
ownership of the permit holder, a change in the physical location of the
establishment, a change in the type of operation, a change in menu that
requires the addition of equipment and/or structural modifications of the food
establishment, a change in menu that requires a food preparation process that
was not contemplated when the permit was issued, or a change in menu where
animal meat is to be served raw or undercooked.
   (C)   The Health Authority must be notified within 30 days of any change of
information on the permit application, or the permit holder will be subject to
prosecution pursuant to §
91.83. Additionally, a permit may be subject to suspension or revocation
pursuant to §§
91.25 or
91.26.
   (D)   The Health Authority shall solely determine if a change invalidates a
valid permit.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.21 PERMIT CATEGORIES.
   (A)   The Health Authority shall assess the risks of a foodborne illness for
every food establishment operating within Macon County. The Health Authority
shall use this assessment in classifying a food establishment for purposes of a
category. The Health Authority shall apply the criteria in the Food Code to
determine the category for a food establishment. If a health hazard will not
result from reclassification or if reclassification will provide better
protection for the public, the Health Authority may reclassify a food
establishment based on inspection history; the number, frequency, and severity
of violations; and corrective action. The basis for this decision shall be
documented, and a copy will be retained in the food establishment’s file.
      (1)   CATEGORY 1 FOOD ESTABLISHMENT means a food establishment that
presents a high relative risk of causing a foodborne illness based upon the
large number of food handling operations typically implicated in foodborne
outbreaks and/or the type of population served by the facility. CFPM credential
is required for this designation.
      (2)   CATEGORY 2 FOOD ESTABLISHMENT means a food establishment that
presents a moderate relative risk of causing foodborne illness based upon few
handling operations typically implicated in foodborne illness outbreaks. CFPM
credential is required for this designation.
      (3)   CATEGORY 3 FOOD ESTABLISHMENT means a food establishment that
presents a low relative risk of causing a foodborne illness based upon few or
no food handling operations typically implicated in foodborne illness
outbreaks.
   (B)   These license categories are not meant to imply that any given
establishment is more or less safe than others. The criteria in the Food Code
shall be utilized to determine risk.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.22 PERMIT POSTING AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Posting. Every licensed food establishment shall prominently and
conspicuously post a valid permit for public view.
   (B)   Issuance. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment or to
renew an expired permit Macon County shall make a written application for a
permit on forms provided by the Macon County Health Department, accompanied by
a permit fee, if required, in an amount set forth by the Macon County Board of
Health.
      (1)   When plans are required. A permit applicant or permit holder shall
submit to the Health Authority properly prepared plans and specifications for
review and approval before any of the following can occur:
         (a)   The construction of a food establishment;
         (b)   The conversion of an existing structure for use as a food
establishment;
         (c)   The remodel of a food establishment; or
         (d)   A change of type of food establishment or food operation if the
Health Authority determines that plans and specifications are necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   Application for permit. After approval of the plans proposed for
the permit by a food establishment, the Health Authority shall conduct an
inspection of the premises. If the Health Authority finds that the food
establishment is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and upon
receipt of a completed application, and associated fee, the Health Authority
shall issue a permit authorizing the food establishment to operate.
      (3)   Annual renewal of permits. For continued operation of the food
establishment, annual renewal of the permit is required. Any permit holder
desiring to renew a permit shall apply on the renewal forms provided by the
Macon County Health Department and pay all money due. A renewal permit is not
renewable if the permit holder has failed to remit outstanding fines owed to
the Macon County Health Department, or has failed to correct repeat priority,
priority foundation, and core violations ordered by the Macon County Health
Department, a local agency, or by a court.
         (a)   Any permit holder who has not paid their annual fee for their
annual renewal of permit by January 1 of the renewal year shall be considered
operating a food service establishment without a valid permit. A late penalty
fee of $50 shall be assessed for permit renewal payments received after January
1 of the permit renewal year. The late penalty shall be increased to $100 for
payments received after January 15 of the permit renewal year. Any food service
establishment operating on or after February 1 of the renewal year without a
renewed, valid permit shall discontinue operation or be subject to prosecution
pursuant to § 91.83. The late fee penalty beginning February 1 shall be
increased to $200.
         (b)   All permits shall be automatically suspended should the permit
holder cease operation of the food establishment for 30 consecutive days or
longer if the Health Authority is not given written notice prior to the
cessation of operation.
      (4)   Mobile food units are permits issued annually to food units that
meet the criteria set forth in the Macon County unit ordinance,
Chapter 116 of this code.
      (5)   Denial of application of permits. If an application for a permit to
operate is denied, the Health Authority shall provide the application with a
written notice that includes:
         (a)   The specific reasons and code citations for the permit denial;
and
         (b)   The actions, if any, that the applicant must take to qualify for
a permit.
      (6)   Change of ownership. If a person is purchasing an existing food
establishment, a change in ownership plan review is required prior to issuing a
new permit. For any determination of what constitutes a change in permit
holder, please contact the Health Authority. To assist in the transition of
business, the Health Authority will allow an open and operating food
establishment to change ownership without interruption of business provided
that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   A plan review for the new permit holder is submitted within 30
days of the execution of the change of owner documents;
         (b)   The food establishment stays within the same category as the
previous permit;
         (c)   The food establishment has not been physically altered,
equipment has not been removed or added, and the food establishment has not
been closed for extensive remodeling or for other reasons;
         (d)   The food establishment has not changed the menu in a manner that
requires new food preparation processes, procedures, and/or equipment; or
         (e)   The time to correct all violations cited in a change of
ownership inspection does not exceed 90 days from date of that change of
ownership inspection.
   (C)   If the provisions above are not met, then the food establishment shall
close, and the new owner will be required to apply for a new permit, including
completing the plan review process before the food establishment may reopen.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord.
O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.23 FEES.
   Pursuant to the Counties Code, 55 ILCS 5/5-1115, the Macon County Board of
Health shall establish fees and amounts that are reasonable and necessary to
provide the services and required activities of the Health Department in
enforcing this chapter. A fee schedule shall be forwarded to the County Board
for approval and may not be increased without the approval of the County Board.
All fees are non-refundable and non-transferable.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.24 PRE-OPERATIONAL INSPECTIONS.
   Prior to the issuance, or reinstatement, of a permit to operate, every food
establishment shall be inspected by or obtain approval from the Health
Authority before beginning or resuming operations to determine compliance with
approved plans, specifications, corrective actions, and the requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.25 PERMIT SUSPENSION.
   (A)   If at any time the Health Authority determines that a permit holder or
operator is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Health
Authority shall issue a notice to the permit holder or operator. The notice
shall state the nature of the violation and a reasonable timeframe in which
corrective action must be taken. Whenever a permit holder has failed to comply
with any notice issued under the provisions of this chapter, the Health
Authority may serve the permit holder or operator with a notice stating that
the permit is suspended, and operations are to cease immediately or as
otherwise ordered by the Health Authority. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, whenever the Health Authority finds unsanitary or other
conditions in the operation of a food establishment, or a temporary food
establishment, which in the Health Authority’s judgment, constitutes a
substantial hazard to public health, it may, without warning, notice, or
hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such
condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and stating that the
permit is immediately suspended. Any person to whom such an order is issued
shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written petition to the Health
Authority, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
      (1)   Hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the
Health Authority at a time and place designated by the Health Authority. Based
upon the record of such hearings, the Health Authority shall make findings and
shall sustain, modify, or rescind an official notice or order considered in the
hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the
permit holder by the Health Authority.
      (2)   All decisions of the Health Authority enforcing this chapter may be
appealed to the Macon County Board of Health in the manner set forth by this
section. Review of the final administrative decision of the Macon County Board
of Health may be had in the Circuit Court of Macon County, Illinois, pursuant
to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.).
   (B)   A permit holder whose permit has been suspended may at any time during
the suspension of the permit make a signed, written request for an inspection
for the purpose of the reinstatement of the permit, stating how the conditions
leading up to the suspension were corrected. Within 24 hours following receipt
of the written request, the Health Authority shall inspect the premises, and
shall reinstate the permit if the permit holder is in compliance with this
chapter. A fee set forth by the Macon County Board of Health for permit
reinstatement shall be applied to all food service establishments required to
cease food service operations. The reinstatement fee shall be paid in full to
the Health Authority prior to resuming operations. Two suspensions during a
period of 12 consecutive months shall constitute grounds for revocation of a
permit.
   (C)   Notice of closure stating the name of establishment, person in charge,
and date/time of permit suspension will be affixed to all points of entry into
facility. Closure sign must be visible and prominently displayed until removed
by the Health Authority and not removed under penalty of law.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.26 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The Health Authority may permanently revoke a permit for serious or repeated
violations of this chapter, or for interference with the Health Authority in
the performance of its duties. The Health Authority shall notify the permit
holder of its intent to revoke the permit, stating the reason for the action
and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of five business days following
the serving of the notice. The revocation shall remain valid pending a hearing
request submitted by the permit holder in writing to the Health Authority
within the five-day period.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
INSPECTIONS
§ 91.40 FREQUENCY.
   At a minimum, the Health Authority shall inspect each food establishment
within the jurisdiction of the Macon County Health Department as determined in
77 Illinois Administrative Code 615.310. Temporary food establishments may or
may not be inspected as determined by the Health Authority. All categories and
types of food establishments shall be inspected as many times as the Health
Authority deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Health
Authority shall not perform routine inspections of those food establishments
operated by the State of Illinois. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
Health Authority from conducting investigations or inspections of a special or
emergency nature or routine inspections at the request of Illinois Department
of Public Health.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.41 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Health Authority shall have the right to enter any food establishment or
any temporary food establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of
conducting inspections to determine compliance with this chapter. The Health
Authority shall properly identify themselves prior to initiating an inspection.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.42 REFUSAL OF ENTRY.
   (A)   If a person denies access to the Health Authority, the Health
Authority shall inform the person that:
      (1)   The permit holder is required to allow access to the Health
Authority;
      (2)   Access is a condition of acceptance and retention of a permit to
operate; and
      (3)   If access is denied, the Health Authority will take such legal
action as required.
   (B)   If the person in charge denies the Health Authority access to a
permitted food establishment pursuant to § 91.41, the Health Authority may gain
access in a manner provided by law. In addition, the Health Authority may issue
a cease-and-desist order, or seek a temporary restraining order, or other
relief, to cease the food establishments operations until the inspection is
conducted.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.43 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   The Health Authority may examine the records of a food establishment to
obtain information including, but not limited to, food and supplies purchased,
food and food supplies received, and persons employed in such establishments.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.44 INSPECTION REPORT.
   (A)   Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is conducted to
determine compliance with the chapter, the findings shall be recorded on the
inspection report form provided by the Health Authority. The inspection report
form shall constitute a legal notice of violations of this chapter.
   (B)   One copy of the inspection report shall be furnished to the operator
or person in charge of the food establishment and a copy of the inspection
report will be available in the food establishment’s file at the Health
Authority. The inspection report is a public document, subject to the Illinois
Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.).
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.45 DETERMINING THE STATUS OF THE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   At the conclusion of the inspection, the status of the food service
establishment shall be determined, and it shall be placed into one of the
following categories:
      (1)   No follow-up required. No uncorrected priority or priority
foundation violations exist. Core violations may exist, but the quantity does
not warrant enforcement review. A limited number of repeat violations may have
been observed during the inspection.
      (2)   Follow-up required. A follow-up visit shall be completed at a date
noted on the report to verify the timely correction of the outstanding priority
or priority foundation violations.
      (3)   Enforcement action required. Violations observed during the routine
inspection warrant further review or enforcement action by the Health
Authority. Enforcement action may include, but is
not limited to, a follow-up inspection, a warning letter from the Health
Authority, a scheduled formal hearing, a completed long-term plan of action by
the permit holder, or the immediate suspension of food operations.
      (4)   Closure. Immediate closure of the establishment will occur if an
imminent health hazard exists to the public health.
   (B)   It is at the discretion of the Health Authority to establish the
severity of enforcement protocol based upon observations and violations noted
during the inspection.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.46 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Health Authority shall establish a specific and reasonable time
for the correction of observed violations. The permit holder shall correct the
violations within the period specified in accordance with the following
provisions:
      (1)   Core violations. Must be corrected in a time frame agreed upon by
the Health Authority but no later than the next routine inspection.
      (2)   Priority foundation violations. Must be corrected immediately,
within five business days of inspection, or other specified time frame
designated by the Health Authority.
      (3)   Priority violations. Must be corrected immediately, within two
business days, or other specified time frame designated by the Health
Authority.
   (B)   A food establishment may be required under the provisions of this
chapter to cease all or a portion of its operations. A food establishment shall
not resume operations until such time as the Health Authority grants
authorization to resume operations.
   (C)   Approval of a compliance schedule that extends beyond the time limits
specified under this section may be approved by the Health Authority so long as
no imminent public health hazard exists or may result from the extension of the
compliance schedule.
   (D)   For any follow-up inspections due to priority or priority foundation
violations, a fee set forth by the Macon County Board of Health will be
assessed.
   (E)   Failure to comply with any time limits for correction will require the
permit holder to immediately cease operations at the food service
establishment. Whenever a permit holder is required under the provisions of
this section to cease operations, the permit holder shall not resume operations
until such time that a follow-up inspection has been made and the Health
Authority confirms that the conditions responsible for the cessation of
operations no longer exist. Receipts indicating work completed
as well as pictures or videos showing correction may be used as documentation
of correction. Provisions from §
91.25 must be followed to request a follow-up inspection.
   (F)   If an imminent health hazard exists, the food establishment shall
immediately cease food preparation operations until such hazard is corrected,
and the Health Authority grants authorization to resume operations.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.47 REFUSAL TO SIGN.
   If the person in charge refuses to sign an acknowledgment of receipt of an
inspection report, the Health Authority shall inform the person who declines to
sign the acknowledgment that:
   (A)   Acknowledgment of receipt does not indicate agreement with the
inspection findings;
   (B)   Refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will not affect the
permit holder’s obligation to correct the violation(s) noted in the inspection
report within the timeframes specified; and
   (C)   A refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will be noted on the
inspection report.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.48 EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD AND EQUIPMENT.
   Food may be examined and/or sampled by the Health Authority as often as it
deems necessary for enforcement of this chapter.
   (A)   The Health Authority may place a hold order on any food item which it
determines or has probable cause to believe:
      (1)   Originates from an unapproved source;
      (2)   Is adulterated, misbranded, or is not wholesome or not honestly
presented;
      (3)   Is not labeled according to law, or, if the food is raw molluscan
shellfish, is not tagged or labeled according to law; or
      (4)   Is otherwise not in compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Placing a hold order for food.
      (1)   Food subject to a hold order shall be identified by the common
name, the label information, a container description, the quantity, the Health
Authority’s information, and a location.
      (2)   Food shall be allowed to be suitably stored. If storage is not
possible without risk to the public health, then the Health Authority shall
require the denaturing or destruction of the food.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold
order, notice, or tag placed on food or food container by the Health Authority.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or donate, use
(re-label, repack, reprocess, alter) denature, dispose, destroy, or remove food
that is the subject of a hold order from the food establishment without the
written release of the Health Authority, except on order by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Removing a hold order for food.
      (1)   A permit holder or person in charge may dispose of or destroy the
food subject to a hold order in presence of the Health Authority. Such disposal
or destruction will be documented.
      (2)   The permit holder or person in charge has the right to a hearing
regarding the hold order and may request a hearing with the Health Authority by
submitting a written request within seven calendar days of the hold order being
issued. The hearing process is described in §
91.25.
      (3)   After the permit holder or person in charge has had a hearing and
based on evidence produced at such hearing, the Health Authority may vacate the
hold order if evidence is clear and convincing that no danger to the public
will ensue if the hold order is vacated.
      (4)   In the event that a written request for a hearing is not received
within seven calendar days of the hold order being issued, the Health Authority
may direct the permit holder or person in charge to bring the food into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or order the food to be
denatured or destroyed.
   (D)   Placing a hold order for equipment. The Health Authority may place a
hold order on equipment which it determines or has probable cause to believe:
      (1)   Is constructed from unsafe materials;
      (2)   Is found in a state of disrepair so that it is not easily
cleanable, is unsuitable for use, or is in an unsanitary condition; or
      (3)   Is found to be unable to perform as intended.
   (E)   The Health Authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any
equipment subject to the hold order. The permit holder or person in charge
shall take the equipment out of use until written permission is obtained from
the Health Authority. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or alter a
hold order notice or tag placed on equipment by the Health Authority.
   (F)   Removing a hold order for equipment. The permit holder or person in
charge has the same rights and responsibilities as for food in “removing a hold
order for food” pursuant to division (C) above.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.49 IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD.
   A permit holder shall immediately discontinue operations and must notify the
Health Authority if an imminent health hazard may exist because of an emergency
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, extended interruption of electrical
or water service, sewage backup, misuse of poisonous or toxic materials, onset
of an apparent foodborne illness outbreak, gross unsanitary occurrence or
condition, disease transmission from an employee, pest infestation, or other
circumstances that may endanger public health.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.50 WHEN DISEASE TRANSMISSION IS SUSPECTED.
   When the Health Authority has reasonable cause to suspect a possibility of
disease transmission from any food establishment employee, it shall secure a
morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other inspection or
investigation as may be necessary and take appropriate action. The Health
Authority may require any or all of the following measures:
   (A)   Immediate exclusion of the employee from the food establishment;
   (B)   Immediate closure of the food establishment concerned until in the
opinion of the Health Authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
   (C)   Restriction of employee’s services to some area of the food
establishment where there will be no danger of transmitting disease; or
   (D)   Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee(s) and of
his, her or their bodily discharges.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.51 FOOD HANDLER AND CERTIFIED FOOD MANAGER CLASSES.
   The Health Authority may order any food handler to attend certified food
manager or food handler training course, when in the judgment of the Health
Authority, the work habits of the food handler constitute a hazard to public
health. The Health Authority may impose a time period not to exceed 90 days for
completion of the training from date of violation.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.52 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Health Authority may grant a variance by modifying or waiving the
requirements of this chapter, if in the opinion of the Health Authority, a
public health hazard or nuisance will not result from the issuance of the
variance. If a variance is granted, the Health Authority shall retain all
pertinent information in the food establishments filed. A variance is non-
transferrable between owners.
   (B)   Before a variance from a requirement of this chapter is approved, the
person requesting the variance shall supply the Health Authority with
information such as, but not limited to, the name and location of the business,
the section in which the variance is being requested, and information that
demonstrates the conditions that from exist which warrant the granting of a
variance. Any person who requests a variance for the provisions of this chapter
shall have the burden of supplying the Health Authority with the information
necessary to support the request. The Health Authority shall retain this
information in the food establishment’s file.
   (C)   If the Health Authority grants a variance, the permit holder shall
comply with the plan and procedures that are submitted and approved as a basis
for the modification or waiver and shall also maintain and provide to the
Health Authority, upon request, records that demonstrate compliance.
   (D)   A variance can be revoked or expire if in the opinion of the Health
Authority the variance results in a public health hazard or nuisance, there is
a change of circumstances from those supporting the variance, or there is a
change of ownership of the food service establishment.
   (E)   Variances may not be transferred from one person to another person,
nor be applicable at any location, building, or place other than that for which
it was issued.
   (F)   If a variance has been denied by the Health Authority, an appeal can
be made requesting a hearing before the Macon County Board of Health. The
hearing process is described in § 91.25.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.53 HAZARD ANALYSIS CRITICAL CONTROL POINT PLAN (HACCP).
   (A)   As required in the Food Code, or before engaging in food preparation
that requires a HACCP plan, a permit holder or person in charge shall submit to
the Health Authority for approval a properly prepared HACCP plan.
   (B)   Contents of a HACCP Plan shall include:
      (1)   A categorization of the types of time/temperature control for
safety foods that are specified in the menu such as soups and sauces, salads,
and bulk, solid foods such as meat roasts, or of other foods that are specified
by the Health Authority.
      (2)   A flow diagram by specific food or category of food type
identifying critical control points and providing information on the following:
         (a)   Ingredients, materials, and equipment used in the preparation of
that food;
         (b)   Formulations or recipes that delineate methods and procedural
control measures that address the food safety concerns involved;
         (c)   Food employee and supervisory training plan that addresses the
food safety concerns involved;
         (d)   A statement of operating procedures for the plan under
consideration including clearly identifying:
            1.   Each critical control point;
            2.   The critical limits for each critical control point;
            3.   The method and frequency for monitoring and controlling each
critical control point by the food employee designated by the person in charge;
            4.   The method and frequency for the person in charge to routinely
verify that the food employee is following standard operating procedures and
monitoring critical control points;
            5.   Action to be taken by the person in charge if the critical
limits for each critical control point are not met;
            6.   Records to be maintained by the person in charge to
demonstrate that the HACCP plan is properly operated and managed; and
         (e)   Additional scientific date or other information, as required by
the Health Authority, supporting determination of the food safety is not
compromised by the proposal.
   (C)   The HACCP plan and procedures that are submitted and approved shall be
maintained and provided to the Health Authority, upon request. This includes
all records that demonstrate compliance.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.54 MENU LIMITATION.
   The Health Authority may determine that menu limitation at a food
establishment is necessary for food safety. The food establishment will comply
with any notice of menu limitation issued by the Health Authority.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.55 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   If necessary to protect against public health hazards or nuisances, the
Health Authority may impose specific requirements in addition to the
requirements contained in this chapter. The Health Authority shall document the
conditions that necessitate the imposition of the additional requirements and
the underlying public health rationale. The documentation shall be provided to
the applicant or permit holder, and shall be maintained by the Macon County
Health Department in the food establishment’s file.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 91.65 GENERAL.
   The requirements outlined in this subchapter apply only to temporary food
establishments and are in addition to the requirements stated in other sections
of this chapter. Temporary food establishments shall also meet the criteria set
forth in the Illinois Department of Public Health Food Code, Section 750.300.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord.
O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.66 PERMIT.
   A temporary food permit application and the appropriate fee, if required,
should be submitted at least seven days prior to the start date of the event at
which food will be provided. Late fees will apply if application is made less
than seven days before the event or may be subject to denial. At least one
person in charge of the temporary food establishment shall show documentation
of completion of food safety training. A Certified Food Protection Manager or a
food handler training certificate will be deemed sufficient. Food operators
seeking a temporary food establishment permit shall meet all applicable
provisions of this chapter and the Food Code. All priority item and priority
foundation item violations shall be corrected prior to the issuance of the
temporary food establishment permit.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.67 FEES.
   All fees for temporary food establishment permits shall be as set forth by
the Macon County Board of Health.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.68 INSPECTIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
   The Health Authority may provide consultation and/or on-site inspection for
each temporary food establishment. The Health Authority may make as many follow
up inspections as are necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and the
Food Code. All priority item and priority foundation item violations shall be
corrected prior to the issuance of the temporary food establishment permit. The
temporary food establishment shall immediately cease food preparation if any
priority item or priority foundation item violations are not satisfactorily
corrected and/or pose an imminent health hazard after temporary food
establishment permit is issued.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 91.80 PLAN REVIEWS.
   No food establishment shall be constructed, remodeled, or converted except
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Health Authority.
   (A)   Plan review. The Health Authority shall conduct a plan review whenever
a food establishment:
      (1)   Is newly constructed or remodeled;
      (2)   Is in a facility converted for use as a food establishment; or
      (3)   Undergoes change of ownership.
   (B)   The Health Authority shall advise the food establishment within 14
days of the Health Authority’s receipt of plans with specifications that they
are approved or that specified revisions must be made.
   (C)   The Health Authority, at its sole discretion, may waive a plan review
based on the information provided in the application for a new permit.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.81 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS OUTSIDE THE JURISDICTION OF THE HEALTH AUTHORITY.
   Food from food establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Health
Authority may be allowed if such food establishments conform to the provisions
of this chapter, or equivalent provisions, and can provide proof of a valid
permit from the applicable public health authority.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.82 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to have properly
served when a copy of the inspection report form, or other notice, has been
delivered personally to the permit holder or person in charge, sent by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the permit holder or person in charge, or prominently posted on the
premises. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the Health
Authority.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.83 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Health Authority may seek administrative or judicial remedy to achieve
compliance with the provisions of this chapter if a person operating a food
establishment or employee:
   (A)   Fails to obtain or have a valid permit to operate a food
establishment;
   (B)   Violates any term or condition of a permit;
   (C)   Allows a priority item violation or a priority foundation item
violation or a repeat violation to remain uncorrected beyond the timeframes for
correction that was approved, directed, or ordered by the Health Authority;
   (D)   Fails to comply with a Health Authority order concerning an employee
suspected of having a disease transmissible through food by infected persons;
   (E)   Fails to comply with a hold order;
   (F)   Fails to comply with an order issued as a result of a hearing for an
administrative remedy; or
   (G)   Fails to comply with a summary suspension order issued by the Health
Authority.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any rules
and regulations adopted herein shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500. In addition, therefore, such person may be enjoined from continuing such
violations. Each day’s violation constitutes a separate violation. The State’s
Attorney of Macon County shall bring such actions in the name of the County of
Macon, Illinois, and may bring action for an injunction to restrain such
violation, or to enjoin the operation of any such food establishment causing
such violation.
   (B)   The Health Authority shall not renew a food permit if a permit holder
has failed to pay any outstanding fees or fines pursuant to the Health
Authority’s fee schedule or to any enforcement decision of the Health Authority
or any levy imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction based upon a violation
issued by the Health Authority. In addition, the Health Authority may revoke
the current food permit of a permit holder if the permit holder has fees or
fines that have been outstanding for more than 90 days. The Health Authority
shall not renew and may revoke a food permit if the permit holder is subject to
any active injunction related to this chapter.
(Ord. O-132-11-18, passed 11-8-2018; Ord. O-156-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
CHAPTER 92: STREET NAMING, SIGNAGE, AND STRUCTURE NUMBERING
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Administration
   
92.03   Street naming policy
   
92.04   Street name changes
   
92.05   Private street names
   
92.06   Street sign standards
   
92.07   House numbers, generally
   
92.08   House numbers, guidelines
   
92.09   Applicability
   
92.10   Enforcement
   
92.11   Disclaimer for emergency calls
   
92.12   Deviations
   
92.13   Appeals
   
92.14   Conflicts
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning that is provided in the current
National Emergency Number Association (NENA) Standard Guidelines as referenced
by the United States Postal System, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, or except where the NENA Standard Guidelines are modified to be in
conformance with county zoning ordinance definitions.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building which is clearly incidental or subordinate
to, and customarily utilized adjacent to and in connection with, a principal
structure located on the same zoning lot, including but not limited to a
residential garage, storage shed, swimming pool, barn, or grain bin.
   ADDRESSING SYSTEM. As used herein, a grid ADDRESSING SYSTEM whereby quadrant
dividing lines, running north-and-south and east-and-west, extend outward from
the point of origin at the intersection of North/South Main Street and East/
West Main Street in the center of the City of Decatur.
      (1)   Beginning from the point of origin, a house number shall be
assigned for each grid interval, or every 5.28 feet, or each one-one-thousandth
mile, there being 1,000 intervals per mile. Intervals of greater or lesser
length may be determined by dividing the actual distance of the street section
by 1,000.
      (2)   Beginning from the point of origin, even numbers are assigned on
the north and east sides of streets. Odd numbers are assigned on the south and
west sides of streets. The numbers shall increase consecutively by an increment
of two for each interval.
   HOUSE NUMBER, STRUCTURE NUMBER or STRUCTURE ADDRESS NUMBER. The number
assigned to consecutive intervals along a street pursuant to the addressing
system contained herein.
   MAJOR LANDMARKS. Include but are not limited to cemeteries, parks, major
bridges, and boat launching ramps.
   NONCONFORMANCE. Any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
including but not limited to, by way of example, a number out of sequence, odd
or even number on wrong side of street, rural route and box numbers in a 9-1-
1–addressed area, numbers improperly affixed, numbers illegible, numbers
unclear, numbers obstructed, numbers not visible, numbers not present, numbers
of improper size, numbers not in contrast with the immediate background,
weather-worn numbers, wrong numbers, non-approved numbers, and unofficial
street signs designed and/or displayed in such manner as to cause confusion for
emergency responders and/or the public.
   OCCUPANT.  Any person, firm, entity, partnership, trust, corporation,
association, or other organization that is occupying or leasing a building or
other property for a period exceeding 30 days.
   OWNER.  Any and all persons, firms, entities, partnerships, trusts,
corporation, associations, or other organizations that own the fee title to, or
have an undivided interest in, any building or property which is subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. A non-accessory building in which a principal use of
the lot on which it is located is conducted, including but not limited to:
residential building, mobile home, commercial building, industrial building,
office building, school building, public building, communications tower, water
tower, pipeline station or other utility structure, or a livestock barn or
grain storage complex not adjacent to a residence or other non-accessory
building.
   STREET.  As used herein, refers in a general way to any type of road/lane/
highway/street unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Emergency Telephone System Board (ETSB) shall be responsible in
the unincorporated area of the county and, upon agreement with any municipality
that may request the service, for:
      (1)   Assigning new house numbers and/or correcting house numbers that do
not correspond to the countywide addressing system;
      (2)   The naming and/or renaming of all streets; and
      (3)   The provision of street name signs at street intersections, except
as cited in the county subdivision ordinance, §
154.072.
   (B)   Pre-existing street names and house numbers that do not strictly
conform with the provisions of this chapter may be retained if, in the judgment
of the ETSB, the nonconformance is minor in nature or is of great historical
significance to the county and/or its residents, and if the nonconformance does
not pose a threat to the public health and safety by causing undue difficulties
or delays for 9-1-1 system operations or emergency response.
   (C)   The ETSB shall cause to be created, and shall maintain, an accurate
map of all officially named streets within the county, shall establish address
ranges for each segment of each street, and shall record the location of each
address assigned along each street. The map(s) shall be the official repository
of the street names, address ranges, and address number assignments.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.03 STREET NAMING POLICY.
   (A)   Streets requiring names. A street will be named if it meets at least
one of the following conditions:
      (1)   If three or more principal structures exist, or are approved to be
constructed, that are accessed off a private street that is served by the
public right-of-way; or
      (2)   If the street is maintained by the county, township, or other unit
of local, state, or federal government.
   (B)   Street name selection.  The following standards will be used:
      (1)   A street name shall be appropriate and easy to read and pronounce
(so that children can use the name in an emergency situation);
      (2)   Names with the same theme (i.e., flowers, states) are suggested for
naming streets in an entire subdivision, as a means of general identification;
      (3)   Historically used or significant street names will be retained
where possible;
      (4)   Street names should be unique throughout the unincorporated area of
the county;
      (5)   Names having the same or similar pronunciation but with different
spellings shall not be used (e.g., Smith, Smyth, or Smythe; Allen or Alan);
      (6)   Avoid sound-alike names (e.g., Bay View Drive and Bayview Drive or
Brainard Lane and Barnard Lane);
      (7)   Names which may be offensive (slang, double meanings, and the like)
are prohibited;
      (8)   Use of special characters in street names, such as hyphens,
apostrophes, or dashes, is prohibited (e.g., Bob-O-Link; Jane’s Lane);
      (9)   Differentiation of the same street name by a suffix is not allowed
in the unincorporated area of the county (e.g., Moundview Lane and Moundview
Court);
      (10)   Usage of street names that have a partial name in common in the
same geographic area is prohibited (e.g., Lake Crest Drive and Lake Bottom
Drive);
      (11)   Use of standard suffixes or directional suffixes or prefixes as
street names is prohibited (e.g., North Avenue, Court Street, Avenue of Pines);
      (12)   Numbers are not allowed as street names (e.g., 1st Street; Third
Street), except that streets officially named with numbers by previous
governmental action may retain those numbered names;
      (13)   A street running continuously in one direction shall have only one
street name throughout its entire length;
      (14)   County highways shall be assigned street names for addressing
purposes, but shall also be identified on official maps by their route number
as an alias (i.e., C.H. 30); such alias shall not be used as part of an
address. In the unincorporated area of this county, state and federal highways
shall be named as, by way of example, “N. Route 121”, “S. Route 51”, or “E. I
72”; such street names shall be used as part of an address. State Route 105
running east from Decatur to the county line is an exception, as it is named E.
William Street for addressing purposes; and
      (15)   The ETSB shall review preliminary plats to ensure that proposed
new street names are consistent with this chapter. Street names and
designations on new plats must be approved by the ETSB before final plat
approval by the county. Duplication or use of “sound-alike” subdivision and/or
building complex names shall be avoided. Review by the ETSB shall be
accomplished in a timely manner.
   (C)   Directional prefixes. Where a street crosses an imaginary dividing
line extending north, south, east, and west from the intersection of North/
South Main Street and East/West Main Street in the center of the City of
Decatur, a prefix directional of North (“N”), South (“S”), East (“E”), or West
(“W”), as appropriate, shall be used with the street name. If a street does not
cross a dividing line, its name may have a prefix directional.
   (D)   Suffixes. Street name suffixes shall meet valid street suffix
abbreviations as defined by the United States Postal Service (USPS) official
suffix guidelines (USPS, Postal Addressing Standards, April 2012, Publication
28) and by the National Emergency Number Association (NENA).
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.04 STREET NAME CHANGES.
   The following regulations are established for changing the name of a public
or private street that has been legally named and recorded.
   (A)   A request to change the name of an existing recorded street will
require the approval of 100% of the property owners along the street. Proposed
street names and signatures of property owners shall be provided to the ETSB in
the form of a petition. In the event that 100% approval is not obtained, the
street will not be renamed.
   (B)   The ETSB may deny the requested street name change if the ETSB finds
there are public health and safety concerns regarding the change.
   (C)   Approval by the ETSB for any street name change petition for any
reasons other than public health and safety will be contingent upon payment to
the ETSB by the petitioner of an administrative fee of $250, plus $5 for each
address along the street.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.05 PRIVATE STREET NAMES.
   The naming of a private street shall be required under the following
conditions.
   (A)   Private lanes with three or more principal structures and/or platted
lots along them shall be named and these principal structures and/or platted
lots shall be addressed off that private lane in accordance with the countywide
addressing system.
   (B)   A private street that serves only one or two principal structure(s)
and/or platted lot(s) is considered to be a driveway for the purposes of this
chapter. No street name shall be assigned nor any street sign erected by the
county. An unofficial name of any private driveway shall not be recognized by
the county and shall not be used as part of an address. Address(es) of the
principal structure(s) and/or platted lot(s) on the private driveway shall
consist of the name of the street from which the driveway departs and the
appropriate structure number(s) as determined by the countywide addressing
system described in this chapter. When the driveway serves a second principal
structure or platted lot, the next odd or even number, as appropriate, shall be
assigned to the second structure or lot. If additional principal structures are
built and/or additional lots are platted along a private driveway, resulting in
three or more principal structures and/or platted lots, the ETSB shall assign a
name to the driveway, all principal structures and/or platted lots shall be
assigned or reassigned an address number off that named private driveway, and a
street sign shall be erected in accordance with this chapter at the
intersection of the private driveway with the public street.
   (C)   When the ETSB requires the naming of a previously unnamed private
street, residents who are property owners on the subject street may, within 30
days of notification by the ETSB that the naming is required, provide to the
ETSB a petition bearing the approving signatures of at least 60% of the
property owners and containing up to three street name choices that are
acceptable to the petitioners. The street names, including spaces between
words, shall not be more than 18 spaces in length, prefix and suffix excluded.
The names shall not include numerical reference or numerical, alphabetic, or
alphanumeric sequences. If at least 60% of the property owners do not agree
with a suggested name, or the ETSB does not approve any of the suggested names,
the ETSB shall have the authority to assign a name to the private street.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.06 STREET SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   A street name sign of standard design, as recommended by the ETSB and
approved by the County Engineer, shall be erected on a standard pole at each
intersection of public streets and at the intersections of public streets and
officially named private streets within the unincorporated area of this county.
At least one street name sign post displaying the name of each street shall be
erected and maintained at each intersection in the corner most suitable as
determined by the County Engineer.
   (B)   (1)   Street name signs shall be erected and maintained by the County
Highway Department. The cost of materials and any specialized equipment for the
installation and maintenance of street name signs shall be borne by the ETSB,
except as otherwise specified in this chapter.
      (2)   Street name signs for public streets shall have white reflective
numbers and lettering on a green reflective background. Street name signs for
private streets named under this chapter shall have white reflective numbers
and lettering on a blue reflective background. The County Engineer shall set
the reflectivity grade standard for both letters and background. Street name
signs and posts shall meet all applicable Department of Transportation and
Federal Highway Administration safety standards for size and reflectivity.
      (3)   Street name signs for new subdivisions: the developer shall be
responsible for initial installation of new street name poles and signs as
cited in the county subdivision ordinance, §
154.072.
      (4)   A developer may not install decorative street name poles and signs
for new subdivision streets.
      (5)   Unofficial private street name signs shall not be erected on any
public rights-of-way, nor shall the unofficial street name signs have the same
design and/or color background as county-maintained street name signs, nor
shall the signs be posted in such a manner as to cause confusion for emergency
responders or for the public, as judged by the County Engineer and the ETSB.
The signs shall be in violation of this chapter.
      (6)   No person shall remove or deface any street sign or pole that is
erected or maintained by the County Highway Department.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 HOUSE NUMBERS, GENERALLY.
   (A)   All principal structures and significant landmarks in the
unincorporated area of the county are required to have an address approved or
issued by the ETSB. Assignment of separate addresses to nearby accessory
buildings shall be avoided except where the buildings have separate landline
telephone service and/or separately metered utility service or are used for
residential, commercial, or business purposes. An accessory building may also
be addressed when the building is not visible or accessible by emergency
services from the principal structure.
   (B)   Upon application to the ETSB by a land owner or his or her authorized
agent, or by action initiated by the ETSB, a house number shall be assigned for
new construction, or for any pre-existing principal structure that lacks an
address, that is consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Existing house
numbers that do not comply with the countywide addressing system may be
corrected by the ETSB at the request of the property owner or his or her
authorized agent, or the correction may be initiated by the ETSB. When a change
of address for a pre-existing principal structure is initiated by the ETSB, the
property owner shall be notified in writing 30 days prior to the time the new
number shall become the official number for the property in question. Within 60
days after receipt of an official notification letter of a change of address or
new address assignment by the ETSB, the owner or occupant shall, at his or her
own expense, affix/display the assigned address number(s) in accordance with
this chapter.
   (C)   No person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity shall
authorize any public utility company as defined by state law to supply any
public utility services to any new residence or business or other structure in
the unincorporated area of the county until an address for the new residence or
business or other structure has been assigned or otherwise approved by the
ETSB.
(Ord. O-58-3-9-06, passed 3-9-2006)
§ 92.08 HOUSE NUMBERS, GUIDELINES.
   The following guidelines shall apply to pre-existing, changed, and new
addresses.
   (A)   Number assignment.  Assignment of address numbers shall be based upon
where the driveway intersects the main street, except where otherwise specified
by this chapter.
   (B)   Conflicting numbers. The owner or occupant shall remove any pre-
existing or different address numbers that might be mistaken for or confused
with the proper number that has been assigned by the ETSB to the structure.
   (C)   Dimensions. Address numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in
height, shall be affixed near or on the main entrance to the structure, and
shall be visible from the street named in the address. All house numbers shall
be in Arabic numerals (i.e., block print). Address numbers shall contrast with
the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable and may be arranged
horizontally or vertically.
   (D)   Restrictions on numbers. Numbers evenly divisible by 100 shall not be
used in assigning house numbers. Fractions shall not be used in assigning house
numbers. A new address shall be assigned by the ETSB to correct any pre-
existing address that uses a fraction. There shall be no use of fractional
addresses, alphanumeric address numbers, nor hyphenated address numbers (i.e.,
134-1/2 Ash Street, 123A Main Street, or 41-656 Bell Street).
   (E)   Mailboxes. When the structure is more than 50 feet from the street
named in an address, or when the entrance of the building is not visible from
the street, the address number shall also be mounted on a post, sign, wall,
fence, or mailbox that is on the same side of the street as the addressed
structure, within ten feet of the driveway, and not more than 20 feet back from
the street, and shall be readily visible from the street when approaching from
either direction. (Mailboxes that are grouped, that are on the opposite side of
the street from the structure, or that are located away from the driveway that
serves the structure shall not be used for displaying house numbers as defined
in these rules, because the mailboxes may not allow house numbers to be viewed
from either direction and/or may not provide adequate identification of the
location of the addressed structure. The mailboxes should be labeled according
to United States Postal Service guidelines for proper mail delivery.)
   (F)   Multiple-use situations. Any site which includes multiple apartments,
suites, spaces, or other units must include the appropriate unit designator and
number in the address following the street name. Appropriate designators shall
be APT/Apartment, BLDG/Building, CBN/Cabin, DEPT/Department, STE/Suite, SP/
Space, FL/Floor, TRLR/Trailer, HNGR/Hanger, UNIT/Unit, LOT/Lot. Basement unit
numbers shall be three-digit numbers beginning with “0” (APT 005), first-floor
unit numbers shall begin with “1” (UNIT 108), second floor unit numbers shall
begin with “2” (STE 210), and the like.
      (1)   Apartment houses. A building under one ownership in which rooms are
arranged and rented as apartments. The apartment house shall be given one
street number and each individual apartment shall be given an apartment number.
Example: “250 W. Elwin Road APT 103”.
      (2)   Residential condominium complex. A building or buildings with
individual, separately owned units in a multi-unit structure. The private
street serving the building(s) may be given a name. Each condominium unit
structure shall be given its own street number. Units in the same structure
shall have a unit number.
      (3)   Commercial complex. A building or buildings under one ownership,
used for commerce or industrial use. If each unit within a building has its
entrance off a common interior hallway, then each building shall be given its
own street number and each unit within the building shall be given its own unit
or suite number. The building number shall be displayed on or near the main
building entrance and each unit or suite number shall be displayed at each
unit’s entrance. If each unit within a building has its own street entrance,
not off a common interior hallway, then each unit shall be given its own street
number. Each unit street number shall be displayed on or near that unit’s main
entrance.
      (4)   Commercial complex with apartment complex.  A building or buildings
used for commercial use in which there are also apartments. Each building shall
be given its own street number, each commercial unit shall be given a
respective unit or suite number, and each apartment shall be given a respective
apartment number. At no time shall there be unit or apartment numbers within a
complex that are the same.
      (5)   Duplex; a two-family residential structure.  Each family unit shall
be given its own street number. If multiple duplex buildings are served by a
private street, that street may be given a name and the duplex units addressed
off that street.
      (6)   Multiple-address locations. For plazas or other commercial
occupancies with multiple addresses, the posting of the range of addresses on
the main plaza or occupancy sign, readily viewed from the street, is
encouraged.
   (G)   Pre-addressed recorded subdivision plats. As a general rule,
subdivision plats of record may be pre-addressed by the ETSB in accordance with
these rules. Addresses identified on recorded surveys which are not approved by
the ETSB and recorded in the addressing database are not valid and shall not be
used for physical addressing purposes.
   (H)   Corner lots.  When assigning a number to a principal structure that
does not prominently front on a street and is located on a corner lot, a number
from the street with which the main driveway intersects shall be assigned. Any
principal structure on a corner lot that prominently fronts on a street may be
assigned a number upon that street regardless of the driveway location. Dual
addresses shall be avoided.
   (I)   House numbers along diagonal, meandering, or curvilinear streets.
Where the street does not run directly north-south or east-west, the general
course of the street is to be used in determining the house numbering
direction.
   (J)   Suffix letters and numerals. Planned suffix letters and/or numbers for
multiple-occupancy dwellings, mobile home park spaces, office suites, and other
buildings or developments that are divided into address units shall be
submitted to the ETSB for approval prior to being adopted by the property owner
(s).
   (K)   Unincorporated area. A municipality’s house numbering system may be
used by the ETSB to number properties in the unincorporated area of the county
along the streets and streets that border that municipality or that are likely
to be annexed by that municipality in the relatively near future.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.09 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to the unincorporated area of this county and to
any municipality that has entered into agreements with the ETSB regarding
addressing services.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Procedures to enforce this chapter may be commenced by the State’s
Attorney no sooner than 15 days after written notification of a violation
thereof is made by certified mail by the ETSB to the violator.
   (B)   No portion of this chapter shall be applied so as to adversely
interfere with the activities of any city or village in this county. Should any
application of the provisions of this chapter adversely interfere with any
activity of any city or village within the county, the application shall be
void and of no effect.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.11 DISCLAIMER FOR EMERGENCY CALLS.
   The county shall assume no liability if the location of any emergency call
cannot be responded to by emergency service personnel due to a lack of posting
of the physical address or if the physical address is not visible from the
street providing access to the property.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.12 DEVIATIONS.
   The ETSB may grant minor deviations from literal compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. The deviations are intended to provide relief
from literal compliance with specific provisions of this chapter in instances
where there is an obvious practical problem with doing so, while still
adequately addressing the property in a manner which will allow it to be easily
located in an emergency.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.13 APPEALS.
   Appeals of addressing and/or street naming decisions of the ETSB under this
chapter may be initiated by filing a written petition for review with the ETSB,
stating the specific reasons for the appeal. The appellant shall then have the
right to a hearing before the ETSB. The appeal shall be limited to a review of
the record by the ETSB and limited to the issues raised in the petition for
review. Any decision rendered by the ETSB or its designee on a petition for
review shall be final.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.14 CONFLICTS.
   Any provisions in other county ordinances, including but not limited to
street naming, street name signing, and structure numbering that are in
conflict with this chapter, are hereby repealed.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates the house number or unofficial street name
sign display provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $50 and each day that the violation occurs shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (C)   Any person who tampers with any street name sign and/or pole that has
been installed in accordance with this chapter shall be punishable by a fine up
to $250 and each street name sign and/or pole so tampered with shall be deemed
a separate offense.
(Ord. O-78-11-09, passed 11-12-2009)
CHAPTER 93: SWIMMING FACILITIES
Section
   
93.01   Inspections and investigations of swimming facilities
   
93.02   Certification of pool operators
   
93.03   No limit on Department
§ 93.01 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS OF SWIMMING FACILITIES
   (A)   Responsibilities of Department. The Department shall perform
inspections and investigations of SWIMMING FACILITIES, as that term is defined
in the Illinois Swimming Facility Act, 210 ILCS 125/1 et seq., with the
exception of bathing beaches. Such inspections and investigations shall be
performed by the Department as an agent of the Illinois Department of Public
Health in accordance with § 1.1 of the Illinois Swimming Facility Act within
the county. In performing inspections and investigations of swimming
facilities, the Department shall utilize the standards set forth in regulations
adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health in accordance with the
Illinois Swimming Facility Act and Code, as it is currently and as it may be
amended in the future. The Department shall be authorized to enter into agency
agreements with the Illinois Department of Public Health for the purpose of
carrying out this section.
   (B)   Inspection fees. The owner or operator of the swimming facility shall
pay to the Department a re-inspection fee, as applicable, in accordance with
the fee schedule approved by the Board of Health.
   (C)   Complaint investigations. All complaints on a swimming facility will
be investigated. The owner or operator of the swimming facility shall pay to
the Department a complaint investigation fee, as applicable, in accordance with
the fee schedule approved by the Board of Health.
   (D)   Water testing fees. The owner or operator of the swimming facility
shall pay to the Department a water testing fee, in accordance with a fee
schedule set by the Board of Health.
   (E)   Lab fees. In the event of a waterborne illness, the owner or operator
of the swimming facility shall pay for all lab fees associated with the event.
Any lab providing this testing must be approved by the Department. The
Department will not be responsible for any fees associated with testing for a
waterborne illness.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 93.02 CERTIFICATION OF POOL OPERATORS.
   (A)   Certification required. On or before May 1, 2010, all swimming
facilities operated within county, with the exception of facilities operated to
serve residents of buildings with fewer than six residential units, shall be
managed by an individual who has a current certification of successful
completion of a training program in swimming facility management issued by the
State of Illinois. Proof of such certification shall be provided to the
Department as part of its annual inspection.
   (B)   Certification refresher. All certified pool operators will be required
to take a refresher course every year.
   (C)   Violation. Violation of the certification set forth in this section
shall subject the owner and operator of the swimming facility shall comply with
division (A) of this section within 30 days. An owner or operator who commits a
second violation of this section shall be subject to a penalty, in accordance
with a fee schedule set by the Board of Health, and 15 days to receive the
certification. An owner or operator who commits a third or subsequent violation
of this section shall be subject to a penalty, in accordance with a fee
schedule set by the Board of Health, and pool closure.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 93.03 NO LIMIT ON DEPARTMENT.
   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the activities or authority of
the Department as otherwise provided for by the law including any county
ordinance.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 94: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
94.01   Title
   
94.02   Statement of purpose
   
94.03   Definitions
   
94.04   Applicability
   
94.05   Measurement; weighted sound level
   
94.06   Prohibited activity
   
94.07   Exemptions
   
94.08   Enforcement
   
94.09   Notice to property owner
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Macon County Noise Control Ordinance”
and may be so cited.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
§ 94.02 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The county seeks to control noise in its residential districts for the
purpose of protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general
welfare of its residents. Further, the County of Macon seeks to conserve the
value of property throughout the county, and to prevent noise pollution in that
excessive noise endangers physical and emotional health and well-being,
interferes with legitimate business and recreational activities, depresses
property values, offends the senses, creates public nuisances, and in other
respects reduces the quality of the environment.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
§ 94.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as specifically stated herein, the definitions of terms used in this
chapter shall have their regular and usual meaning as indicated by common
dictionary definition. However, all definitions of acoustical terminology used
in this chapter shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. Words
importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or
things. Words importing the plural number may include the singular. Words
importing gender may be applied to both male and female.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
§ 94.04 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter’s noise regulations shall apply in unincorporated
residential zoning districts, except where otherwise exempt under this chapter.
Any person, including, but not limited to, the subject property’s owner, agent,
tenant, visitor, and/or other occupant of the property who violates any
provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for such noncompliance as further
set forth herein.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, a property owner shall be held liable for a
violation under this chapter if the county establishes by a preponderance of
the evidence that he or she is legally accountable for the conduct giving rise
to the violation, acquiesced to the conduct, and/or knew or should have
reasonably known of the conduct occurring.
   (C)   A PERSON for the purpose of this chapter, shall be any individual,
corporation, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, public or private
institution, group, agency, or any legal successor, representative, agent, or
agency of the foregoing.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
§ 94.05 MEASUREMENT; WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL.
   Measurement of sound for the purposes of this chapter shall be obtained
using a device that utilizes the proper frequency sound weighting. Weighted
sound level is the sound pressure level decibels as measured on a sound level
meter using the A weighing network. The level so read is designed dB(A) or dBA.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
§ 94.06 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   During day hours. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made
the emission of sound during daytime hours (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m) from any
noise source to any receiving residential land:
      (1)   Which can be heard from a distance of 300 or more from the source;
and/or
      (2)   Which exceeds 60 dBA when measured at any point within such
receiving residential land shall be in violation of this chapter; provided,
however, that the point of measurement shall be on the property line of the
complainant. Further, no person shall permit any sound as described herein to
be made in or upon any house, premises, or property owned or possessed by them
or under their management and or control.
   (B)   During night hours. No person shall make excessive, unnecessary,
continuous, unreasonable, continue, or cause to be made the emission of sound
during nighttime hours (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) from any noise source to any
receiving residential land:
      (1)   Which can be heard from a distance of 100 feet or more from the
source; and/or
      (2)   Which exceeds 55 dBA when measured at any point within such
receiving residential land; provided, however, that point of measurement shall
be on the property line of the complainant. Further, no person shall permit any
sound as described herein to be made in or upon any house, premises, or
property owned or possessed by them or under their management and/ or control.
   (C)   Public nuisance declared. Sound emissions in violation of (A) and (B)
above are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (D)   Point of measurement. For the purposes of determining violations of
(A) and (B) above within attached multiple-family structures or multiple unit
developments such as apartments, condominiums and townhomes, the point of
measurement shall be the outer property line of the multiple-family structures
or multiple unit developments and not at the dividing walls between individual
units in said structures.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following exemptions to violation of this chapter shall apply.
   (A)   Emergency operations. Emergency short term operations which are
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, such as
emergency utility and street repair, fallen tree removal, or emergency fuel oil
delivery shall be exempt, provided that reasonable steps shall be taken by
those in charge of such operations to minimize noise emanating from the same.
Emergency operations by fire and rescue services and police agencies shall also
be exempt.
   (B)   Noise required by law. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any noise required specifically by law for the protection of safety of
people or property.
   (C)   Powered equipment. Powered equipment, such as air conditioners, lawn
mowers, small lawn and garden tools, riding tractors, and snow removal
equipment which is necessary for the maintenance of property, is kept in good
repair and maintenance, and which equipment, when new, would not comply with
the standards set forth in this chapter, shall be exempted. Good repair for the
purpose of this exemption shall be when the equipment at issue is in a
condition that meets factory specifications and is properly maintained to
prevent any excessive or unusual noise. However, the use of radios or other
sound/ entertainment devices on such equipment shall not be exempted if
listened to at a level otherwise violating the terms of this chapter.
   (D)   Community events. The term COMMUNITY EVENTS shall include, but is not
limited to, such things as parades, festivals, drum corps shows, sports events,
and Fourth of July celebrations, which are sanctioned or sponsored in whole or
in part by local governments, schools, or charitable or service organizations.
   (E)   Agricultural noise. Specifically excluded from the provisions of this
chapter is noise generated by agricultural equipment on land zoned and/or used
for agricultural purposes.
   (F)   Motor vehicles. Nothing herein shall be construed as a limitation on
the operation of duly registered motor vehicles as defined in the Illinois
Motor Vehicle Code, which are not in violation of 625 ILCS 5/12-602.
   (G)   Work performed by a public body/service workers. Any work performed by
or on behalf of a public body, including that which is performed by
subcontractors, shall be exempted. Such activities may include, but are not
limited to, routine maintenance work, road and bridge construction, garbage
services, and emergency repairs.
   (H)   Motorcycles. Nothing herein shall be construed as a limitation on the
operation of duly registered motorcycles as defined in the Illinois Motor
Vehicle Code, which are not in violation of 625 ILCS 5/12-602.
   (I)   Construction sites. Construction noise that occurs between the hours
of 7 a.m. and 8 p.m. shall be exempted. However, if in the opinion of the Macon
County Planning and Zoning Department, equipment or activities employed in the
performance of construction exceeds the allowable decibel levels within this
code, the Macon County Planning and Zoning Department may require noise
mitigation methods be implemented and used at the construction site to mitigate
noises which exceed the requirements herein.
   (J)   Recreational firearm shooting and hunting activities. Specifically
excluded from the provisions of this chapter is noise generated from shooting
of firearms for recreational purposes and/or hunting wild game on land zoned
for such and/or zoned for agricultural purposes.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
§ 94.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this chapter shall be performed by the County Sheriff’s
Office and any and all complaints of violations of this chapter shall be
directed to them. The County State’s Attorney’s Office shall be authorized to
prosecute any violations of this chapter.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
§ 94.09 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER.
   (A)   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, the owner of the property
shall be given notice of the violation in accordance with the following
provisions:
      (1)   If the owner’s name and current address are known, then by either
personal service or mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to that address. For purposes of notice under this section,
if the person cited for the conduct giving rise to the violation is the owner,
then the address provided to the Macon County Sheriff’s Office at the time of
citing shall be deemed to be that person’s known address; or
      (2)   If the owners address is not known, then by either personal service
or mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the owner’s address as provided to the County Clerk and/or County Supervisor of
Assessments Office; or
      (3)   If the owner’s address is not known, and is not on record as
provided above, then by publication for three successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation within the county.
   (B)   Notice served under this chapter is effective upon personal service,
the last date of publication, or the mailing of written notice, whichever is
earlier.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to violate any of the terms and provisions of
this chapter. Any person found to have violated this chapter shall be fined not
less than $50 and not more than $500 for a first offense and shall be fined not
less than $100 and not more than $1,000 for a subsequent offense which occurs
less than two years after the prior offense. If a subsequent offense occurs
more than two years after a prior offense, it shall be treated as a first
offense.
   (B)   Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a
distinct and separate violation.
   (C)   In addition to any penalty provided by this chapter, the Macon County
State’s Attorney is authorized to initiate action to obtain injunctive relief
in the Circuit Court, including, but not limited to, the issuance of a
temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction, in order to abate any
such nuisance condition as enumerated in this chapter.
(Ord. O-113-9-14, passed 9-11-2014)
CHAPTER 95: HOME KITCHEN OPERATION
Section
   
95.01   Home kitchen operations authorized
§ 95.01 HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS AUTHORIZED.
   Home kitchen operations are authorized within the unincorporated parts of
the county, subject to the provisions of Section 3.6 of the Food Handling
Regulation Enforcement Act (410 ILCS 625/3.6).
(Ord. O-124-11-16, passed 11-10-2016)
CHAPTER 96: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
   
96.01   Short title
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Sanitation
   
96.04   Animals running at large
   
96.05   Rabies inoculation; dogs and cats
   
96.06   Biting animals
   
96.07   Registration
   
96.08   Tag worn
   
96.09   Harboring stray animal(s) restricted
   
96.10   Nuisance animal
   
96.11   Adequate space; tethering of animals
   
96.12   Humane care of animals
   
96.13   Abandonment of animal
   
96.14   Multiple-pet license required
   
96.15   Breeder permit required
   
96.16   Female dogs and cats in heat
   
96.17   Registration procedures
   
96.18   Registration tag
   
96.19   Non-transferable
   
96.20   Impounding
   
96.21   Redemption by person other than owner
   
96.22   Diseased or injured animals
   
96.23   Enforcement officers not responsible for accident or disease to any dog
or cat
   
96.24   Multiple-pet license and renewal
   
96.25   Multiple pet-owner licensee requirements
   
96.26   Revocation of multiple-pet license
   
96.27   Impoundment of multiple pets
   
96.28   Breeder's permit regulations
   
96.29   Enforcement
   
96.30   Citations
   
96.31   Payment of citations
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Macon County Animal Control Ordinance.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. A veterinarian licensed by the State of Illinois and
appointed by the Macon County Board pursuant to the State of Illinois "Animal
Control Act" as amended.
   BREEDABLE FEMALES. Any dog or cat that is six months or older and is not
spayed.
   BREEDER PERMIT. A permit obtained from Macon County Animal Control.
   CAT. All members of the family feline.
   COUNTY. County of Macon.
   DIRECT, EFFECTIVE, PHYSICAL CONTROL. Mechanical exercise or authority over a
dog or other animal by the person in control of the animal, by means of a
leash, cord, rope, strap or chain which shall be fastened to the collar or
harness of the animal and of sufficient strength to control the dog or animal.
   DOG. All members of the family canidae.
   COMPETENT PERSON. A human being over the age of 15 years that is capable of
controlling and governing the dog or cat in question.
   IMPOUNDMENT. Animals taken up under the foregoing provisions hereof shall be
impounded in some suitable place provided by the county by contract or
otherwise.
   INOCULATED AGAINST RABIES. The injection of an anti-rabies vaccine given by
a licensed veterinarian.
   MULTIPLE-PET LICENSE. A license obtained from Macon County Animal Control.
   MULTIPLE-PET OWNER. Any person who harbors or allows more than seven dogs or
cats, or any combination thereof, over four months of age on their property or
in their dwelling unit.
   OWN. Have a right of property in, or keep, or harbor, or act as custodian
of, or have the care of, or knowingly permit, or encourage, to remain on or
about premises occupied by the owning person.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in a dog or other animal or who
keeps or harbors a dog or other animal or who has it in his care, or acts as
its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or other domestic animal to
remain on or about any premise occupied by him or her.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. A functional division of a public agency which
provides fire fighting, police, medical, or other emergency services.
   REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. A document or writing furnished by the Macon
County Animal Control upon proper registration and upon payment of the
registration fee herein imposed, unless exempt from payment of the registration
fee.
   REGISTRATION TOG. A tag, disk, or plate of suitable and durable material
furnished by the Macon County Animal Control.
   RUN AT LARGE. Suffering, permitting, or causing an animal to be at any place
within the county, at any time, outside an escape-proof building or other
enclosure without such animal being under direct, effective physical control of
the owner thereof, or his or her agent, or a member of the immediate family of
said owner.
   SHELTER. A building which has four sides, a roof, floor, and bedding. The
shelter shall be of sufficient size to permit such animal to stand up and turn
around inside when fully grown and allow retention of body heat. The shelter
shall be placed to provide shade from the sun and protection from the weather.
   STRAYING. A dog or other animal not on the premises of the owner or not
confined or under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
   TETHER. A method of securing an animal to a stationary object.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.03 SANITATION.
   All companion animal kennels, pens, enclosures or areas in which any such
animal is kept must be maintained in a sanitary manner without the accumulation
of dirt, offal, or urine and in such a manner as to prevent any disagreeable
odor.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.04 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   Every owner of an animal shall contain such animal to the confines of the
owner's real property unless the animal is under restraint and shall not permit
such animal to be at large. Any animal found running at large in unincorporated
areas of the county in violation of this section may be apprehended and
impounded. The provisions shall not apply to:
   (A)   Dogs being used in hunting, field trials;
   (B)   Dog shows while on public lands set aside for those purposes;
   (C)   Blood hounds or other dogs used for tracking in conjunction with
police activities;
   (D)   Dogs of the Canine Corps of any police force, the state police, any
federal law enforcement agency, or the Armed Forces while being used to conduct
official business or being used for official purposes;
   (E)   Dogs confined upon the property of another with the permission of the
property owner or resident of such property;
   (F)   Dogs and cats which are not located within the unincorporated areas of
the county which have been subdivided for residential purposes.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference: 
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/9 through 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.05 RABIES INOCULATION; DOGS AND CATS.
   No person shall own within the county a dog or cat four months or more of
age which has not been inoculated against rabies. No person shall fail to
vaccinate a dog or cat within 30 days following the vaccination due date.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/8
§ 96.06 BITING ANIMALS.
   Any animal which shall bite a person so as to cause an abrasion or
laceration or puncture of the skin of such person, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and such animal shall be taken up and impounded as hereafter provided.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/13
§ 96.07 REGISTRATION.
   No person shall own a dog or cat four months or more of age within the
county unless said dog or cat has been registered in accordance with state law
and the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.08 TAG WORN.
   Each registered animal shall be provided by the owner with a suitable collar
or harness to which the registration tag for that animal shall be securely
attached. Both collar or harness and registration tag shall be worn by such
animal at all times. Any dog or cat found within the county, whether running at
large or otherwise, without a registration tag thereon may be impounded as
herein provided.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.09 HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS(S) RESTRICTED.
   No person shall harbor, keep, care for, feed or allow to remain on their
property any stray domestic animal without notifying Macon County Animal
Control within 48 hours.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.10 NUISANCE ANIMAL.
   (A)   No person owning, possessing or harboring any animal within the
unincorporated area of the county shall permit said animal to become a
nuisance. An animal, other than a dog trained for law enforcement in the
performance of its duty, shall be considered a nuisance if said animal:
      (1)   Substantially damages property other than the owner's;
      (2)   Causes a disturbance by excessive barking, caterwauling or
noisemaking;
      (3)   Chases, attacks, bites, or interferes with or physically
intimidates any person while on the premises of the owner in unincorporated
areas of the county which have been subdivided for residential purposes.
      (4)   Chases, molests, attacks, bites, or interferes with other domestic
animals while off of the premises of the owner.
   (B)   The administrator or animal shelter manager or delegate, upon
reasonable grounds, shall impound any animal creating a nuisance by being in
violation of divisions (A)(3) or (A)(4) above and not restrained by a competent
person.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.11 ADEQUATE SPACE; TETHERING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall fail to provide any animal with adequate space.
"Adequate space" means sufficient space to allow each animal to easily stand,
sit, lie, turn about and make all other normal body movements in a comfortable,
normal position for the animal and to interact safely with other animals in the
enclosure.
   (B)   When a dog is tethered, "adequate space" means a tether that permits
the above actions and is appropriate to the age and size of the animal (no more
than 1/10 of the animal's body weight). A tether must be attached to the animal
by a properly applied collar, halter or harness configured so as to protect the
animal from injury and prevent the animal or tether from becoming entangled
with other objects or animals, or from extending over an object or edge that
could result in the strangulation or injury of the animal.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.12 HUMANE CARE OF ANIMALS.
   No person shall fail to provide any animal in his/her charge or custody, as
owner or otherwise, with proper and necessary food, drink, shelter, heat, air,
sanitation or veterinary care.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 70/3
§ 96.13 ABANDONMENT OF ANIMAL.
   No person shall abandon an animal within the county where it may become a
public charge or may suffer injury, hunger or exposure.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 70/3.01
§ 96.14 MULTIPLE-PET LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall own or allow more than seven dogs, cats or a combination
thereof on any one property or dwelling unit without obtaining a multiple-pet
license from Macon County Animal Control.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.15 BREEDER PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall breed any dog or cat without obtaining a permit from Macon
County Animal Control. No puppies or kittens shall be advertised, sold or given
away without supplying a permit number.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.16 FEMALE DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT.
   Every owner of a female dog or cat shall maintain such dog or cat in a
manner that prevents unplanned breeding.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 96.17 REGISTRATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All dogs and cats kept and maintained within the county shall be
registered by the owner or owners thereof with Macon County Animal Control
through its authorized agents. Such registration shall be valid for one year
from the date of a one-year vaccination, and three years from the date of a
three- year vaccination. The annual registration fee for dogs and cats
registered within 30 days of inoculation against rabies shall be $15 if the dog
or cat is spayed or neutered and $50 if the dog or cat is not so altered. The
owner or owners thereof shall remit the required registration fee for each dog
or cat at the time of inoculation. The veterinarian who inoculated the dog or
cat shall collect the registration fees. The veterinarian shall remit the
registration fees collected to the Macon County Animal Control through its
authorized agent. If the vaccination is obtained out of county, the
registration fee must be paid to the authorized agent for collection for Macon
County Animal Control. The registration fee for any dog or cat registered more
than 30 days after the date of inoculation against rabies shall be double the
original fee. Exempt from the registration fee are trained public safety agency
owned dogs maintained by public safety officers for use in public safety duties
full-time, with proof of such certified by the public safety agency’s chief or
other agency head.
   (B)   Upon payment of the annual registration fee, unless exempt from such
payment, a registration certificate will be issued by the veterinarian who
shall remit the original to the Macon County Animal Control through its
authorized agent. A copy of said certificate shall be kept by the owner and the
veterinarian inoculating the dog or cat. The registration certificate shall be
appropriately numbered and serially filed by the authorized agent of Macon
County Animal Control.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats the
owners of which are not residents within the county and are temporarily within
the county for a period of less than 30 days, nor shall they apply to feral
cats.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009; Ord. O-148-11-23, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 96.18 REGISTRATION TAG.
   (A)   At the time an animal is registered as herein provided, the
veterinarian who inoculated the dog or cat shall issue a registration tag
furnished by the Macon County Animal Control through its authorized agent
bearing a number corresponding with the number on said registration
certificate. The registration tag must be obtained from the authorized agent of
Macon County Animal Control when a vaccination is obtained out of county after
presenting proof of rabies vaccination. Registration tags must be of suitable,
durable material and of a size suitable to be affixed to a collar worn by the
registered animal. Registration tags shall be varied either in color or in
shape from registration period to registration period so that tags issued for a
registration period may be readily distinguished from tags issued for prior
periods in near proximity of time.
   (B)   Duplicate registration tags shall be issued by the authorized agent of
Macon County Animal Control in the event the original tag is lost or destroyed,
upon presentation of evidence or the prior payment of registration fee, unless
exempt, for the animal for the current registration period along with an
application for such duplicate registration tag and the payment of a fee
equivalent to the cost for the duplicate tag.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.19 NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   Neither registration certificates nor registration tags shall be
transferable. There shall be no refund for any reason of registration fee.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.20 IMPOUNDING.
   Any animal running at large at any time contrary to the provisions of this
chapter may be taken up and impounded as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/9
§ 96.21 REDEMPTION BY PERSON OTHER THAN OWNER.
   Upon expiration of seven days from the date of impoundment, an unclaimed dog
or cat, which has been deemed suitable for adoption by the Animal Control
Officer or Administrator, may be adopted by any person other than the owner
upon payment of the adoption fee and approved application. If no placement is
available or the animal is deemed unadoptable, it shall be humanely dispatched
pursuant to the Humane Euthanasia in Animal Shelters Act.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 510 ILCS 5/11
§ 96.22 DISEASED OR INJURED ANIMALS.
   Any animal which does not exhibit a valid vaccination, registration tag or
current microchip and which reveals the symptoms of an injury or disease,
clearly not those of rabies, as determined by the administrator or his/her
designated agent, may be subjected to disposal at the earliest possible time by
Macon County Animal Control personnel. Animals with a known or incapacitated
owner will be transported to a Veterinarian of Animal Control's choice for
recommendation of treatment. Any expense incurred during the period of
impoundment, including veterinary bills, shall be paid by the owner prior to
release of the impounded animal.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.23 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ACCIDENT OR DISEASE TO ANY DOG
OR CAT.
   The Administrator, manager, Animal Control Wardens or anyone enforcing the
provisions of this chapter shall not be held responsible for any accident or
disease that may happen to any dog or cat.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.24 MULTIPLE-PET LICENSE AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Multiple-pet owners shall obtain an annual license from the county.
Such license shall be obtained no later than 30 days after assuming ownership
of an eighth animal and shall be renewed annually by January 1. The multiple-
pet license shall not exempt such licensee from payment of county registration
fees for each dog or cat owned by him/her.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to persons licensed with The Illinois
Department of Agriculture pursuant to 225 ILCS 605/3 and 225 ILCS 605/3.2.
These persons will still be required to comply with all other county
ordinances.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.25 MULTIPLE PET-OWNER LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.
   An applicant for a multiple-pet license shall consent to the inspection of
the premises where his animals are kept or maintained. Such inspection shall be
performed upon receipt of a citizen's complaint that is not anonymous. Annual
inspections may be required for multiple-pet owners where an inspection has
shown marginally acceptable standards. Such inspection may be performed by
Macon County Animal Control. Failure to comply with a request for inspection is
a violation of this chapter. Holders of multiple-pet licenses shall conform to
the following requirements:
   (A)   All dogs and/or cats over four months of age must be inoculated
against rabies and registered pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   All dogs and/or cats must be provided with a fresh water daily,
sufficient food to maintain acceptable body weight, proper shelter, protection
from the weather and sufficient veterinary care to prevent suffering.
   (C)   If the dogs and/or cats are kept or maintained within a structure or
building, such building shall:
      (1)   Be cleaned of feces and urine on a daily basis;
      (2)   Not constitute a nuisance or danger to the health or welfare of its
inhabitants nor surrounding residents; and
      (3)   Be well ventilated and maintain appropriate temperature (follow
USDA guidelines) to prevent suffering.
   (D)   The dogs and/or cats shall be prevented from running at large.
   (E)   The dogs and/or cats shall be prevented from causing a nuisance
pursuant to county ordinance.
   (F)   The owner's property shall be kept free of all feces and urine to
prevent its accumulation from constituting a health hazard or an odorous
nuisance.
   (G)   The applicant shall not have been convicted of or received supervision
or conditional discharge through an agreement with the States Attorney's Office
of any violation of the Animal Control or Humane Care for Animals Act within
the previous two years from the date of application.
   (H)   The owner shall immediately notify the Animal Control Administrator of
any change in the animals governed by the multiple-pet license including the
rabies vaccination and registration required pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.26 REVOCATION OF MULTIPLE-PET LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon conviction of a violation of the Animal Control or Humane Care
for Animals Act, the Administrator shall revoke the multiple-pet license for a
period of not more than five years, the length of the revocation period to be
determined by the number and severity of the violations. After expiration of
the revocation period, the license shall not be automatically reinstated. The
former licensee must reapply for the license and show an ability to conform to
the existing ordinances before he or she may be issued a multiple-pet license
and must submit to yearly inspections.
   (B)   Upon revocation of the license, the owner shall relinquish ownership
of his/her animals to the Administrator.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.27 IMPOUNDMENT OF MULTIPLE PETS.
   (A)   The Administrator may impound the dogs and/or cats of any multiple-pet
owner if such owner does not hold a multiple-pet license.
   (B)   Such animals shall be redeemed by the owner upon payment to the
Administrator the lawful fees accrued pursuant to this chapter and after
application and approval for a multiple-pet owner license.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.28 BREEDER'S PERMIT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any person breeding dogs or cats must obtain a breeder's permit. With
this permit an owner will be allowed to breed the female animal once a year.
The female animal will be required to have current vaccinations and be proven
to be in good health prior to the breeding. All puppies or kittens will be
required to be at least eight weeks of age and must have had their first set of
vaccinations before being transferred to their new owner. A copy of the
animal's vaccination record and breeder's permit number shall be given to the
new owner of the animal. The breeder's permit number must be included in any
and all advertising for the puppies or kittens.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to persons licensed with the Illinois
Department of Agriculture pursuant to 225 ILCS 605/3 and 510 ILCS 5/2.18. These
persons will still be required to comply with all other county ordinances.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.29 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of Macon County Animal Control, and other persons
so authorized by the county, by contract or otherwise, to investigate
violations of this chapter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such
enforcement shall include the issuance of warnings, the issuance of citations,
taking and impounding of animals in violation hereof, and any other means
necessary to enforce and effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall in any way interfere, attempt to interfere, or cause
another person or animal to interfere or attempt to interfere with any
authorized person engaged in the performance of his or her duties under this
chapter.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.30 CITATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer or other person duly authorized by the
county to enforce this chapter witnesses or has knowledge, based on reasonable
grounds, of a violation by any person of any section of this chapter, such
person may be issued a citation for said violation by the Animal Control Warden
or other person duly authorized by the county to enforce this chapter.
   (B)   A citation issued hereunder shall be in writing and shall:
      (1)   State the name of the person being cited, and said person's
address, if known;
      (2)   Set forth the specific section of this chapter that was violated,
the date of the violation, and a brief description of the violation;
      (3)   State the amount to be paid to the county due to such violation,
and where and when such payment may be made;
      (4)   State that upon failure to pay the amount of the citations in the
time allowed as herein provided, said person will be subject to prosecution by
the county for such violation; and
      (5)   Be signed by the issuing Animal Control Warden or other person duly
authorized by the county to enforce this chapter.
   (C)   Citations shall be in the following amounts:
      (1)   Seventy-five dollars for the first violation.
      (2)   One hundred fifty dollars for the second violation.
      (3)   Two hundred fifty dollars for third and subsequent violations.
   (D)   Macon County Animal Control reserves the right to issue warnings,
citations, education and/or to impound animals.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.31 PAYMENT OF CITATIONS.
   (A)   A person cited for a violation of any section of this chapter as
herein provided may terminate any further proceedings by the county due to said
violations by making payment to the county at the office of the Macon County
Animal Control or its authorized agent in the amount of the citation. Payment
will be considered as being made only when the Macon County Animal Control or
its authorized agent is in receipt of the full amount. If a person is cited for
more than one violation of this chapter on a single citation, the amount must
be paid for each violation listed in order to terminate any further
proceedings.
   (B)   If a person is given a citation for a violation as herein provided, no
complaint may be filed by any attorney on behalf of the county in any court
having jurisdiction thereof seeking to prosecute and fine such person for said
violation sooner than 30 days after such citation is issued, and no such
complaint may be filed if the citation is timely paid.
   (C)   The Macon County Animal Control may accept payment of a citation
issued hereunder tendered after the thirty-day period provided for herein, and
upon such acceptance no prosecution for the violation may be filed or pursued
by the county.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
hereof, shall, upon conviction be fined not less than $75 nor more than $500
for each offense, and every day on which a violation occurs or continues shall
be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. O-67-6-07, passed 4-9-2009)
CHAPTER 97: FIREWORKS
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Applicability
   
97.03   Sale/use prohibited; exceptions
   
97.04   Public display permit; application for permits
   
97.05   Pyrotechnic display permit
   
97.06   Consumer fireworks display permit
   
97.07   Disposal of unfired fireworks
   
97.08   Duties of fire official
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
company, consortium, joint venture, not for profit, government, or commercial
entity making application for a pyrotechnic display.
   ASSISTANT. An on-site individual who is at least 18 years of age and who,
under the supervision of the lead operator, assists with the safety, setup and
discharge of a pyrotechnic display.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks that must comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Products
Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and classified
as fireworks UN0336 (1.4G) or UN0337 (1.4S); by the United States Department of
Transportation under 49 CFR 172.101. CONSUMER FIREWORKS shall not include snake
or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as “party
poppers”, “booby traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads”, and
“auto burglar alarms”; sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps containing 0.25 grains or less of
explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than 0.20 grains of explosive
mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY or CONSUMER DISPLAY. The detonation, ignition, or
deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
   DISCHARGE SITE. The immediate area surrounding the fireworks mortars.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further defined
in the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act of Illinois.
   DISPLAY SITE. The immediate area where a fireworks display is conducted and
includes the discharge site, the fallout area, and the required separation
distance from the mortars to spectator viewing areas.
   FALLOUT AREA. The areas over which aerial shells are fired and is the
location where a typical aerial shell dud falls to the ground depending on the
wind and the angle or mortar placement.
   FLAME EFFECT. The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable gases,
liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual, or
audible effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether
admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic Operator
Licensing Act of Illinois.
   LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR. An individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup, and discharge of the pyrotechnic display and who is licensed pursuant to
the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act of Illinois.
   1.3G FIREWORKS. Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UN0333 (1.1G), UN0334 (1.2G), or UN0335 (1.3G) by the
United States Department of Transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
   OWNER. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, not for profit, government, or commercial entity who
owns the property on which a pyrotechnic display will be held.
   PERMITTEE. Any person that is granted the appropriate permit under the
provisions of this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, state, municipality, or political
subdivision of a state or any agency, department, or instrumentality of the
United States and any officer, agent, or employee of these entities.
   PUBLIC DISPLAY. A consumer fireworks display and/or a pyrotechnic display.
   PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY. The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic
Distributor and Operator Licensing Act of Illinois. PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS may
include consumer fireworks.
   PYROTECHNIC DISTRIBUTOR. Any person, company, association, group of persons,
or corporation who distributes display fireworks for sale in the State of
Illinois or provides them as part of a pyrotechnic display service in the State
of Illinois or provides only pyrotechnic services.
   SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS. Pyrotechnic devices used for special effects by
professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical,
or other productions that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical
compositions and construction, but are not intended for consumer use and are
not labeled as such or identified as “intended for indoor use”. SPECIAL EFFECTS
FIREWORKS are classified as fireworks UN0431 (1.4G) or UN0432 (1.4S) by the
United States Department of Transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
(Ord. 0-1-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Res. G-34-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. O-151-
05-24, passed 5-9-2024)
§ 97.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter with respect to fireworks display are
applicable to sites located within Macon County but outside the corporate
limits of any and all cities, villages, and incorporated towns within the
county.
   (B)   The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the jurisdiction.
(Ord. 0-1-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Res. G-34-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. O-151-
05-24, passed 5-9-2024)
§ 97.03 SALE/USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   Except as provided in this chapter and approved by the county as evidenced
by the granting of an appropriate permit, it shall be unlawful for any person
to knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, use,
explode, or cause the explosion of, any fireworks unless otherwise permitted by
state law.
(Ord. 0-1-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Res. G-34-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. O-151-
05-24, passed 5-9-2024)
§ 97.04 PUBLIC DISPLAY PERMIT; APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   The county is authorized and empowered to grant and issue a permit for
a public display upon compliance with the conditions set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The applicant must meet all requirements of state law for the
conducting of a public display.
   (C)   Application for permits shall be made in writing at least 15 days in
advance of the date of the display or discharge of fireworks. The sale,
possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful
under the terms and conditions approved with the permit and for that purpose
only. A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable, nor shall any such
permit be extended beyond the dates set out therein.
   (D)   The County Clerk, or his or her duly authorized representative, shall
ascertain the qualifications of the person identified in the application to
conduct a public display, and shall make a determination of whether or not the
person identified in the application meet the requirements of this chapter and
of state law.
   (E)   The County Clerk, or his or her duly authorized representative, shall
prepare and make available such applications as are necessary to obtain a
permit under this chapter.
   (F)   The County Clerk shall adopt a reasonable fee for the processing of an
application; such fee shall only take into consideration the administrative
burden on the County Clerk’s Office which is fairly traceable to the
requirements of this chapter. The fee shall not be arbitrarily or capriciously
modified. The fee must be paid by the applicant upon submission of the
application to the County Clerk for processing.
   (G)   The County Clerk shall maintain a copy of each permit issued pursuant
to this chapter in a manner that complies with the Local Records Act, 50 ILCS
205/1 et seq., including any regulations promulgated thereunder. Any reports of
fire, injury, property damage, theft or loss of fireworks that are submitted to
the county shall be maintained with a copy of the permit.
(Ord. 0-1-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Res. G-34-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. O-151-
05-24, passed 5-9-2024)
§ 97.05 PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY PERMIT.
   (A)   At the time of filing an application for a pyrotechnic display permit
and upon the payment of all applicable permit fees, the applicant must produce
all of the following:
      (1)   The applicant seeking the pyrotechnic display permit must provide
proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than $1,000,000 to the county.
The insurance must be issued by a solvent and responsible company authorized to
do business in the state, shall be an occurrence-based policy, and it shall
cover all periods of time when pyrotechnic materials, including flame effect
materials, are in the insured’s actual or constructive possession, including
those times when the materials are being stored, transported, handled, used,
discharged and displayed;
      (2)   Identification information for the lead pyrotechnic operator for
the pyrotechnic display and a copy of that person’s license from OSFM; and
      (3)   Identification information for all assistants to the lead
pyrotechnic operator sufficient to enable the county to confirm that each such
individual is at least 18 years of age.
   (B)   A permit for a pyrotechnic display may be issued only after the Chief
of the Fire Protection District providing fire protection coverage to the site
of the proposed pyrotechnic display, or his or her designee, has inspected the
site and determined that the proposed pyrotechnic display can be performed in
full compliance with the rules adopted by OSFM.
   (C)   When the application has been approved, the permit shall be signed by
the County Clerk or his or her designee. The permit must also be signed by the
Fire Chief providing fire protection coverage to the site where the pyrotechnic
display is to be conducted. Any permit not bearing either required signature is
not valid.
   (D)   The issued permit shall state the place of the pyrotechnic display and
the exact time and date of the pyrotechnic display. After the permit is
granted, the sale, possession, use, and distribution of fireworks for a
pyrotechnic display shall be lawful for that purpose only and shall further be
lawful for display only on the date and time and at the place stated in the
permit. Such permit shall not be transferable for any purpose.
   (E)   The permit, when issued, shall name the person designated to serve as
the lead pyrotechnic operator. The lead pyrotechnic operator must be in
possession of, and be able to produce, his or her license upon request at all
times during the delivery, setup, and performance of the pyrotechnic display.
   (F)   No individual may serve as an assistant in a pyrotechnic display
unless his or her name and other identification information was submitted to
the county with the initial application.
(Ord. 0-1-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Res. G-34-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. O-151-
05-24, passed 5-9-2024)
§ 97.06 CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY PERMIT.
   (A)   At the time of filing an application for a consumer fireworks display
permit and upon the payment of all applicable permit fees, the applicant must
produce all of the following:
      (1)   The applicant seeking the consumer fireworks display permit must
provide proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than $1,000,000 to the
county. The insurance must be issued by a solvent and responsible company
authorized to do business in the state, shall be an occurrence-based policy,
and it shall cover all periods of time when pyrotechnic materials, including
flame effect materials, are in the insured’s actual or constructive possession,
including those times when the materials are being stored, transported,
handled, used, discharged and displayed;
      (2)   A certificate of training demonstrating successful completion of a
consumer fireworks training class approved by the State Fire Marshal;
      (3)   Identification information for the consumer operator and all
assistants.
   (G)   A permit for consumer fireworks display may be issued only after the
Chief of the Fire Department providing fire protection coverage to the site of
the proposed consumer fireworks display, or his or her designee, has inspected
the site and determined that the proposed consumer fireworks display can be
performed in full compliance with the rules adopted by OSFM.
   (H)   When the application has been approved, the permit shall be signed by
the County Clerk or his or her designee. The permit must also be signed by the
Fire Chief providing fire protection coverage to the site where the consumer
fireworks display is to be conducted. Any permit not bearing either required
signature is not valid.
   (I)   The issued permit shall state the place of the consumer fireworks
display and the exact time and date of the consumer fireworks display. After
the permit is granted, the sale, possession, use, and distribution of fireworks
for a consumer fireworks display shall be lawful for that purpose only and
shall further be lawful for display only on the date and time and at the place
stated in the permit. The permit shall not be transferable for any purpose.
   (J)   The location that a consumer fireworks display will be performed must
be at least 200 feet in all directions from any spectators, buildings,
structures or property lines, and must be free of any overhead obstructions. A
fire extinguisher or water hose must be present while consumer fireworks are
being prepared for firing or fired.
   (K)   All fireworks used in a consumer fireworks display shall be purchased
or otherwise obtained by the permittee from a lawfully operating consumer
fireworks distributor or consumer fireworks retailer, in accordance with state
law.
(Ord. 0-1-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Res. G-34-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. O-151-
05-24, passed 5-9-2024)
§ 97.07 DISPOSAL OF UNFIRED FIREWORKS.
   Unfired fireworks and trash that remains after the display is concluded
shall be immediately disposed of in a safe manner approved by the fire
official.
(Ord. 0-1-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Res. G-34-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. O-151-
05-24, passed 5-9-2024)
§ 97.08 DUTIES OF FIRE OFFICIAL.
   The fire official shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for display or
sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 0-1-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Res. G-34-6-83, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. O-151-
05-24, passed 5-9-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSING
      
111.   (RESERVED)
      
112.   BODY ART
      
113.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
      
114.   LIQUOR SALES
      
115.   RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS
      
116.   MOBILE FOOD UNITS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
Temporary Entertainment or Recreational Events
   
110.01   Purpose
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Licenses
   
110.04   Application for license
   
110.05   Review of applications
   
110.06   Enforcement
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Raffles and poker runs, see
Chapter 115
TEMPORARY ENTERTAINMENT OR RECREATIONAL EVENTS
§ 110.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote and protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the patrons of the entertainment or recreational event,
of the residents in the surrounding vicinity, and of persons traveling in the
vicinity. To promote this purpose, this subchapter shall provide reasonable
rules governing the location, establishment, construction, and operation of
temporary entertainment or recreational events.
(Ord. O-8-8-85, passed 8-13-1985)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENTERTAINMENT OR RECREATIONAL EVENT. Any event held on private property
which is open to the general public, with or without an admission fee, whether
for profit or not for profit, where patrons attend for social or pleasure
rather than business reasons. This definition shall specifically exclude
church-sponsored events held on church property, any event held at a site which
is already licensed through the county zoning ordinance for the type of
entertainment or recreational event proposed, and events which are expected to
attract 100 or fewer patrons.
   TEMPORARY EVENT. One which is limited to a maximum of 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. O-8-8-85, passed 8-13-1985)
§ 110.03 LICENSES.
   (A)   Before any temporary entertainment or recreational event may be held,
a county license for the event must be applied for and issued by the
Chairperson of the County Board. The Chairperson of the County Board shall have
the authority to issue licenses, to order reviews and hearings, to order
inspections, and to revoke licenses. The County Board Chairperson shall have 30
days to review any application for a license under this subchapter. If the
Chairperson fails to make a decision within this 30-day period, the application
shall be deemed approved as applied for. Anyone wishing to obtain a license
should apply well in advance of the proposed date of the event to allow for
this 30-day review period.
   (B)   A license issued hereunder is a personal license and is not
transferable.
   (C)   A license shall be valid only for the event specified, on the date(s)
and at the times specified, and at the location specified in the license.
   (D)   A license will also specify all stipulations which have been placed on
the operation of the proposed entertainment or recreational event, and which
must be adhered to during the entire length of the temporary event. These
stipulations are intended to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the
general public and shall be designed on a case-by-case basis, based upon the
circumstances of the particular event proposed.
   (E)   The Chairperson of the County Board may require that the operation of
the temporary event be inspected periodically to ensure that the operation
meets all of the requirements and stipulations specified in the license.
   (F)   An existing license may be revoked if an inspection reveals that any
provision of the license is being violated, or if it is found that the license
was issued based on incomplete or inaccurate information, or if it becomes
necessary to stop the operation of the temporary event in order to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
(Ord. O-8-8-85, passed 8-13-1985) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   A filing fee of $75 shall be required to be paid at the time an
application for a license is filed. Any person, organization, corporation, and
the like wishing to obtain a license for a temporary entertainment or
recreational event must first file an application with the Chairperson of the
County Board. No specific format for the application is required, but the
application must contain at a minimum sufficient information in the following
areas (where applicable) to allow a reasonable determination to be made:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of all persons, organizations,
corporations, and the like sponsoring or organizing the proposed event;
      (2)   Type of event, location, date(s), and times/hours or operation
proposed;
      (3)   Number of persons expected to attend the proposed event, the
maximum number of people that could attend (where applicable), and the method
used in arriving at these figures;
      (4)   Provisions proposed for parking, traffic control, security, and
crowd control;
      (5)   Provisions proposed for supplying adequate safe drinking water and
toilet facilities;
      (6)   Provisions proposed for emergency medical needs;
      (7)   Provisions proposed to ensure compliance with all state and local
fire, health, and safety codes; and
      (8)   Provisions proposed for insurance or bonding to be held by the
applicant.
   (B)   Where applicable, the applicant must also show that all other required
state or local permits have been applied for.
   (C)   If the information provided is determined to be insufficient, then the
Chairperson of the County Board may require that the applicant supply more
information so that a reasonable determination can be made concerning the
proposed temporary event.
(Ord. O-8-8-85, passed 8-13-1985)
§ 110.05 REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the Chairperson of the County Board
shall direct the Environment, Education, Health, and Welfare Committee of the
County Board to review the application and to make a recommendation. The
Committee shall have the authority to waive the license or filing fee on a
case-by-case basis.
   (B)   The Committee will review the application in an open, public meeting
at which all interested parties will be permitted to make statements for or
against the proposed event.
   (C)   (1)   The Committee may require, where appropriate, that the
application be reviewed by other agencies, such as County Health Department,
County Highway Department, County Sheriff’s Office, County Planning and Zoning
Department, and any adjacent municipality or governmental district.
      (2)   The opinions and recommendations of any outside agency will be used
by the Committee in making its findings and recommendations to the Chairperson
of the County Board, but shall not be considered to permit or to veto any
proposed temporary event.
(Ord. O-8-8-85, passed 8-13-1985)
§ 110.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Chairperson of the County Board is authorized to request the
State’s Attorney for the county to institute civil action for injunction to
restrain any person, organization, corporation, and the like from operating or
holding a temporary entertainment or recreational event who does not have a
valid license as required by this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   Applicants shall give bond in an amount with surety as approved
by the Chairperson of the County Board to ensure faithful performance of
obligations under the terms, of this subchapter, including but not limited to
damages to and expense of restoration of public property.
      (2)   Applicants shall also provide a certificate of insurance naming the
county as insured with respect to proposed activities in form and amount
approved by the Board Chairperson.
(Ord. O-8-8-85, passed 8-13-1985) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, organization, corporation, and the like who violates any
provision of §§
110.01 through
110.06 shall be prosecuted in accordance with provisions of the state in any
court of competent jurisdiction and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
the sum of $500 or imprisonment in a penal institution other than the
penitentiary for a period of six months or both the fine and imprisonment. Each
day of violation of the provisions of §§
110.01 through
110.06 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. O-8-8-85, passed 8-13-1985)
CHAPTER 111: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 112: BODY ART
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Applicable rules and regulations; adoption of state law
   
112.02   Definitions
Permits
   
112.15   Body art practitioner permit requirements
   
112.16   Exemptions
   
112.17   Permit fees
   
112.18   Suspension or revocation of permits
Standards of Operation
   
112.30   Prohibitions
   
112.31   Body suspensions
   
112.32   Client records
   
112.33   Records retention
   
112.34   Body fluid precautions
   
112.35   Diseases
   
112.36   Preparation of skin and aftercare
   
112.37   Equipment sanitation and sterilization
   
112.38   Sanitary facilities
   
112.39   Premises
   
112.40   Construction and remodeling
Administration and Enforcement
   
112.50   Inspections
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS; ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   (A)   Body art establishments and body art practitioners practicing within
the boundaries of Macon County, Illinois are subject to the rules and
regulations set forth by this chapter, Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment
Registration Act (410 ILCS 54/1), and the Illinois Department of Public Health
Body Art Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code, § 797.100). This chapter is enacted to
establish standards to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
people of the county through regulation of persons owning body art
establishments, individuals performing body art procedures, and establishments
where body art procedures are performed.
   (B)   In addition to those provisions set forth herein, this chapter hereby
adopts by reference the current edition and any and all subsequent revisions of
the Illinois Department of Public Health Body Art Code.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFTERCARE. Written instructions given to the client, specific to the body
art procedure(s) rendered, on caring for the body art and surrounding area.
These instructions will include information when to seek medical treatment, if
necessary.
   ANTISEPTIC. An agent that reduces disease-causing microorganisms on human
skin or mucosa.
   APPRENTICE. An individual who works under the supervision of a body artist
and performs body art activities.
   AUTOCLAVE. An apparatus that is registered and listed with the federal Food
and Drug Administration for sterilizing articles by using superheated steam
under pressure.
   BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD. The Macon County Board of Health.
   BODY ART.  The practice of physical body adornment by permitted
establishments and practitioners utilizing, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, and branding. This
definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by
the Illinois State Medical Board, such as implants requiring the use of a
scalpel, or scarification, and shall not be performed in a body art
establishment. Nor does this definition include, for the purposes of this code,
piercing of the non-cartilaginous portion of the ear using pre-sterilized
single use stud and clasp ear piercing system, or any other portion of the
body.
   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT. A body-piercing operation, a tattooing operation,
body modification establishment or a combination of all operations in a
multiple-type establishment, whether public or private, permanent in nature and
location, whether profit or not for profit.
   BODY ART PRACTITIONER or PRACTITIONER. A specifically identified individual
who has been granted a permit by the Board of Health to perform body art in an
establishment that has been granted a permit by the Illinois Department of
Public Health. The Body Art Practitioner shall be a person who controls,
operates, manages, conducts, or practices body art activities at a body art
establishment and who is responsible for compliance with these regulations,
whether actually performing body art activities or not.
   BODY ART PRACTITIONER PERMIT or PRACTITIONER PERMIT. Written approval by the
Department to practice in a body art establishment, conditional upon
maintaining compliance with this Ordinance.
   BODY PIERCING. Puncturing or penetration of the skin of a person using pre-
sterilized single use needles and the insertion of pre-sterilized single use
needles and the insertion of pre-sterilized jewelry or other adornment thereto
in the opening. Puncturing the non-cartilaginous portion of the ear using a
pre-sterilized single use stud and clasp ear piercing system shall not be
included in this definition.
   BODY SUSPENSION. The act of hanging, or the state of being hung, by
piercings in the body. All suspensions must follow the specific guidelines laid
forth in this chapter.
   BRANDING. Inducing a pattern of scar tissue by use of a heated material
(usually metal) to the skin, making a serious burn, which eventually becomes a
scar.
   CONTAMINATED WASTE. Any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially
infectious materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other
potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if
compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially
infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during
handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood and other potentially
infectious materials, as defined in 29 C.F.R. part 1910.1030 (latest edition),
known as “Occupational Exposure to Blood-Borne Pathogens.”
   COSMETIC TATTOOING. The introduction of permanent or semipermanent pigment
in/under the skin or mucosa by the aid of any instrument that penetrates the
skin. See also “tattooing.”
   DEPARTMENT. The Macon County Health Department.
   DERMAL IMPLANT. The insertion of an object under the skin for ornamentation
or decoration.
   DISINFECTION or DISINFECT. A process that provides an effective
concentration of a United States Environmental Protection Agency registered
chemical for enough contact time as specified by the manufacturer to reduce
bacterial count, including pathogens, to a safe level (when disease organisms
that may be present are destroyed so as to prevent transfer) on equipment
surfaces and in toilet and hand-washing facilities.
   EAR PIERCING. The puncturing of the non-cartilaginous portion of the ear
using a pre-sterilized single use stud and clasp ear piercing system following
manufacturer’s instructions.
   EQUIPMENT. All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other
apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body art
establishment.
   HAND SINK. A basin equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure,
used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body, activated
by hands-free means; hand sink must be positioned within the proximity of
procedural areas and cannot be located in the lavatory.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Administrator of the County Health Department or his or
her authorized representative.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. Any hazard to the public health when the evidence
shows that a product or practice creates or may create a public health
situation, including, but not limited to, a lack of water or electricity, lack
of sterilization, infections that are epidemiologically associated with a body
art establishment, or the occurrence of a single case of a life-threatening
illness that is epidemiologically associated with a body art establishment.
   INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART. Hand pieces, needles, needle bars, and other
instruments that may come in contact with a client’s body or possible exposure
to bodily fluids during body art procedures.
   JEWELRY. Any personal ornament inserted into a newly pierced area; ornament
must be made of surgical implant grade materials per manufacturer’s
recommendations; ornaments shall be free of nicks, scratches, or irregular
surfaces and properly sterilized prior to use.
   LIQUID CHEMICAL GERMICIDE. A disinfectant or sanitizer registered with the
Environmental Protection Agency or an approximate 1:100 dilution of household
chlorine bleach made fresh daily and dispensed from a spray bottle (500ppm, 1/
4 cup/gal. or 2 tablespoons/quart of tap water).
   MICRODERMALS and/or SINGLE POINT PIERCING. Piercings that only penetrate the
skin once. A single point perforation on any body part for the purpose of
inserting an anchor with a step either protruding or flush with the skin. The
use of dermal punches for this modification is prohibited.
   PERSON. An individual, any form of business or social organization or any
other non-governmental legal entity including but not limited to a corporation,
partnership, firm, limited liability company, association, trust, or
unincorporated organization.
   PHYSICIAN. A person licensed under the Medical Practice Act of 1987 [225
ILCS 60/1 et seq.] to practice medicine in all of its branches, which may
include areas such as dentistry, osteopathy, or acupuncture.
   PROCEDURE SURFACE. Any surface of a work area, including, but not limited
to, the procedure chair that comes into contact with the client’s body during a
body art procedure, skin preparation of the area adjacent to and including the
body art procedure, or any associated work area that may require disinfecting.
   SANITIZE/SANITIZATION PROCEDURE. A process of reducing the numbers of
microorganisms on cleaned surfaces and equipment to a safe level as judged by
public health standards and which the Department has approved.
   SHARPS. Any object (sterile or contaminated) that may purposefully or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa including, but not limited to,
pre-sterilized, single use needles, scalpel blades, and razor blades.
   SHARPS CONTAINER. A puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be
closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and is labeled with
the International Biohazard Symbol.
   SINGLE USE. Products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person,
and are disposed of after use on each client including, but not limited to,
cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze
and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink
cups, and protective gloves.
   SKIN REMOVAL and/or SCARIFICATION. To create a design on the skin by means
of shallow cuts or skin removal that are sometimes rubbed with a colorant or
irritant to enhance the resulting scar tissue. This definition includes shading
or ashing of these areas.
   STERILIZATION. A process resulting in the destruction of all forms of
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial spores.
   TATTOOING. Any method of placing ink or other pigment into the skin or
mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin,
resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This term includes all
forms of cosmetic tattooing.
   UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS. A set of guidelines and controls, published by the
CDC, as “Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency
Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers” in
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MM WR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6,
and as “Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human  Immunodeficiency
Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Expo sure-Prone Invasive
Procedures” in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of infection
control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood
and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood
pathogens. Precautions include hand washing; gloving; personal protective
equipment; injury prevention; and proper handling and disposal of needles,
other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid-contaminated products.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
PERMITS
§ 112.15 BODY ART PRACTITIONER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall practice body art procedures in the county without
first obtaining a body art practitioner permit from the County Health
Department. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter
shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit.
   (B)   The body art practitioner permit must be renewed annually.
   (C)   The body art practitioner permits for all body art practitioners,
including all body art apprentices, working at a body art establishment, must
be posted so as to be clearly visible to all clients. A valid permit is one
that is not suspended, revoked, or expired.
   (D)   Any person desiring to obtain a body art practitioner permit shall
make written application on forms provided by the Department. Applications for
body art practitioner permits shall include:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Date of birth:
      (3)   Sex;
      (4)   Residence address;
      (5)   Mailing address;
      (6)   Phone number:
      (7)   Place(s) of employment as an operator:
      (8)   Training and/or experience;
      (9)   Proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen-training program
approved by the Department; and
      (10)   Copy of signed declaration or record of Hepatitis B series.
   (E)   Examples of courses approved by the Department would include such
courses as Preventing Disease Transmission (American Red Cross) and Blood-Borne
Pathogen Training (US OSHA). Training/courses provided by professional body art
organizations/associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted
to the Department for approval.
   (F)   (1)   Applicants shall possess knowledge of the following subjects:
         (a)   Anatomy;
         (b)   Skin diseases, disorders, and conditions (including diabetes);
         (c)   Infectious disease control including waste disposal, hand
washing techniques, sterilization equipment operation and methods, and
sanitization/disinfection/sterilization methods and techniques.
      (2)   Evidence that a body art practitioner possesses knowledge of the
above subjects may be demonstrated through submission of documentation of
attendance/completion of courses approved by the Department.
   (G)   No body art practitioner permit shall be issued unless, following
reasonable investigation by the Department, the body art practitioner has
demonstrated compliance with the provisions of this section and all other
provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   All body art practitioner permits shall be conditional upon continued
compliance with the provisions of this section as well as all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.16 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Physicians, physician assistants, and advanced practice nurses
licensed by the Illinois State Medical Board are exempt from these regulations.
   (B)   Individuals who pierce only the non-cartilaginous portion of the ear
using a pre-sterilized single use stud and clasp ear piercing system are exempt
from these regulations. Under no circumstances shall ear piercing studs and
clasps be used anywhere on the body other than the non-cartilaginous portion of
ear. Individuals who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the
manufacturer’s directions on use and applicable U.S. Food and Drug
Administration requirements. The County Health Department retains authority to
investigate consumer complaints relating to alleged misuse or improper
disinfection of ear piercing systems.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-15) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.17 PERMIT FEES.
   The County Health Department shall collect reasonable fees in connection
with the administration of this chapter.
   (A)   The fees for the body art practitioner permits shall be established by
the Department and may be increased whenever deemed necessary. The current fee
schedule will be available from the Department upon request.
   (B)   Permit fees shall be non-refundable once the Department has issued a
permit.
   (C)   All permit fees for the renewal of permits are due by December 31 of
each calendar year.
   (D)   Persons failing to submit the fee and renewal application by the above
stated renewal due date shall be assessed a late payment penalty fee of $50 in
addition to the permit fee.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 112.18 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)    Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended
by the Health Officer upon notice to the permit holder of same. Reasons for
suspending the permit include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter after
notification by the Health Officer;
      (3)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter within the
time established by the Health Officer;
      (4)   Interference with the Health Officer in the performance of his
duties, including, but not limited to, failure to allow the Health Officer
access to the permit holder’s building or records;
      (5)   Failure to update the original and renewal applications, as
required by this chapter;
      (6)   Knowingly furnishing false information on the original or renewal
applications; or
      (7)   Conducting procedures without prior approval, given by the
Department.
   (B)   Upon making a determination that a suspension is appropriate, the
Health Officer shall advise the permit holder in writing of the intended
suspension. The notice shall be delivered in person by the Health Officer or
sent via certified mail to the address of record on the permit. Within five
working days after receiving the notice of suspension, the permit holder may
make a written request for a hearing with the Health Officer. Failure to
request a hearing with five working days shall be construed as a waiver of a
right to a hearing. Upon receipt of the request for a hearing, a hearing shall
be conducted pursuant to § 5.7.
   (C)   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended
by the Health Officer without notice to the permit holder when, in the judgment
of the Health Officer, a condition exists that will result in an imminent
health hazard to the public.
   (D)   (1)   Upon making a determination that a suspension without notice is
appropriate, the Health Officer shall immediately, without warning or notice,
advise the permit holder of said condition and all body art operations shall be
immediately discontinued.
      (2)   If a suspension is ordered pursuant to division (C) above, the
practitioner or establishment may request a hearing within five working days of
the suspension taking effect. Upon receipt of the request for a hearing, a
hearing shall be conducted pursuant to division (G) below. If no request for
hearing is made within five working days of the suspension taking effect, the
practitioner/establishment shall be deemed to have waived any right to a post-
suspension hearing.
   (E)   Permit revocation. Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter
may be revoked by the Health Officer upon notice to the permit holder of same.
Reasons for revoking the permit include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Repeated failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Interference with the Health Officer in the performance of his or
her duties, including, but not limited to, failure to allow the Health Officer
access to the permit holder’s building or records;
      (3)   Failure to update the original and renewal applications, as
required by this chapter;
      (4)   Knowingly furnishing false information on the original or renewal
applications;
      (5)   Failure to apply for re-inspection within 30 days of the end of a
suspension period imposed for violations any of the provisions of this chapter;
and,
   (F)   Upon determining that a revocation is appropriate, the Health Officer
shall advise the permit holder in writing of the intended revocation. The
notice shall be delivered in person by the Health Officer or sent via certified
mail to the address of record on the permit. Within five working days after
receipt of the notice of revocation, the permit holder may make a written
request for a hearing within five working days with the Health Officer before
imposition of the revocation. Failure to request a hearing with five working
days shall be construed as a waiver of a right to a hearing.
   (G)   Hearings held pursuant this section shall be held within ten working
days after receipt of the request for hearing. Such hearings shall occur at the
Macon County Health Department before the Macon County Board of Health. The
Board of Health shall receive evidence from the Health Officer and from the
requester, if the requester chooses to present evidence. Upon a finding that
the Health Officer has proved, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
establishment or practitioner is in violation of this chapter, the Board shall
affirm the suspension of revocation, or it may modify the terms of said
suspension or revocation as it deem necessary to promote the public safety and
welfare.
   (H)   Notices sent via certified mail to the address of record on the permit
shall be considered received by the permit holder as of the second business day
following placement in the mail. For example, if the notice is placed in the
mail on Monday, it will be deemed received by the permit holder on Wednesday.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
STANDARDS OF OPERATION
§ 112.30 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No mobile, temporary, or transient body art establishment shall
operate in the county, except with written permission from the County Board of
Health.
   (B)   No person, other than a physician, shall perform any tattooing
procedure upon a person under the age of 18 [720 ILCS 5/12-10]. Age
verification shall be obtained by government issued identification containing a
birth date and photograph.
   (C)   No person shall perform any body piercing procedure upon a person
under the age of 18 without the parent or legal guardian signing a consent form
in the presence of a practitioner. The consent form shall indicate that the
parent or legal guardian has read and understood the disclosure warning
statement required under § 797.600(c) of the Illinois Department of Public
Health’s Body Art Code. Age verification shall be obtained by government issued
identification containing a birth date and photograph. Nothing in this section
is intended to require a practitioner to perform any body piercing procedure on
a person under 18 years of age with parental or guardian consent.
   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) above are to be posted as to be clearly visible
to all clients.
   (E)   A body art practitioner shall refuse service to any person who, in the
opinion of the practitioner, is under the influence of alcohol or drugs. A body
art practitioner may refuse service to any person, for any reason, at any time.
   (F)   The following practices are hereby prohibited unless performed by a
medical doctor licensed by the Illinois State Medical Board: tongue splitting,
implants, skin removal, or scarification requiring the use of a scalpel. Dental
procedures such as tooth filing, fracturing, removal, or tattooing shall be
performed, exclusively, by a dentist licensed by the State of Illinois.
   (G)   There shall be no eating or drinking by anyone in the area where body
art is performed, other than the client.
   (H)   No piercings of any area other than the non-cartilaginous portion of
the ear by a stud and clasp piercing system are allowed.
   (I)   It is prohibited to own, operate, or solicit business as a body art
establishment or body art practitioner without first obtaining all necessary
permits and approvals from Illinois Department of Public Health, and the Macon
County Health Department, unless exempted by this chapter.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.31 BODY SUSPENSIONS.
   All suspensions need to follow the following guidelines in order to receive
approval from the County Health Department:
   (A)   All suspensions require a two-week advance notice to the Department.
   (B)   All piercings used for suspensions must be done in a licensed facility
by licensed body art practitioners.
   (C)   There must be a minimum of three licensed practitioners on the
premises during the duration of the suspension.
   (D)   Emergency procedures must be in writing and approved by the
Department.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.32 CLIENT RECORDS.
   So that the body art practitioner can properly evaluate the client’s medical
condition for receiving a body art procedure and not violate the client’s
rights or confidential medical information, the practitioner shall ask for the
information as follows:
   (A)   In order for the body art practitioner to properly evaluate any health
risks prior to a procedure, the client should disclose any of the following
conditions:
      (1)   Diabetes;
      (2)   History of hemophilia (bleeding);
      (3)   History of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to
soaps, disinfectants, adhesives, and the like;
      (4)   History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, latex,
or other skin sensitivities;
      (5)   History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy;
      (6)   Any current communicable diseases; and
      (7)   Use of medications such as anticoagulants, including aspirin, which
thin the blood and/or interfere with blood clotting.
   (B)   The body art practitioner shall ask the client to sign an informed
consent form confirming that the above information was requested. The client
shall be asked to disclose any other information that would aid the
practitioner in the client’s body art healing process evaluation.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the practitioner
to perform a body art procedure upon a client.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.33 RECORDS RETENTION.
   The following information shall be kept on file on the premises of the body
art establishment and available for inspection by the County Health Department:
   (A)   Records of all persons who have had body art procedures performed. The
record shall include the name, date of birth, and address of the client, the
date of the procedure, name of the practitioner who performed the procedure(s),
type and location of procedure performed, aftercare instruction document with
practitioner signature and signature of client and if the client is a minor
receiving a piercing, written consent of parent or legal guardian. All client
records shall be confidential and be retained for a minimum of three years;
   (B)   Identification photos of all body art practitioners;
   (C)   Proof that all operators have either completed or were offered and
declined, in writing, the Hepatitis B vaccination series;
   (D)   A complete description of all body art procedures performed;
   (E)   Autoclave spore destruction test records shall be retained by the
establishment for a period of three years;
   (F)   An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all sharps, and all
inks used for any and all body art procedures, including names of manufacturers
and serial or lot numbers, if applicable. Invoices or orders shall satisfy this
requirement; and
   (G)   A copy of this chapter.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.34 BODY FLUID PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   The body art practitioner shall maintain a high degree of personal
cleanliness, conform to hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes when
performing body art procedures. Before performing body art procedures, the
practitioner must thoroughly wash hands in warm running water with liquid soap,
then rinse hands and dry with disposable paper towels.
   (B)   The body art practitioner shall wear disposable medical gloves while
performing body art procedures. Gloves must be changed whenever they become
contaminated. The gloves shall be discarded after the completion of each
procedure on an individual client and hands washed prior to donning the next
set of gloves. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on
more than one person. The use of disposable medical gloves does not preclude or
substitute for hand washing procedures as part of a good personnel hygiene
program.
   (C)   If, while performing a body art procedure the body art practitioner’s
glove is pierced, torn, or otherwise contaminated, the contaminated gloves
shall be immediately discarded and the hands washed thoroughly before a fresh
pair of gloves is applied. Any item or instrument used for body art that is
contaminated during the procedure shall be taken out of service or discarded
and replaced immediately with a new disposable item or a new sterilized
instrument or item before the procedure resumes.
   (D)   Contaminated waste, as defined in this chapter, which may release
liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body
fluids when handled, must be placed in an approved “red” bag which is marked
with the International Biohazard Symbol. Contaminated waste shall be stored,
treated, and disposed in accordance with Title XV of the Environmental
Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/56-56.7.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.35 DISEASES.
   (A)   Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall be
free of rash or any visible infection.
   (B)   The skin of the body art practitioner shall be free of rash or
infection. No practitioner affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores,
abrasions, weeping dermatological lesions, or acute respiratory infection shall
work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which there is
likelihood that they could contaminate body art equipment, supplies, or working
surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms.
   (C)   All infections, complications, or diseases resulting from any body art
procedure that becomes known to the practitioner shall be reported to the
Department by the operator within 24 hours.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.36 PREPARATION OF SKIN AND AFTERCARE.
   (A)   Instruments used for body art shall remain in sterile packages until
used. When assembling instruments used for performing body art procedures, the
body art practitioner shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically
recognized techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves are not
contaminated.
   (B)   All inks, dyes, pigments, needles, and equipment shall be specifically
manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be used according to
manufacturer’s instructions. The mixing of approved inks, dyes, or pigments, or
their dilution with potable water, is acceptable. Immediately before applying a
tattoo, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye
bottle and placed into single use paper cups or plastic cups. Upon completion
of the tattoo, these single cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded.
   (C)   Before performing a body art procedure, the immediate and surrounding
area of the skin where the body art procedure is to be placed shall be washed
with soap and water or an approved surgical skin preparation, depending on the
type of body art to be performed. If shaving is necessary, single use
disposable razors or safety razors with single service blades shall be used and
discarded after each use and the reusable holder shall be sterilized after each
use. Following shaving, the skin and surrounding area will be washed with soap
and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after each use.
   (D)   Products used to check the flow of blood or to absorb blood shall be
single use and disposed of immediately after use in appropriate containers.
   (E)   Single use items shall not be used on more than one client for any
reason. After use, all single use needles, razors and other sharps shall be
immediately disposed of in approved sharps containers.
   (F)   All products applied to the skin, including body art stencils, shall
be single use and disposable. Acetate stencils shall be allowed for re-use if
sanitization procedures are performed between uses. Petroleum jellies, soaps,
and other products used in the application of stencils shall be dispensed and
applied on the area to be tattooed with sterile gauze or in a manner to prevent
contamination of the original container and its contents. The gauze shall be
used only once and then discarded.
   (G)   Verbal and written public educational information, approved by the
Department, shall be required to be given to all clients wanting to receive
body art procedure(s). Verbal and written instruction, approved by the County
Health Department, for the aftercare of the body art procedure site shall be
provided to each client by the body art practitioner upon completion of the
procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a
physician at the first sign of infection or swelling and shall contain the
name, address and phone number of the body art establishment. These documents
shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and
the practitioner retaining the original with all other required records.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.37 EQUIPMENT SANITATION AND STERILIZATION.
   (A)   All body art establishments must have an autoclave onsite. All other
forms of sterilization are prohibited, unless all body art instruments are
single use and disposable.
   (B)   All autoclave and sterilizing equipment must be stored and used in a
separate area designated by signs with partitions separating the areas from any
client areas.
   (C)   All non-single use, non-disposable instruments used for body art shall
be cleaned thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soap or
disinfectant solution and hot water or follow the manufacturer’s instructions
to remove blood and tissue residue, and placed in an ultrasonic unit which will
also be operated in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.
   (D)   After cleaning, all non-disposable instruments used for body art shall
be packed individually in peel-packs and subsequently sterilized. All peel-
packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature
indicator. Peel-packs must be dated with an expiration date not to exceed six
months.
   (E)   All cleaned, non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be
sterilized in an autoclave. The autoclave shall be used, cleaned, and
maintained according to manufacturer’s instruction. A copy of the
manufacturer’s recommended procedures for the operation of their sterilization
unit must be available for inspection by the County Health Department. Sterile
equipment may not be used if the package has been breached or after the
expiration date without first re-packaging and re-sterilization. Sterilization
equipment shall be located away from workstations or areas frequented by the
public.
   (F)   The body art establishment shall demonstrate that the sterilization
equipment used is capable of attaining sterilization by monthly spore
destruction tests. These tests shall be verified through an independent
laboratory.
   (G)   After sterilization, the instruments used for body art shall be stored
in a dry, clean cabinet, or other tightly covered container reserved for the
storage of such instruments.
   (H)   Kneeling pads, other pads, and contact surfaces such as, but not
limited to machine head and clip cords, shall be cleaned and sanitized after
each use. Such contact surfaces shall be sanitized by rinsing, spraying, or
swabbing with a chemical sanitizing solution.
   (I)   A chemical test kit that accurately measures the parts per million
concentration of the sanitizing solution shall be available and used when
mixing a sanitizing solution.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 112.38 SANITARY FACILITIES.
   (A)   A potable water supply and water distribution system shall be
constructed and operated in accordance with the law.
   (B)   All water-carried waste shall be disposed of by discharging into a
sewage system operated and maintained under permit by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA), or a private sewage system constructed
in accordance with the Illinois Private Sewage Licensing Act and Code.
   (C)   All solid waste, except contaminated waste outlined in §
112.34(D), shall be kept in durable containers that do not leak or absorb
liquids.
   (D)   Containers stored outside the establishment shall be provided with
tight-fitting lids and kept covered when not in use.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.39 PREMISES.
   (A)   All walls, floors, ceilings, and all procedure surfaces of a body art
establishment shall be smooth, non-absorbent, free of open holes or cracks,
light colored, washable, and in good repair. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall
be maintained in a clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client
chairs/benches shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and
sanitized after each use. All body art establishments shall be completely
separated by solid partitions or by walls extending from floor to ceiling, from
any room used for any unrelated activity such as a food establishment or room
where food is prepared, a hair salon, tanning facility, retail sales, or other
such activity which may cause potential contamination of work surfaces.
   (B)   Effective measures shall be taken by the practitioner to protect
against the entrance into the establishment, and against the breeding or
presence on the premises, of insects, vermin, and rodents. Insects, vermin, and
rodents shall not be present in any part of the establishment.
   (C)   Each establishment shall have an area that may be screened from public
view for clients requesting privacy. Dividers, curtains, or partitions shall
separate multiple body art stations.
   (D)   The establishment shall be well-ventilated and provided with an
artificial light source to maintain adequate light for cleaning and body art
procedures.
   (E)   A separate hand sink with hot and cold running water, under pressure,
equipped with touch-less controls and readily accessible within the body art
procedural area shall be required in all newly constructed body art
establishments. One hand sink shall serve no more than three operators. All
hand sinks shall be supplied with liquid soap, and disposable paper towels, in
addition, there shall be a minimum of one readily accessible lavatory,
excluding any service sinks, and one toilet in a body art establishment.
   (F)   At least one covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each body
art procedure area and each toilet room. All refuse containers shall be easily
cleanable.
   (G)   All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and
covered containers.
   (H)   No animals of any kind shall be permitted in a body art establishment
except service animals used by persons with disabilities or fish aquariums in
waiting rooms and non-procedural areas.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.40 CONSTRUCTION AND REMODELING.
   When a body art establishment is constructed or remodeled, or whenever an
existing structure is converted to use as a body art establishment, plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be
submitted to the Health Officer for review and approval before construction,
remodeling, or conversion may begin.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
112.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 112.50 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Health Officer shall conduct at least one inspection annually of
each body art establishment in the county, pursuant to the Illinois Department
of Public Health Body Art Code.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall conduct at least one inspection annually of
each body art establishment operating in the county. Additional inspections and
re-inspections will occur as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   The Health Officer, after proper identification, shall be permitted to
inspect, at any reasonable time, any body art practitioner, for the purpose of
determining compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   Whenever an inspection of a practitioner is made, the findings shall
be recorded on a standardized inspection report. One copy of the completed
inspection report form will be furnished to the permit holder at the time of
inspection. If violations of this chapter exist, the inspection report shall
serve as official notice to the permit holder that the body art practitioner is
in violation of the provisions of this chapter. The completed inspection report
form shall specify the violations found by the Health Officer, and shall
establish a reasonable time period within which said violations must be
corrected.
   (E)   If the County Health Department has reasonable cause to suspect that a
communicable disease is, or may be transmitted by a body art practitioner; that
there is use of unapproved or malfunctioning equipment; or if unsanitary or
unsafe conditions which may adversely impact the health of the public are
found, upon written notice to the owner or operator, the Department may do any
or all of the following:
      (1)   Issue an order excluding any or all body art practitioners from the
permitted body art establishment who are responsible, or reasonably appear
responsible, for the transmission of a communicable disease until the
Department determines there is no further risk to public health; and/or
      (2)   Issue an order to immediately suspend the permit of the licensed
practitioner until the Department determines there is no further risk to the
public health. Such an order shall state the cause for the action.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter shall constitute an offense pursuant to 55 ILCS
5/5 -1052, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. Further, violations
of different Sections of this Ordinance may be prosecuted as separate and
distinct violations and each day a violation of any Section of this Ordinance
continues shall be considered a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. O-115-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
CHAPTER 113: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   General intent
   
113.02   Specific purposes
   
113.03   Definitions
   
113.04   Applicable area
   
113.05   Other applicable rules
   
113.06   Amateur radio/receive-only antennas
Compliance
   
113.20   Radio frequency radiation and interference
   
113.21   Subdivision of property
   
113.22   Nonconforming facilities
   
113.23   Abandonment
   
113.24   Enforcement
Construction Standards
   
113.35   Construction codes
   
113.36   Structural certification
   
113.37   Appearance
   
113.38   Signs and lighting
   
113.39   Location
Building Permit
   
113.50   Permits required
   
113.51   Application prerequisites
   
113.52   Applications not requiring County Board action
   
113.53   Applications requiring County Board action
   
113.54   Public hearing
 
   
113.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Tower Permit Requirement Checklist
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 GENERAL INTENT.
   (A)   The county wishes to protect the interests of the citizens and
businesses of the county, while at the same time accommodating the expanding
needs of the community for a wide spectrum of communication services including
cellular telephone and personal communication, plus new types of wireless
communication services yet to be developed.
   (B)   Specifically, the regulations and requirements set forth in this
chapter are adopted:
      (1)   To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
county;
      (2)   To preserve and protect the property values and the enjoyment of
property throughout the county;
      (3)   To promote the orderly development of the county;
      (4)   To avoid potential damage to public utilities and to nearby
buildings or structures;
      (5)   To accommodate, equally and fairly, the communication needs of the
citizens and businesses of the county; and
      (6)   To preserve the attractive visual character of the residential
neighborhoods and rural farmlands of the county.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.02 SPECIFIC PURPOSES.
   In order to achieve the goals identified above, the County Board finds that
it is necessary for the health, welfare, and safety of its inhabitants:
   (A)   To establish structural standards for the erection of the towers;
   (B)   To regulate the placement of towers, antennas, and accessory
structures;
   (C)   To regulate the appearance of towers and antennas;
   (D)   To require screening and fencing around tower sites; and
   (E)   To require the demolition of abandoned towers.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. An antenna device by which radio signals are transmitted, received,
or both.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board or Board of County Commissioners of this
county.
   COUNTY JURISDICTION AREA. Those portions of the county that lie outside the
corporate limits of cities, villages, and incorporated towns that have
municipal zoning ordinances in effect.
   EQUIPMENT HOUSING. A combination of one or more equipment, building, or
enclosures housing equipment that operated in conjunction with the antennas of
a facility, and the equipment itself.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
   FACILITY. The part of the signal distribution system used or operated by a
telecommunications carrier under a license from the FCC, consisting of a
combination of improvements and equipment, including:
      (1)   One or more antennas;
      (2)   A supporting structure and the hardware by which antennas are
attached;
      (3)   Equipment housing; and
      (4)   Ancillary equipment such as signal transmissions cables and
miscellaneous hardware.
   FACILITY LOT. The zoning lot on which a facility is or will be located.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   HEIGHT OF A FACILITY. The total height of the facility’s supporting
structure and any antennas that will extend above the top of the supporting
structure; however, if the supporting structure’s foundation extends more than
three feet above the uppermost ground level along the perimeter of the
foundations, then each full foot in excess of three feet shall be counted as an
additional foot of facility height. The HEIGHT of a facility’s supporting
structure is to be measured from the highest point of the supporting
structure’s foundation.
   HORIZONTAL SEPARATION DISTANCE. The distance measured from the center of the
base of the facility’s supporting structure to the point where the ground meets
a vertical wall of a principal residential building.
   LOT LINE SETBACK DISTANCE. The distance measured from the center of the base
of the facility’s supporting structure to the nearest point on the common lot
line between the facility lot and the nearest residentially zoned lot. If there
is no common lot line, the measurement shall be made to the nearest point on
the lot line of the nearest residentially zoned lot without deducting the width
of any intervening right-of-way.
   NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. The county jurisdiction of this county,
except for those portions within a residential zoning district.
   NONRESIDENTIALLY ZONED LOT. A zoning lot in a nonresidential zoning
district.
   PRINCIPAL RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Has its common meaning but shall not include
any building under the same ownership as the land of the facility lot.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENTIAL BUILDING shall not include any structure that is not
designed for human habitation.
   QUALIFYING STRUCTURE. A supporting structure that is:
      (1)   An existing structure, if the height of the facility, including the
structure, is not more than 15 feet higher than the structure just before the
facility is installed; or
      (2)   A substantially similar, substantially same-location replacement of
an existing structure, if the height of the facility, including the replacement
structure, is not more than 15 feet higher than the height of the existing
structure just before the facility is installed.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. A zoning district that is designated under a
county zoning ordinance and is zoned predominantly for residential uses.
   RESIDENTIALLY ZONED LOT. A zoning lot in a residential zoning district.
   SUPPORTING STRUCTURE. A structure, whether an antenna tower or another type
of structure, that supports one or more antennas as part of a facility.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. A telecommunications carrier as defined in the
Public Utilities Act, being 225 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as of January 1, 1997.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.04 APPLICABLE AREA.
   The requirements of this chapter shall apply only in the unincorporated area
of this county.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.05 OTHER APPLICABLE RULES.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as reducing, abridging,
or eliminating the requirements of other applicable rules, regulations,
ordinances, or laws as they may legally apply, including but not limited to the
following: county zoning ordinance, Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations for
Decatur Airport, Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations, and
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. Where a conflict exists
between this chapter and any other applicable rule, the more strict regulation
shall govern.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.06 AMATEUR RADIO/RECEIVE-ONLY ANTENNAS.
   The regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the construction or
modification of any antenna facility that is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or that is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
COMPLIANCE
§ 113.20 RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION AND INTERFERENCE.
   (A)   Radio frequency radiation. All antenna facilities shall comply with
the radio frequency radiation standards of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC). Application for a building permit for an antenna facility
shall include a written statement from a radio frequency engineer or licensed
engineer stating that the facility complies with these standards.
   (B)   Interference with public safety telecommunications. No new or existing
antenna shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. An application
for a building permit for a new antenna or antenna facility shall include a
written statement from a licensed engineer that the proposed antenna(s) will
not interfere with public safety telecommunications.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.21 SUBDIVISION OF PROPERTY.
   An antenna facility may be located on a parcel of land without requiring the
subdivision of the parcel, provided that an accurate legal description of the
property leased for, or otherwise dedicated to, the antenna facility is
provided with the application for building permit.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.22 NONCONFORMING FACILITIES.
   Towers, antennas, and antenna facilities in existence on, or approved prior
to, the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter which do not
conform to or comply with the regulations of this chapter shall be allowed to
continue to exist and to be used, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   Routine repairs and maintenance shall be permitted and encouraged, to
prevent structural failure, to an extent not to exceed one-half of the fair
market value of the nonconforming tower, antenna, or antenna facility;
   (B)   Nonconforming towers, antennas, or antenna facilities shall not be
moved, replaced, enlarged, structurally altered, or modified unless the action
decreases its nonconformity; and
   (C)   Nonconforming towers, antennas, or antenna facilities which are
damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent exceeding one-half of the fair
market value of the nonconforming tower, antenna, or antenna facility shall not
be replaced or reconstructed except in conformance with all of the requirements
of this chapter.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.23 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   The owner(s) of the real property on which an antenna facility is
placed shall be ultimately responsible for all costs of dismantling or removal
of the antenna facility. Unused antenna facilities or portions of antenna
facilities, such as a section of a tower above a manufactured connection, shall
be removed by the owner or operator within one year of the cessation of use or
operation.
   (B)   Antenna facilities or portions of antenna facilities that remain
unused for more than one year shall be deemed to have been abandoned. In the
event that an antenna facility or portion of an antenna facility is deemed to
have been abandoned, then it may be dismantled and removed by the county and
the costs of the action assessed against the real property.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.24 ENFORCEMENT.
   The County Planning and Zoning Department shall be the agency responsible
for the administration and enforcement of the regulations of this chapter. The
County State’s Attorney shall prosecute violations of this chapter for the
county.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 113.35 CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   The construction or modification of all antenna facilities in the
unincorporated area of the county shall comply with the requirements set forth
in the county building ordinance and the county electrical ordinance, as now
adopted and as amended from time to time.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
Cross-reference:
   Electrical Code, see
Ch. 150
§ 113.36 STRUCTURAL CERTIFICATION.
   Each application for building permit for the construction or modification of
an antenna facility shall include a certification of the structural integrity
of the facility and foundation plans sealed by a licensed engineer.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.37 APPEARANCE.
   The following rules shall apply except in instances where the regulations of
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other federal or state agency
require otherwise.
   (A)   Any building that is part of a facility located adjacent to a
residentially zoned lot should be designed with exterior materials and colors
that are reasonably compatible with the residential character of the area.
   (B)   Fencing shall be installed around a facility. The height and materials
of the fencing should be in accordance with county fence regulations.
   (C)   Existing trees more than three inches in diameter should be preserved
if reasonably feasible during construction. If any tree more than three inches
in diameter is removed during construction a tree three inches or more in
diameter of the same or a similar species shall be planted as a replacement if
reasonably feasible. Tree diameter shall be measured at a point three feet
above ground level.
   (D)   If any elevation of a facility faces an existing, adjoining
residential use within a residential zoning district, low maintenance
landscaping should be provided on or near the facility lot to provide at least
partial screening of the facility. The quantity and type of that landscaping
should be in accordance with any county landscaping regulations of general
applicability, except that paragraph (5) of this subsection (E) shall control
over any tree-related regulations imposing a greater burden.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997; Ord. O-85-5-10, passed 5-13-2010)
§ 113.38 SIGNS AND LIGHTING.
   (A)   The use of any portion of an antenna facility for advertising
purposes, including but not limited to signs, banners, streamers, company name,
and the like, is prohibited. However, an antenna may be attached to an existing
sign structure.
   (B)   Warning signs and equipment information signs shall be permitted on an
antenna facility.
   (C)   Lighting should be installed for security and safety purposes only.
Except with respect to lighting required by the FCC or FAA, all lighting should
be shielded so that no glare extends substantially beyond the boundaries of a
facility.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.39 LOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   In choosing a location for a facility, a telecommunications
carrier shall consider the following:
         (a)   A nonresidentially zoned lot is the most desirable location;
         (b)   A residentially zoned lot that is not used for residential
purposes is the second most desirable location;
         (c)   A residentially zoned lot that is two acres or more in size and
is used for residential purposes is the third most desirable location; and
         (d)   A residentially zoned lot that is less than two acres in size
and is used for residential purposes is the least desirable location.
      (2)   The size of a lot shall be the lot’s gross area in square feet
without deduction of any unbuildable or unusable land, any roadway, or any
other easement.
   (B)   No building or tower that is part of a facility should encroach onto
any recorded easement prohibiting the encroachment unless the grantees of the
easement have given their approval.
   (C)   No facility should encroach onto an existing septic field.
   (D)   No portion of a facility’s supporting structure or equipment housing
shall be less than 15 feet from the front lot line of the facility lot or less
than ten feet from any other lot line.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
BUILDING PERMIT
§ 113.50 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Anyone wishing to construct or modify an antenna facility, including but not
limited to: erection, modification, extension, moving, or replacement of a
tower; placement or replacement of an antenna; and placement or replacement of
an equipment shelter, shall be required to obtain a county building permit
before commencing the work.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.51 APPLICATION PREREQUISITES.
   In addition to the information required to be submitted by the county
building ordinance and the county electrical ordinance, as now adopted and as
amended from time to time, an applicant for a county building permit for an
antenna facility shall be required to submit the following information from a
professional engineer licensed to practice in this state:
   (A)   A statement as specified in §
113.20(A);
   (B)   A statement as specified in §
113.20(B);
   (C)   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of all proposed
improvements, and the location of all pertinent existing buildings, structures,
right-of-way and easement lines, property lines, above-ground power lines or
telephone lines, and similar relevant features within a radius distance around
the proposed tower site, equal to the height of the proposed antenna facility;
   (D)   A detailed description of the proposed antenna facility, indicating
the proposed tower height, antenna facility height, and the number and type of
antennas that the proposed tower can accommodate, and including certification
of the structural integrity of the facility;
   (E)   Foundation plans sealed by the engineer; and
   (F)   An accurate legal description of the property leased for, or otherwise
dedicated to, the antenna facility.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.52 APPLICATIONS NOT REQUIRING COUNTY BOARD ACTION.
   (A)   A facility is permitted if its supporting structure is a qualifying
structure or if both of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The height of the facility shall not exceed 200 feet, except that
if a facility is located more than one and one-half miles from the corporate
limits of any municipality with a population of 25,000 or more, the height of
the facility shall not exceed 350 feet; and
      (2)   The horizontal separation distance to the nearest principal
residential building shall not be less than the height of the supporting
structure, except that if the supporting structure exceeds 99 feet in height,
the horizontal separation distance to the nearest principal residential
building shall be at least 100 feet or 80% of the height of the supporting
structure, whichever is greater. Compliance with this division (A)(2) shall
only be evaluated as of the time that a building permit application for the
facility is submitted. If the supporting structure is not an antenna tower,
this division (A)(2) is satisfied.
   (B)   Applications not requiring County Board action shall be processed
within 30 days of receipt of the application by the County Planning and Zoning
Department.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.53 APPLICATIONS REQUIRING COUNTY BOARD ACTION.
   (A)   Facilities not permitted under §
113.52 can be established only after the County Board gives its approval.
   (B)   The County Board shall consider the following siting considerations in
approving or denying applications:
      (1)   Whether a substantial adverse effect on public safety will result
from some aspect of the facility’s design or proposed construction, but only if
that aspect of design or construction is modifiable by the applicant;
      (2)   The benefits to be derived by the users of the services to be
provided or enhanced by the facility and whether public safety and emergency
response capabilities would benefit by the establishment of the facility;
      (3)   The existing uses on adjacent and nearby properties; and
      (4)   The extent to which the design of the proposed facility reflects
compliance with §§
113.37(A), (B), (C) and (D),
113.38(C), and
113.39(B) and (C).
   (C)   If the County Board fails to act on the application within 75 days
after its submission, the application shall be deemed to have been approved.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.54 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   One public hearing shall be held regarding applications requiring
County Board approval under §
113.53 either before or contemporaneous with the County Board’s approval vote.
   (B)   The time and place of public hearing shall be published in a county
newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The hearing shall be governed by the rules of the County Board
regarding public hearings.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation, or agent, employee, or contractor thereof,
who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who
resists enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than six months, or both, for each offense. Each week
a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
APPENDIX A: TOWER PERMIT REQUIREMENT CHECKLIST
                        Permit # ____________________      Date:
__________________
______   1)   No County Board action needed if:
      a)   Tower less than 200 feet (350 feet if over one and one-half mile
from Decatur); and
      b)   Tower is at least the height of from nearest residence or, if over
99 feet tall, at least 100 feet or 80% of tower height, whichever is greater.
______   2)   Engineer’s written statement that antenna(s) complies with FCC
regulations or radio frequency radiation (RFR). (§
113.20(A))
______   3)   Engineer written statement that antenna(s) will not interfere
with public safety telecommunications. (§
113.20(B))
______   4)   Legal description of leased/dedicated land for tower. (§
113.51(F))
______   5)   Certification by engineer as to structural integrity. (§
113.51(D))
______   6)   Certification by engineer as to foundation plans. (§
113.51(E))
______   7)   No part of “supporting structure or equipment housing” shall be
less than 15 feet from front lot line of facility lot or ten feet from any
other lot line. (§
113.39(D))
______   8)   Site plan, to scale. (§
113.51(C))
______   9)   Detailed description: tower height, facility height, number, and
type of antennas that the proposed tower can accommodate. (§
113.51(D))
(Res. G-1699-11-97, passed 11- -1997)
CHAPTER 114: LIQUOR SALES
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Title
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Adoption of regulations
   
114.04   License required
   
114.05   Annual fee; proration
Permits; Licenses
   
114.20   License regulations, generally
   
114.21   Number of licenses
   
114.22   Temporary permits
   
114.23   Sanitary facilities required
   
114.24   Posting license
   
114.25   Licenses non-assignable
   
114.26   License suspension or revocation
Restrictions
   
114.40   Customers not allowed
   
114.41   Persons ineligible to be licensed
   
114.42   Employees
   
114.43   Applications
   
114.44   Property; duration of licensed premises
   
114.45   Prohibited premises, conduct
   
114.46   Employment of minors
 
   
114.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   Certain sections of this chapter were previously amended on May 9, 1978, and
February 20, 1981.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and designated as the County Liquor Control Act
of this county, and shall be effective immediately upon its final adoption by
the Board as attested by the Clerk of the Board.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions.  The words and phrases used in this chapter and which are
defined in the Act of the General Assembly of this state, known as 235 ILCS 5/,
1994, an act relating to intoxicating liquor, passed January 1, 1934 (in effect
February 1, 1934), as amended, shall have the same meaning as in the Act
defined.
   (B)   Other terms.
      (1)   The Chairperson of the County Board shall be the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner with those duties and powers as may be provided by law or
ordinance. The Vice Chairperson of the County Board shall serve as Chairperson
in the absence of the Chairperson.
      (2)   No person, firm, or corporation shall sell alcoholic liquor at
retail without them having a currently in force local liquor license issued to
the person or entity as provided herein for the premises whereon the sale takes
place. Each license and the privileges thereunder shall expire and terminate on
June 30 next following the issue date thereof.
      (3)   (a)   Classes of local liquor licenses are hereby established and
hereby authorized as follows:
            1.   Class A, under which alcohol liquor may be sold for
consumption on the licensed premises, and coincident to and in conjunction
with, and only coincident to and in conjunction with the active and substantial
exercise of the privilege, alcoholic liquor also may be sold in packages for
consumption off the licensed premises;
            2.   Class B, under which alcoholic liquors may be sold only in
packages for consumption off the licenses premises; and
            3.   Class C, under which only a club shall be licensed and
alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption on or off the licensed premises
only to members of the club and invited guests of the members personally being
attended by a member.
         (b)   The classes of licenses as used in this chapter shall be
construed to permit the holder of the license to sell at retail only for
consumption on or off the premises, with the further provision that alcoholic
liquor shall not be sold, delivered, or consumed upon the premises so licensed
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any week day, and with the
provision that alcoholic liquor may be sold, delivered, or consumed upon the
premises so licensed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sunday, and 2:00 a.m.
on Monday. However, on January 1, no alcoholic liquor may be sold, consumed, or
delivered between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
         (c)   The hours as set forth herein are on Central Standard Time,
unless the county offices located in the County Building for official business
shall operate on “daylight saving time”.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Ord. O-36-
8-96, passed 8-8-1996)
§ 114.03 ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.
   All the regulations and requirements set forth in the Act of the General
Assembly above referred to as 235 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., which relate in any
manner to the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail in the territory lying
outside the corporate limits of any city, village, or incorporated town, shall
be taken and construed as a part of this chapter.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell at retail any intoxicating liquors within the territory
lying outside the corporate limits of any city, village, or incorporated town,
without having a license to do so.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984) Penalty,
see §
114.99
§ 114.05 ANNUAL FEE; PRORATION.
   The annual fee to be charged for all classes of licenses is $1,250; provided
that the fee shall be prorated ($120 per month) for the issuance of any license
during a license period.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Ord. O-5-
6-02, passed 6-13-2002)
PERMITS; LICENCES
§ 114.20 LICENSE REGULATIONS, GENERALLY.
   Licenses for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be granted for a
term not to exceed one year and all licenses shall expire on June 30 next after
the issuance of the licenses. No refund shall be allowed because of the
revocation of license or relinquishment thereof by the licensee (provided,
however, that in the event territory containing premises on which license has
previously been granted by this county is annexed to a city or village, a
refund shall be given for the unused portion of the licensing period from the
date of the annexation of the territory until the end of the licensing period,
and provided further that, in the case of the death or the adjudicated
incompetence of the licensee, the executors or administrators of the estate of
the deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee
and the conservator of any incompetent, shall on application be refunded the
proportionate amount of the license fee for the unused portion of the license,
and all refunds shall be paid out of the County Treasury on warrant duly issued
and executed by the County Clerk and the County Treasurer, on approval of claim
for refund by the Local Liquor Control Commission).
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.21 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The number of licenses of all classifications issued and in full force and
effect at any time from and after the effective date of this Act shall not
exceed 25 in number, and it is hereby specifically provided that no application
shall be permitted to be placed on file during such time as the number of
regular retailer’s licenses in full force and effect equals the limitation of
25 fixed in this section.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.22 TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   The Chairperson of the Board shall have the power to issue temporary permits
for the sale of beer to be consumed on the premises of any banquet, picnic,
bazaar, fair, or similar private or public assembly where food or drink is
sold, served, or dispensed. The temporary permit shall only be issued to a
club, society, fraternal, or benevolent organization organized not for
pecuniary profit, which shall allow the sale of beer for a period of not more
than three days and no more than one temporary permit shall be granted to any
club, society, fraternal, or benevolent society in any period of 30 days.
Temporary permit fees shall be $50 per day. The holder of the temporary permit
shall be prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering the alcoholic
liquor or beverage during the hours for which the sale of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited to the holder of any class license.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Ord. O-5-
6-02, passed 6-13-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.23 SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   No license or renewal of any license for the sale of alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises where sold shall be granted to any applicant for a
new license or for a renewal of any existing license, unless the premises have
installed and maintained separate sanitary toilets complete with lavatories and
running water for each sex within the building where the liquor is to be sold
or consumed, the toilets and lavatories to be connected to either a septic tank
or cesspool. All bar wastes and drips are to be connected to the sanitary
sewers within the building, and the premises shall in all respects conform to
the state laws, rules, and regulations on plumbing, wiring, sanitation,
ventilation, fire prevention, and control.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.24 POSTING LICENSE.
   Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall immediately post and keep while in force in a conspicuous place on the
premises the license so issued. Whenever the license shall be lost or
destroyed, a duplicate in lieu thereof shall be issued by the Chairperson of
the Board.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.25 LICENSES NON-ASSIGNABLE.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be assignable and a licensee
shall permit the sale of any alcoholic liquor as he or she is licensed to sell
only in the premises as described in the application and license. The location
may be changed only upon the written permit to make the change issued by the
Liquor Control Commission, and no change of location shall be permitted unless
the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor under the laws of this state and this chapter.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.26 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The County Liquor Control Commission may revoke or suspend any license
issued under this chapter for any violation or provision of this chapter or for
the violation of any state or federal law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
liquor, or at any time the applicant or, if a corporation, any member of the
corporation, or if a partnership, any member of the partnership, has since the
issuance of a license becomes ineligible for an application for a new license
by conviction of crime or any other provision in the rules and regulations set
forth herein, and the license may be revoked if the licensee continues to
maintain, after notification by the County Liquor Control Commission, any
unclean or unsanitary condition in and about the kitchen, bar, toilet, or other
parts of portions of the premises and including disposal of bar wastes and
drains of all types in and about the building, and including outside toilets,
and continues to maintain unsanitary conditions detrimental to the health of
the employees and of the public patronage.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
RESTRICTIONS
§ 114.40 CUSTOMERS NOT ALLOWED.
   No licensee shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any minor or to
any intoxicated person or to any person known to him or her to be a habitual
drunkard, spendthrift, or insane, feeble-minded, or distracted person.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984) Penalty,
see §
114.99
§ 114.41 PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO BE LICENSED.
   No license of any kind shall be issued to:
   (A)   Any person who is not a resident of this county;
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this
state;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted as a keeper, or is keeping a house of
ill fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (H)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for the license upon a first
application;
   (I)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of the co-partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license;
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of the corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision;
   (K)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in this state, or unless it
is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the State Business Corporate
Act to transact business in this state;
   (L)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee;
   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of this alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this chapter or any provision of this chapter, or
shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for
the violation;
   (N)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought
or does not have a lease thereon for the full periods for which the license is
to be issued;
   (O)   Any law enforcing official, any Chairperson of the Board, or member of
the County Board. No official shall be interested in any way, either directly
or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
   (P)   A person who has been convicted of a felony or offense punishable by
imprisonment in a penitentiary or penal institution of like character under the
laws of any state or of the United States of America;
   (Q)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (R)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections 720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(1) through (a)(12), or as proscribed by
720 ILCS 5/28-3 of the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as
heretofore or hereafter amended, or proscribed by a statute replaced by any of
the aftersaid statutory provisions;
   (S)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period;
   (T)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period;
   (U)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of the
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp by the federal government for the current tax period; or
   (V)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.42 EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor, any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of
contagious, infectious, or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or carrier of any such disease to work in or about
any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation, or
distribution of the liquor.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984) Penalty,
see §
114.99
§ 114.43 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   All applications for licenses permitted under this Act shall be made
upon a form provided by the County Liquor Control Commission [missing text?]
shall be furnished, otherwise, the application will not be considered by the
Commission.
   (B)   All applications for a license to sell alcoholic liquors at retail
outside the corporate limits of any city, village, or incorporated town within
limits of this county and state, shall contain the correct legal description of
the premises sought to be licensed by lots and blocks or metes and bounds, and
the legal description upon the approval of the application shall be set forth
upon the face of the license; the legal description to be by metes and bounds
or other apt legal description, including the section, town, and range.
   (C)   All applications for a license to sell alcoholic liquors at retail as
herein provided, and for renewal of the license, shall be accompanied by a
complete set of fingerprint records given on forms generally used by the
Sheriff of this county, and taken by a representative of the Office of the
Sheriff of this county, and no license or renewal thereof shall be issued until
30 days shall have elapsed from the date of the submission of the application
for license or renewal of license accompanied by the record of the
fingerprints, in order that an examination may be made to determine any fact
and circumstances necessary to be known by the Local Liquor Control Commission,
relative to any prior offense, and provided that the information as disclosed
by the record shall be held confidential by the Commission, except as the
evidence disclosed by the record is required to be introduced before the
Commission or in a court of proceeding.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.44 PROPERTY; DURATION OF LICENSED PREMISES.
   The application shall have attached to it a certified copy of the deed of
conveyance by which the applicant acquired title to the property or, if not the
owner, a certified copy of the lease to the premises from the owner thereof to
the applicant, which lease shall be for the full period from the date of the
application to and including June 30 next, after the date of application.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
§ 114.45 PROHIBITED PREMISES, CONDUCT.
   (A)   The sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor is prohibited at premises
whereat, or at premises which have any access which leads from the premises to
any premises whereat the following acts or conduct is permitted:
      (1)   The employment or use of any person in the sale or service of
alcoholic liquors or for the entertainment or diversion of others while the
person is unclothed or in attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view or
to show with less that a folly opaque covering any portion of the breast below
the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, buttocks, vulva,
or genitals.
      (2)   The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual
acts prohibited by law.
      (3)   The actual or simulated exhibition, displaying touching, or
caressing or fondling of or on, the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals.
      (4)   The permitting or encouragement of any person to remain in or upon
the premises who exposes to view any portion of the body described in divisions
(A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section.
      (5)   The showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction, or
visual reproduction depicting the acts or conduct described in division (A)(2)
above, or any person being touched, caressed, or fondled on the breast,
buttocks, anus, or genitals, or scenes wherein a person displays the vulva,
anus, or genitals, or scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects
are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray the activities
described in this division (A)(5).
   (B)   The engaging in, or performance of any act or conduct described in
division (A) above on premises as to which a license has been issued under the
provisions of this chapter is prohibited.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984) Penalty,
see §
114.99
§ 114.46 EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall tend bar or tend a package counter
or window, or sell, draw, pour, mix, or serve alcoholic liquor, and no licensee
or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of a
licensee shall engage, employ, or permit any person under the age of 21 years
to do so.
(Ord. O-36-8-96, passed 8-6-1996; Ord. O-5-6-02, passed 6-13-2002)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Insofar as applicable, the same penalty provided by the Liquor Control Act,
being 235 ILCS 7/1-1 et seq., shall be inflicted for violation of any provision
of this chapter.
(Ord. O-5-6-84, passed 6-12-1984; Res. G-244-6-84, passed 6-12-1984)
CHAPTER 115: RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS
Section
   
115.01   Title
   
115.02   Purpose
   
115.03   Construction
   
115.04   Definitions
   
115.05   Licensee requirements
   
115.06   Application
   
115.07   License qualifications
   
115.08   License issuance
   
115.09   Conduct of raffles or poker runs
   
115.10   Manager
   
115.11   Records
   
115.12   Raffle license fees
   
115.13   Poker run license fee
   
115.14   Combined raffle/poker run events fees
   
115.15   Prize limitations
   
115.16   Chance limitation
   
115.17   Abatement
 
   
115.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Raffle and/or Poker Run License Application
§ 115.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as “An Ordinance
Regulating the Operation of Raffles and Poker Runs.”
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of
raffles within the County of Macon outside the corporate limits of any
municipality (city, village, or incorporated town) and poker runs within the
County of Macon.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.03 CONSTRUCTION.
    In the construction of this chapter, the definitions hereunder shall be
observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number; words used in the
masculine gender shall include the female gender, and such inclusive words
shall be reciprocal.
   (B)   The word “may” is permissive or discretionary.
   (C)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to
those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit upon the public.
   COUNTY. The County of Macon, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of the County of Macon, Illinois.
   COUNTY CLERK. The County Clerk of the County of Macon, Illinois.
   EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION. An organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction by methods common to schools and
institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity
with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens
of government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   KEY LOCATION. The location where a poker run concludes and the prize or
prizes are awarded.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION. An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in occupations and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in the respective occupations.
   LICENSEE. An organization which has been issued a license to operate a
raffle or poker run.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles or poker runs,
less sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle or poker run.
   NON-PROFIT. Organized, operated and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with
no personal profit incurring for any person as a result of said operation.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation,
government, partnership, or unincorporated association.
   POKER RUN. A prize awarding event organized by a person licensed under this
chapter in which participants travel to multiple predetermined locations,
including a key location, to play a randomized game based on an element of
chance. POKER RUN includes dice runs, marble runs, or other events where the
objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an item or
playing a randomized game at each location.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in Section 28-2(b) of the Criminal
Code of 2012, conducted by person licensed under this chapter, in which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other means, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS ORGANIZATION. An organization or association composed of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015; Ord. O-121-04-16, passed 4-14-2016)
§ 115.05 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a raffle or poker run or to sell,
offer for sale, convey, issue, or to otherwise transfer for value a chance on a
raffle or poker run unless done in accordance herewith.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.06 APPLICATION.
    Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle or poker run shall file
an application with the County Clerk on forms provided by the County Clerk not
later than one business day prior to the time a raffle or poker run is to be
conducted. Said application shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and type of organization;
   (B)   The length of existence of the organization;
   (C)   (Raffles Only) The area or areas within unincorporated Macon County in
which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
   (D)   (Poker Runs Only) The location where the poker run will conclude and
where the prize or prizes will be awarded;
   (E)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued or
a poker run or runs will be conducted;
   (F)   (Raffles Only) The time of determination of winning chances;
   (G)   (Raffles Only) The location or locations at which winning chances will
be determined;
   (H)   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the
applicant organization and attesting to the fact that the information contained
in the application is true and correct. Said statement must be signed by the
presiding officer and the secretary of the applicant organization; and
   (I)   Attached evidence of a fidelity bond by the raffle or poker run
manager, in an amount equal to the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be
awarded.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.07 LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans organizations
that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five years or more immediately before making
application for a raffle license, and which have had during that entire five-
year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives, or
to a non-profit fundraising organization that the licensing authority
determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance
to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
   (B)   Poker run licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, veterans, or other bona
fide not-for-profit organizations that operate without profit to their members
and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five years
immediately before making application for a poker run license and which have
had during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in
carrying out their objects. Licenses for poker runs shall be issued for the
following purposes:
      (1)   Providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group
of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an
illness, disability, accident, or disaster; or
      (2)   To maintain the financial stability of the organization.
   (C)   A licensing authority may waive the five-year requirement under this
section for a bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal,
educational, or veterans organization that applies for a license to conduct a
poker run if the organization is a local organization that is affiliated with
and chartered by a national or state organization that meets the five-year
requirement.
   (D)   The following are ineligible for any raffle or poker run license:
      (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      (3)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      (4)   Any organization in which a person, as described above in divisions
(1), (2) or (3), has a proprietary, equitable, or credit interest, or in which
such person is active or employed;
      (5)   Any organization in which a person as described above in divisions
(1), (2) or (3), is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or
not; or
      (6)   Any organization in which a person as described above in divisions
(1), (2), or (3), is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle
or poker run as defined here.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015; Ord. O-121-04-16, passed 4-14-2016)
§ 115.08 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The County Clerk shall receive all raffle or poker run license
applications on behalf of the County Board. The County Clerk is hereby
expressly given authority to approve or deny any such applications which are
received. The County Clerk shall examine applications for compliance with this
chapter and with applicable state law and shall grant all applications which
are submitted by eligible persons or entities when issuing a license would not
contravene this chapter or applicable state law.
   (B)   In the event that the County Clerk denies an application, he or she
shall immediately inform the applicant of said denial. He or she shall also
inform the applicant that the applicant may appeal the County Clerk’s denial to
the County Board.
   (C)   An appeal to the County Board shall be considered at its next
regularly scheduled meeting or at any special meeting called for the purpose of
hearing the appeal. Additionally, the Chair of the County Board, in his or her
discretion, may refer the appeal to the Environmental, Education, Health, &
Welfare (EEHW) Committee for the purposes of reviewing the appeal and making a
recommendation to the full County Board on whether to affirm or reverse the
County Clerk’s denial of an application.
   (D)   If the County Board reverses the County Clerk’s denial of an
application, the County Clerk shall forthwith cause to be issued a raffle or
poker run license, as appropriate.
   (E)   A raffle or poker run license shall show the following:
      (1)   The area or areas in which raffle chances may be sold or issued or
a poker run will be conducted;
      (2)   The time period during which raffle chances may be sold or issued
or a poker run will be conducted;
      (3)   (Raffles only) The time of determination of winning chances on or
at which winning chances will be determined; and
      (4)   (Raffles only) The location or locations at which winning chances
will be determined.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.09 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES OR POKER RUNS.
   The operation and conduct of raffles or poker runs are subject to the
following restrictions.
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle or poker run must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purpose of the license.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
   (C)   No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
   (D)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license for a raffle.
   (E)   A person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances or poker runs only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances in a raffle or winning hands or scores in a poker run are being
determined only when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.10 MANAGER.
   The operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single manager designated by the person obtaining the license. The manager
shall give a fidelity bond equal in amount to the estimated aggregate retail
value of all prizes to be awarded. In lieu of a fidelity bond, a certificate of
unanimous approval of raffle/poker run bond waiver may be submitted along with
the application. The County Clerk will provide said certificate upon request of
an applicant. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to poker runs.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015; Ord. O-121-04-16, passed 4-14-2016) Penalty,
see §
115.99
§ 115.11 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each licensee shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, and
net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are
determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or
occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the
amount, a description of the purchased item or service, or other reason for the
deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of a raffle or poker run shall be
segregated from other revenues of the licensee including bingo gross receipts,
if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization pursuant
to license therefore issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of
Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each licensee shall keep separate
records of its raffles and/or poker runs. The person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the operation of raffles or poker
runs shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the
licensee.
   (C)   Each licensee shall report promptly to its membership and to the
County of Macon, its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the raffle
and/or poker runs, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required
herein.
   (D)   Raffle or poker run records shall be preserved for three years, and
organizations shall make available their records relating to the operation of
raffles or poker runs for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015; Ord. O-121-04-16, passed 4-14-2016) Penalty,
see §
115.99
§ 115.12 RAFFLE LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The following fee shall be paid to the County Clerk when an
application for a raffle license is filed:
 
Aggregate Retail Value of Prizes      Fee
Any amount up to and including $2,500 $30
Any amount over $2,500                $31
 
   (B)   Said application fees are non-refundable, even should the application
for a license be denied.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.13 POKER RUN LICENSE FEE.
   A $25 fee shall be paid to the County Clerk at the time an application for a
poker run license is filed. Said application fees are nonrefundable, even
should the application for a license be denied.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.14 COMBINED RAFFLE/POKER RUN EVENTS FEES.
    In the event that raffle chances are sold at a poker run location within
the unincorporated areas of Macon County, the applicant shall so state on the
applications. In such case, the fee for the poker run license shall be $25 and
the fee for the raffle license shall be $6 for a combined fee of $31. Said
application fees are non-refundable even should the application for a license
be denied.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.15 PRIZE LIMITATIONS.
   The maximum cash prize awarded in any raffle or poker run shall be $100,000.
The maximum retail value of a non-cash prize awarded in any raffle or poker run
shall be $200,000. The aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle or
poker run shall not exceed $300,000.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.16 CHANCE LIMITATION.
   The maximum fee for any chance shall be $1,000. All such fees shall be paid
in currency or by check.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.17 ABATEMENT.
   The imposition of the penalties prescribed in §
115.99 shall not preclude the State’s Attorney from instituting appropriate
action to prevent unlawful raffles or poker runs or to restrain, correct, or
abate a violation of this chapter or of the conditions of a raffle or poker run
license issued pursuant hereto.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Failure by an applicant, licensee, or manager to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter is a Class C misdemeanor, and any person, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500,00 or imprisoned for not
more than 30 days in the county jail or both for each offense. Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015)
APPENDIX A: RAFFLE AND/OR POKER RUN LICENSE APPLICATION
 
   Macon County, Illinois
   Raffle and/or Poker Run License Application        For official use only
License Sought   ___ Raffle   ___Poker Run    ___Bothceived and Filed
 
Applicant Information
Name of Organization:
 
Organization Address:
(if no specific address, list address of organization’s presiding
officer)
Organization’s Telephone:
                                                                     Religious    Charitable  Fraternal
Type of Organization                                                 Educational  Veterans    Labor
                                                                     Other
How long has the organization been in existence? (in years)
 
Raffles Only
 
Area or areas within unincorporated Macon County in which raffle
chances will be sold or issued
The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued
(not longer than one year)
The time of determination of winning chances
The location or locations at which winning chances will be
determined
Poker Runs Only
 
The location where the poker run will conclude and where the prize
or prizes will be awarded
The time period during which poker run or runs will be conducted
(not longer than one year)
 
Raffle Prize Value (Do not complete if your event is a combination raffle/
poker run event.)
 
Estimated total vale
of all prizes which    Less than or equal to
may be awarded in a   $2,500                 More than $2,500
single raffle (check
one box)
Fidelity Bond
All applicants must attach a copy of a fidelity bond in an amount equal to the
estimated aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded. Alternatively,
applicants may submit Certificate of Unanimous Approval of Raffle Bond Waiver.
 
Attestation
The undersigned attest that the organization named above is a not-for-profit
organization.
 
                       Presiding Officer of Organization
                        
                       Secretary of Organization
Subscribed and sworn
to before me this
                  day
of
                                   ,
20         .
                       NOTARY PUBLIC
                        
   (Do not write below this line. For Official Use Only.)
 
Fee collected          Poker run license only   $25
(circle one)           Raffle license only
                       (estimated total value of prizes $2,500 or less)   $30
                       Raffle license only
                       (estimated total value of prizes greater than
                       $2,500)   $31
                       Combined Poker Run/Raffle   $31
Application Approved:
                  
Application Denied:                        If denied, applicant may appeal
denial to the Macon County Board by initialing here.                     
 
(Ord. O-118-1-15, passed 1-8-2015; Ord. 121-04-16, passed 4-14-2016)
CHAPTER 116: MOBILE FOOD UNITS
Section
General
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Scope
   
116.03   Application
   
116.04   Adoptions by reference
   
116.05   Public health protection
   
116.06   Definitions
Administration
   
116.15   General permit requirements
   
116.16   Permit categories
   
116.17   Permit posting
   
116.18   Issuance
   
116.19   Fees
   
116.20   Plan reviews
   
116.21   Construction
   
116.22   Pre-operational inspections
   
116.23   Permit suspension
   
116.24   Permit revocation
Inspections
   
116.40   Frequency
   
116.41   Right of entry
   
116.42   Refusal of entry
   
116.43   Examination of records
   
116.44   Inspection report
   
116.45   Determining the status of the food service establishment
   
116.46   Correction of violations
   
116.47   Refusal to sign
   
116.48   Imminent health hazard
   
116.49   When disease transmission is suspected
   
116.50   Food handler and certified food manager classes
   
116.51   Variances
   
116.52   Hazard analysis critical control point plan (HACCP)
   
116.53   Menu limitation
   
116.54   Additional requirements
Service of Notice
   
116.70   Service of notice
   
116.98   Enforcement
   
116.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Food sanitation, see
Chapter 91
GENERAL
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent foodborne illnesses, promote safe
food handling and hygienic practices, and to protect the general public.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter provides requirements for the issuance, suspension and
revocation of permits; inspections; review of plans; prohibiting the sale of
unsound or mislabeled food; employee restrictions; and enforcement of this
chapter by the Macon County Health Department. Definitions and standards for
management, personnel, food operations, equipment, and facilities are also
included in this chapter.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.03 APPLICATION.
   This chapter applies to those mobile food units that are required to have
permits issued by the Health Authority, as set forth herein.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.04 ADOPTIONS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The provisions set forth in the 77 Ill. Admin. Code 750, and the rules
and laws incorporated therein, as now in force or as may hereafter be revised
or amended, are hereby adopted by reference, and incorporated herein.
   (B)   In addition, food establishments are also subject to all other
applicable ordinances of the Health Authority, such as the Macon County Food
Sanitation Ordinance,
Chapter 91 of this code.
(Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.05 PUBLIC HEALTH PROTECTION.
   The Health Authority shall promote its underlying purpose of safeguarding
public health and ensuring that food is safe, unadulterated, and honestly
presented when offered to the general public.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-21; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.06 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in the laws, rules, and regulations
referenced in § 116.04, the following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
   ADULTERATED. The condition of any food:
      (1)   If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
quantity which may render it injurious to health;
      (2)   If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious
substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in
excess of such tolerance if one has been established;
      (3)   If it consists in whole or part of any decomposed substance or if
it is otherwise unfit for human consumption;
      (4)   If it has been processed, prepared, packed, or held under
insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health;
      (5)   If it is whole or part the product of a diseased animal or animal
which has died otherwise than by slaughter; or
      (6)   If its containers are composed in whole or part of any poisonous or
deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health for
food preparation and storage.
   APPLICANT. Any person making application to the Health Authority for a
permit.
   APPROVED. Accepted by the Health Authority based on its determination as to
conformance with principles, practices, and generally recognized standards that
protect public health.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. Those persons designated by the Health Authority
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   BOARD. The Macon County Board of Health.
   BUSINESS DAYS. Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., excluding
federal holidays.
   CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER. A written order issued by the Health Authority which
directs the responsible person to immediately stop doing or allowing a specific
action to occur. A CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER may or may not include a direction to
completely cease operations at a facility . A CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER may
include a timeframe to achieve compliance if there is not an imminent health
hazard to public health and safety.
   CERTIFIED FOOD PROTECTION MANAGER (CFPM). An individual who has completed a
Illinois Department of Public Health approved or ANSI (American National
Standards Institute) accredited training program for food service sanitation
manger certification, inclusive of the examination, and received a passing
score on the examination set by the certification exam provider accredited
under standards developed and adopted by the Conference for Food Protection or
its successor organization, shall be considered to be a CERTIFIED FOOD SERVICE
SANITATION MANAGER, and maintains a valid certificate.
   CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP. A change in the permit holder. This means that the
entity that is legally responsible for the operation of the food establishment,
such as the owner or other person, has changed.
   COMMISSARY. A licensed food establishment used for preparing, fabricating,
packaging, and storage of food or food products for distribution and sale
through the food establishment’s own food establishment outlets.
   CODE or FOOD CODE. The administrative rules adopted by the Illinois
Department of Public Health pertaining to food establishments. Found at 77 Ill.
Admin. Code 750.
   CORE ITEM. A provision in the Code that is not designated as a priority item
or a priority foundation item; includes items that usually relate to general
sanitation, operational controls, sanitation standard operating procedures,
facilities or structures, equipment design, or general maintenance.
   CORE ITEM VIOLATION. A violation of a provision in the Code whose
application supports, facilitates, or enables one or more core items.
   EMPLOYEE. Includes the permit holder, person in charge, a food employee, a
person having supervisory or management duties, a person on the payroll, a
family member, a volunteer, a person performing work under contractual
agreement, or other person working in a food establishment.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
   FOOD HANDLER/FOOD EMPLOYEE. An individual working with unpackaged food, food
equipment or utensils, or food contact surfaces. Does not include unpaid
volunteers in a food establishment, whether permanent or temporary.
   FOOD PREPARATION. The handling, processing, and/or serving of foods.
   HAZARD ANALYSIS AND CRITICAL CONTROL POINT (HACCP). A systematic approach to
identifying, evaluating, and controlling food safety hazards. Food safety
hazards are biological, chemical, or physical agents that are reasonably likely
to cause illness or injury in the absence of their control.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Public Health Administrator of the Macon County Health
Department or his or her authorized representative.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Macon County Health Department.
   HOLD ORDER/EMBARGO. An order issued by the Health Authority that acts as a
temporary isolation or quarantine of food or equipment that the Health
Authority believes, or has reason to believe, is in violation of this chapter.
   HOME BASE OF OPERATION. Where the licensed mobile unit will be stored when
not in operation.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. Significant threat or danger to health that exists
when there is sufficient evidence to show that a product, practice,
circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires immediate correction
or cessation of operation to prevent injury.
   MENU LIMITATION. A modification or constraint imposed by the Health
Authority on a food establishment’s food preparation based on the type of
operation, menu items, or available equipment.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. Annually licensed food establishment that is a readily
movable vehicle (on wheels) that is self-propelled (driven) or can be pulled or
pushed down a sidewalk or street designed for service of food from the interior
of the unit. Cannot sit at one physical address for more than two weeks without
a variance being issued by the Health Authority.
   PERMIT. The document issued by the Regulatory Authority that authorizes a
person to operate a food establishment.
   PERSON. An association, corporation, individual, partnership, other legal
entity, government, or government subdivision or agency.
   PERSON IN CHARGE (PIC). The individual present at a food establishment who
is responsible for the operation at the time of inspection.
   PLAN REVIEW. An evaluation process conducted by the Health Authority to
determine whether minimum standards are met for sanitary design, facility
layout, operational and product flow, menu processes and food handling
procedures, construction, operation and maintenance of a food establishment and
its premises.
   PREMISES. The physical structure, its contents, and the contiguous land or
property under the control of the permit holder.
   PRIORITY FOUNDATION ITEM. A provision in the Code that includes those items
that require the purposeful incorporation of specific actions, equipment, or
procedures by industry management to attain control of risk factors that
contribute to foodborne illness or injury such as personnel training,
infrastructure or necessary equipment, HACCP plans, documentation or record
keeping, and labeling.
   PRIORITY FOUNDATION ITEM VIOLATION. A violation of a provision in this
chapter whose application supports, facilitates, or enables one or more
priority foundation items.
   PRIORITY ITEM. A provision in the Code whose application contributes
directly to the elimination, prevention or reduction to an acceptable level,
hazards associated with foodborne illness or injury and there is no other
provision that more directly controls the hazard: includes items with
quantifiable measure to show control of hazards such as food protection,
cooking reheating, cooling, sanitization, and hand washing.
   PRIORITY ITEM VIOLATION. A violation of a provision in this chapter whose
application supports, facilitates, or enables one or more priority items.
   PUBLIC EVENT. Any event open to the public where food is prepared or served.
An event open to the public that is advertised with fliers, banners, newspaper
articles, radio or television announcements, internet postings, social media or
by other means, is a PUBLIC EVENT and subject to regulation under this chapter.
Any event that is not a PUBLIC EVENT shall be treated as private. The
determination of whether an event shall be regulated as a PUBLIC EVENT is at
the sole discretion of the Health Authority.
   PUSHCART. A non-self-propelled vehicle food establishment limited to serving
non-potentially hazardous foods or commissary wrapped foods maintained at
proper temperatures or precooked foods that require limited assembly, such as
frankfurters.
   TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY FOOD (TCS). A food that requires time/
temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or
toxin formation.
   UNAPPROVED SOURCE. Any supplier that has not been approved by the Health
Authority may be unsafe. This could include food made in a home kitchen as well
as produce, animals raised or caught in a home environment.
   WHOLESOME. In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration or
contamination, and otherwise suitable for human consumption.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 116.15 GENERAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit
within the jurisdiction of Macon County who does not possess a valid permit
issued to that person. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit.
   (B)   Permits shall not be transferrable from person to person; permits
shall not be applicable to any location, building, or place other than that for
which the permit was originally issued.
   (C)   Changes may occur after a food establishment is permitted. Changes
that invalidate a permit include change of ownership of the permit holder, a
change in the physical location of the establishment, a change in the type of
operation, a change in menu that requires the addition of equipment and/or
structural modifications of the food establishment, a change in menu that
requires a food preparation process that was not contemplated when the permit
was issued, or a change in menu where animal meat is to be served raw or
undercooked.
   (D)   The Health Authority must be notified within 30 days of any change of
information on the permit application, or the permit holder will be subject to
prosecution pursuant to § 91.20 of the Macon County Food Sanitation Ordinance.
Additionally, a permit may be subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to
§§ 91.25 and/or 91.26 of the Macon County Food Sanitation Ordinance, Chapter 91
of this code.
   (D)   The Health Authority shall solely determine if a change invalidates a
valid permit.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.16 PERMIT CATEGORIES.
   (A)   The Health Authority shall assess the risks of a foodborne illness for
every mobile food unit operating within Macon County. The Health Authority
shall use this assessment in classifying a mobile food unit for purposes of a
category.
   (B)   The Health Authority shall apply the criteria in the Illinois Food
Service Sanitation Code to determine the category for a mobile food unit. If a
health hazard will not result from reclassification or if reclassification will
provide better protection for the public, the Health Authority may reclassify a
mobile food unit based on inspection history; the number, frequency and
severity of violations; and corrective action. The basis few this decision
shall be documented, and a copy will be retained in the food establishment’s
file.
      (1)   CATEGORY 1.
         (a)   A mobile food unit that presents a high relative risk of causing
a foodborne illness based upon the large number of food handling operations
typically implicated in foodborne outbreaks and/or the type of population
served by the facility. CFPM credential is required for this designation.
         (b)   These mobile food units must have a commissary on file
demonstrating means of cooling and reheating.
      (2)   CATEGORY 2. A mobile food unit that presents a moderate relative
risk of causing foodborne illness based upon few handling operations typically
implicated in foodborne illness outbreaks. CFPM credential is required for this
designation.
      (3)   CATEGORY 3. A mobile food unit that presents a low relative risk of
causing a foodborne illness based upon few or no food handling operations
typically implicated in foodborne illness outbreaks.
      (4)   These license categories are not meant to imply that any given
establishment is more or less safe than others. The criteria in the Illinois
Food Service Sanitation Code shall be utilized to determine risk.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.17 PERMIT POSTING.
   Every licensed mobile food unit shall prominently and conspicuously post a
valid permit for public view.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.18 ISSUANCE.
   Any person desiring to operate a mobile food unit or to renew an expired
permit in Macon County shall make a written application for a permit on forms
provided by the Macon County Health Department, accompanied by a permit fee in
an amount set forth by the Macon County Board of Health.
   (A)   When plans are required. A permit applicant or permit holder shall
submit to the Health Authority properly prepared plans and specifications for
review and approval before any of the following can occur:
      (1)   The construction of a mobile food unit;
      (2)   A change of type of food operation if the Health Authority
determines that plans and specifications are necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter;
      (3)   Change of ownership.
   (B)   Application for permit. After approval of the plans proposed for the
permit by a food establishment, the Health Authority shall conduct an
inspection of the premises. If the Health Authority finds that the mobile food
unit is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and upon receipt of
a completed application and associated fee, the Health Authority shall issue a
permit authorizing the mobile food unit to operate.
   (C)   Annual renewal of permits. For continued operation of the mobile food
unit, annual renewal of the permit is required. Any permit holder desiring to
renew a permit shall apply on the renewal forms provided by the Macon County
Health Department and pay all money due. A renewal permit is not renewable if
the permit holder has failed to remit outstanding fines owed to the Macon
County Health Department, a local agency, or by a court.
      (1)   Any permit holder who has not paid the fee for their annual renewal
of permit by January 1 of the renewal year are considered to be operating a
mobile food service unit without a valid permit. A late penalty fee of $50
shall be assessed for permit renewal payments received after January 1 of the
permit renewal year. The late penalty shall be increased to $100 for payments
received after January 15 of the permit renewal year. Any mobile food unit
operating on or after February 1 of the renewal year without a renewed, valid
permit shall discontinue operation or be subject to prosecution pursuant to §
91.83 of the Macon County Food Sanitation Ordinance. The late fee penalty
beginning February 1 shall be increased to $200.
      (2)   All permits shall be automatically suspended should the permit
holder cease operation of the mobile food unit for 30 consecutive days or
longer if the Health Authority is not given written notice prior to the
cessation of operation.
   (D)   Denial of application of permits. If an application for a permit to
operate is denied, the Health Authority shall provide the application with a
written notice that includes:
      (1)   The specific reasons and code citations for the permit denial; and
      (2)   The actions, if any, that the applicant must take to qualify for a
permit.
   (E)   No mobile food unit shall be located within 200 feet of a permanent
(i.e., brick and mortar) facility, unless both facilities are owned by the same
person.
   (F)   Any documentation provided to the City of Decatur must be provided to
the Health Authority.
   (G)   A list of proposed locations and hours of operation for each location.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.19 FEES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Counties Code, 55 ILCS 5/5-1115, the Macon County
Board of Health shall establish fees and amounts that are reasonable and
necessary to provide the services and required activities of the Health
Department in enforcing this chapter. A fee schedule shall be forwarded to the
County Board for approval and may not be increased without the approval of the
County Board.
   (B)   All fees are non-refundable and non-transferrable.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.20 PLAN REVIEWS.
   No mobile food unit shall be constructed, remodeled, or converted except in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Health Authority.
   (A)   Plan review. The Health Authority shall conduct a plan review whenever
a food establishment:
      (1)   Is newly constructed or remodeled;
      (2)   Undergoes change of ownership.
   (B)   The Health Authority shall advise the mobile food unit within 14 days
of the Health Authority’s receipt of plans with specifications that they are
approved or that specified revisions must be made.
      (1)   An opening inspection cannot be requested until final approval of
construction has been given.
      (2)   The Health Authority, at its sole discretion, may waive a plan
review based on the information provided in the application for a new permit.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.21 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The requirements below will be required for all mobile food units in
Macon County. Certain requirements may be waived at the discretion of the
Health Department in cases where no potential hazard would result Such waivers
will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Any mobile food unit not meeting
these requirements, shall be limited to prepackaged products only.
      (1)   Exterior surfaces shall be constructed of weather resistant
materials.
      (2)   Windows, doors, and vents shall be protected by:
         (a)   Mesh screens;
         (b)   Properly designed and installed air curtains; or
         (c)   Other effective means approved by the Health Department.
      (3)   Indoor floor, walls, and ceiling construction shall be smooth,
nonabsorbent, and easily cleanable.
      (4)   Food contact surfaces shall be smooth, and free of breaks, open
seams, cracks, chips, pits, and similar imperfections. They shall be
constructed with safe, durable, corrosion-resistant, and nonabsorbent
materials.
      (5)   Non-food contact surfaces shall be free of unnecessary ledges,
projections, and crevices. These should also be designed and constructed to
allow for easy cleaning.
      (6)   Manual warewashing sinks shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   A three-compartment sink shall be provided for washing, rinsing,
and sanitizing equipment and utensils.
         (b)   A three-compartment sink shall be supplied with compartments
large enough to immerse at least half of the largest piece of equipment or
utensil.
         (c)   The sink system shall be made of equipment and materials
intended for the use of ware washing. The sink system shall be designed and
installed so the warewashing of utensils cannot be contaminated by handwashing.
      (7)   A separate hand sink, and sufficient in number, shall be required.
It must always be readily accessible and used for no other purpose. Distance or
a partition shall separate the hand sink from the three-compartment sink and
food contact surfaces/equipment. Sink shall be installed so that hand washing
cannot contaminate utensil washing. Soap and paper towels must always be
available.
      (8)   Lighting shall be shielded or shatter resistant.
      (9)   Outer doors shall be self-closing and tight fitting.
      (10)   Carpeting shall not be allowed.
      (11)   Ventilation hood systems shall be easily cleanable. Fire
suppression systems may be required.
      (12)   Equipment shall be spaced or sealed to allow for easy cleaning.
      (13)   A Class K fire extinguisher must always be present.
      (14)   Surfaces and barriers for any equipment outside (e.g., smokers,
grills, and the like) must be approved.
         (a)   These items must be a minimum of ten feet from the mobile food
unit.
         (b)   These items must have a physical barrier around them.
   (B)   Water, plumbing, and wastewater systems.
      (1)   Water used shall come from an approved source.
      (2)   The water source and system shall be of sufficient capacity to meet
the water demands of the mobile food unit.
      (3)   A potable water tank shall be designed so that water can be flushed
and in a way that permits complete drainage of the tank.
      (4)   (a)   A minimum of at least ten gallons’ capacity shall be
required.
         (b)   Water tanks must be fixed to the mobile food unit. Stationary
facilities are permitted to use a food grade water tank that is safeguarded
from potential cross-contamination.
      (5)   Water under pressure shall be provided to all fixtures, equipment,
and non-food equipment that are required to use water.
      (6)   Hot water generation and distribution systems shall be sufficient
to meet the peak hot water demands.
      (7)   Only food grade hoses shall be used to fill or transfer drinking
water to or within a mobile food unit. Hose ends must be capped, connected, or
otherwise fully protected when not in use.
      (8)   Water systems must be flushed and disinfected prior to use if the
mobile food unit is not in daily use.
      (9)   A mobile food unit must have a wastewater tank.
      (10)   The wastewater tank must be 15% larger than the clean water tank.
      (11)   Liquid waste must be discharged from the retention tank to an
approved sewage disposal system and flushed as often as necessary to maintain
sanitary conditions.
         (a)   Waste tanks shall be fixed to the unit.
         (b)   Discharge onto the surface of the ground, or into storm sewers,
is strictly prohibited.
         (c)   A list of approved disposal site that will be used may be asked
for.
   (C)   Storage and preparation.
      (1)   No food that is sold or served from a mobile food unit may be
stored or prepared in a residential home.
      (2)   All food must be from an approved source.
      (3)   Packaged foods shall be labeled appropriately.
      (4)   Food packages shall be in good condition and protect the integrity
of the contents so that the food is not exposed to adulteration and potential
contaminants.
   (D)   Commissary.
      (1)   All foods and single service articles must be stored at an
approved, permitted commissary. The owner of the commissary must send an
agreement letter to the Health Department.
      (2)   It is at the discretion of the Health Department if a facility is
adequate to act as a commissary.
      (3)   No foods may be cooled and reheated for next day consumption
without a commissary.
      (4)   If a mobile food unit wishes to operate without reporting to a
commissary daily, all items that would be used at the commissary must be on the
unit including, but not limited to: mop sink, food preparation sinks, three-
compartment sink, adequate cooking equipment and storage, and the cooling and
reheating of foods will be prohibited.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.22 PRE-OPERATIONAL INSPECTIONS.
   Prior to the issuance or reinstatement of a permit to operate, every mobile
food unit shall be inspected by or obtain approval from the Health Authority
before beginning or resuming operations to determine compliance with approved
plans, specifications, corrective actions, and the requirements of this chapter
and the Macon County Food Sanitation Ordinance.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.23 PERMIT SUSPENSION.
   (A)   If at any time the Health Authority determines that a permit holder or
operator is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or the
Macon County Food Sanitation Ordinance, the Health Authority shall issue a
notice to the permit holder or operator. The notice shall state the nature of
the violation and a reasonable timeframe in which corrective action must be
taken.
   (B)   Whenever a permit holder has failed to comply with any notice issued
under the provisions of this chapter and/or the Macon County Food Sanitation
Ordinance, the Health Authority may serve the permit holder or operator with a
notice stating that the permit is suspended, and operations are to cease
immediately or as otherwise ordered by the Health Authority.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, whenever the
Health Authority finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a
mobile food unit, which in the Health Authority’s judgment, constitutes a
substantial hazard to public health, it may, without warning, notice, or
hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such
condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and stating that the
permit is immediately suspended.
   (D)   Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately
therewith, but upon written petition to the Health Authority, shall be afforded
a hearing as soon as possible. Hearing information can be found in the Macon
County Food Sanitation Ordinance §
91.25.
   (E)   A permit holder whose permit has been suspended may at any time during
the suspension of the permit make a signed, written request for an inspection
for the purpose of the reinstatement of the permit, stating how the conditions
leading up to the suspension were corrected. Within 24 hours following receipt
of the written request, the Health Authority shall inspect the premises, and
shall reinstate the permit if the permit holder is in compliance with this
chapter.
   (F)   A fee set forth by the Macon County Board of Health for permit
reinstatement shall be applied to all mobile food units required to cease food
service operations. The reinstatement fee shall be paid in full to the Health
Authority prior to resuming operations.
   (G)   Two suspensions during a period of 12 consecutive months shall
constitute grounds for revocation of permit.
   (H)   Notice of closure stating the name of establishment, person in charge,
and date/time of permit suspension will be affixed to all points of entry into
facility. Closure sign must be visible and prominently displayed until removed
by the Health Authority and not removed under penalty of law.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.24 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The Health Authority may permanently revoke a permit for serious or repealed
violations of this chapter and/or the Macon County Food Sanitation Ordinance,
or for interference with the Health Authority in the performance of its duties.
The Health Authority shall notify the permit holder of its intent to revoke the
permit, stating the reason for the action and that the permit shall be revoked
at the end of five business days following the serving of the notice. The
revocation shall remain valid pending a hearing request submitted by the permit
holder in writing to the Health Authority within the five-day period.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
INSPECTIONS
§ 116.40 FREQUENCY.
   (A)   At a minimum, the Health Authority shall inspect each mobile food unit
within the jurisdiction of the Macon County Health Department as determined in
77 Ill. Admin. Code 615.310.
   (B)   All categories and types of mobile food unit shall be inspected as
many times as the Health Authority deems necessary.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Health Authority from
conducting investigations or inspections of a special or emergency nature, or
routine inspections, at the request of Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.41 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Health Authority shall have the right to enter any mobile food unit at
any reasonable time for the purpose of conducting inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter and the Macon County Food Sanitation Ordinance.
The Health Authority shall properly identify themselves prior to initiating an
inspection.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.42 REFUSAL OF ENTRY.
   (A)   If a person denies access to the Health Authority, the Health
Authority shall inform the person that:
      (1)   The permit holder is required to allow access to the Health
Authority;
      (2)   Access is a condition of acceptance and retention of a permit to
operate; and
      (3)   If access is denied, the Health Authority will take such legal
action as required.
   (B)   If the person in charge denies the Health Authority access to a
permitted mobile food unit pursuant to § 116.41 of this chapter, the Health
Authority may gain access in a manner provided by law. In addition, the Health
Authority may issue a cease-and-desist order, or seek a temporary restraining
order, or other relief, to cease the mobile food unit operations until the
inspection is conducted.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.43 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   The Health Authority may examine the records of a mobile food unit to obtain
information including, but not limited to, food and supplies purchased, food
and food supplies received, and persons employed in such establishments.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.44 INSPECTION REPORT.
   (A)   Whenever an inspection of a mobile food unit is conducted to determine
compliance with the chapter, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection
report form provided by the Health Authority.
   (B)   The inspection report form shall constitute a legal notice of
violations of this chapter.
   (C)   One copy of the inspection report shall be furnished to the operator
or person in charge of the food establishment and a copy of the inspection
report will be available in the food establishment’s file at the Health
Authority.
   (D)   The inspection report is a public document, subject to the Illinois
Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.).
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.45 DETERMINING THE STATUS OF THE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   At the conclusion of the inspection, the status of the mobile food
unit shall be determined, and it shall be placed into one of the following
categories:
      (1)   No follow-up required. No uncorrected priority or priority
foundation violations exist. Core violations may exist, but the quantity does
not warrant enforcement review. A limited number of repeal violations may have
been observed during the inspection.
      (2)   Follow-up required. A follow-up visit shall be completed at a dale
noted on the report to verify the timely correction of the outstanding priority
or priority foundation violations.
      (3)   Enforcement action required. Violations observed during the routine
inspection warrant further review or enforcement action by the Health
Authority. Enforcement action may include, but is not limited to, a follow-up
inspection, a warning letter from the Health Authority, a scheduled formal
hearing, a completed long-term plan of action by the permit holder, or the
immediate suspension of food operations.
      (4)   Closure. Immediate closure of the mobile food unit will occur if an
imminent health hazard exists to the public health.
   (B)   It is at the discretion of the Health Authority to establish the
severity of enforcement protocol based upon observations and violations noted
during the inspection.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.46 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Health Authority shall establish a specific and reasonable time
for the correction of observed violations. The permit holder shall correct the
violations within the period specified in accordance with the following
provisions:
      (1)   Core violations. Must be corrected in a time frame agreed upon by
the Health Authority, but no later than the next routine inspection.
      (2)   Priority foundation violations. Must be corrected immediately,
within five business days of inspection, or other specified time frame
designated by the Health Authority.
      (3)   Priority violations. Must be corrected immediately, within two
business days, or other specified time frame designated by the Health
Authority.
   (B)   A mobile food unit may be required under the provisions of this
chapter to cease all or a portion of its operations. A mobile food unit shall
not resume operations until such time as the Health Authority grants
authorization to resume operations.
   (C)   Approval of a compliance schedule that extends beyond the time limits
specified under this section may be approved by the Health Authority so long as
no imminent public health hazard exists or may result from the extension of the
compliance schedule.
   (D)   For any follow-up inspections due to priority violations and/or
priority foundation violations, a fee set forth by the Macon County Board of
Health will be assessed.
   (E)   Failure to comply with any time limits for correction will require the
permit holder to immediately cease operations at the mobile food unit. Whenever
a permit holder is required under the provisions of this section to cease
operations, the permit holder shall not resume operations until such time that
a follow-up inspection has been made and the Health Authority confirms that the
conditions responsible for the cessation of operations no longer exist.
Receipts indicating work completed as well as pictures or videos showing
correction may be used as documentation of correction. Provisions from § 116.23
of this chapter must be followed to request a follow-up inspection.
   (F)   If an imminent health hazard exists, the mobile food unit shall
immediately cease food preparation operations until such hazard is corrected,
and the Health Authority grants authorization to resume operations.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.47 REFUSAL TO SIGN.
   If the person in charge refuses to sign an acknowledgment of receipt of an
inspection report, the Health Authority shall inform the person who declines to
sign the acknowledgment that:
   (A)   Acknowledgment of receipt does not indicate agreement with the
inspection findings;
   (B)   Refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will not affect the
permit holder’s obligation to correct the violation(s) noted in the inspection
report within the time frames specified; and
   (C)   A refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will be noted on the
inspection report.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.48 IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD.
   A permit holder shall immediately discontinue operations and must notify the
Health Authority if an imminent health hazard may exist because of an emergency
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, extended interruption of electrical
or water service, sewage backup, misuse of poisonous or toxic materials, onset
of an apparent foodborne illness outbreak, gross unsanitary occurrence or
condition, disease transmission from an employee, pest infestation, or other
circumstances that may endanger public health.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.49 WHEN DISEASE TRANSMISSION IS SUSPECTED.
   When the Health Authority has reasonable cause to suspect a possibility of
disease transmission from any mobile food unit employee, it shall secure a
morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other inspection or
investigation as may be necessary and take appropriate action. The Health
Authority may require any or all of the following measures:
   (A)   Immediate exclusion of the employee from the mobile food unit;
   (B)   Immediate closure of the mobile food unit concerned until in the
opinion of the Health Authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
   (C)   Restriction of employee’s services to some area of the mobile food
unit where there will be no danger of transmitting disease; or
   (D)   Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee(s) and of
his, her, or their bodily discharges.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.50 FOOD HANDLER AND CERTIFIED FOOD MANAGER CLASSES.
   (A)   All mobile food units shall always have at least one person onsite
that holds a certified food protection manager certification.
   (B)   The Health Authority may order any food handler to attend certified
food manager or food handler training course, when in the judgment of the
Health Authority, the work habits of the food handler constitute a hazard to
public health. The Health Authority may impose a time period for the completion
of the training.
   (C)   Someone in the mobile food unit must be in charge during all hours of
operation. This person is responsible for knowing the food sanitation rules and
procedures within the unit. The person in charge (PIC) is required to
demonstrate knowledge of rules applicable to the food service operation. The
person in charge shall ensure that workers are effectively cleaning their
hands, that potentially hazardous food is adequately cooked and held, and that
all multiuse equipment or utensils are adequately washed, rinsed, and
sanitized.
   (D)   The Health Authority may order any food handler to attend certified
food manager or food handler training course, when in the judgment of the
Health Authority, the work habits of the food handler constitute a hazard to
public health. The Health Authority may impose a time period not to exceed 90
days for completion of the training from date of violation.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.51 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Health Authority may grant a variance by modifying or waiving the
requirements of this chapter, if in the opinion of the Health Authority, a
public health hazard or nuisance will not result from the issuance of the
variance. If a variance is granted, the Health Authority shall retain all
pertinent information in the food establishment’s file. A variance is non-
transferable between owners.
   (B)   Variances can be applied for by following the steps listed in §
91.52 of the Macon County Food Sanitation Ordinance.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.52 HAZARD ANALYSIS CRITICAL CONTROL POINT PLAN (HACCP).
   (A)   As required in the Food Code, or before engaging in food preparation
that requires a HACCP plan, a permit holder or person in charge shall submit to
the Health Authority for approval a properly prepared HACCP plan.
   (B)   Contents of a HACCP plan shall include:
      (1)   A categorization of the types of time/temperature control for
safety foods that are specified in the menu such as soups and sauces, salads,
and bulk, solid foods such as meat roasts, or of other foods that are specified
by the Health Authority.
      (2)   A flow diagram by specific food or category of food type
identifying critical control points and providing information on the following:
         (a)   Ingredients, materials, and equipment used in the preparation of
that food;
         (b)   Formulations or recipes that delineate methods and procedural
control measures that address the food safety concerns involved;
         (c)   Food employee and supervisory training plan that addresses the
food safety concerns involved;
         (d)   A statement of operating procedures for the plan under
consideration including clearly identifying:
            1.   Each critical control point;
            2.   The critical limits for each critical control point;
            3.   The method and frequency for monitoring and controlling each
critical control point by the food employee designated by the person in charge;
            4.   The method and frequency for the person in charge to routinely
verify that the food employee is following standard operating procedures and
monitoring critical control points;
            5.   Action to be taken by the person in charge if the critical
limits for each critical control point are not met;
            6.   Records to be maintained by the person in charge to
demonstrate that the HACCP plan is properly operated and managed; and
            7.   Additional scientific data or other information, as required
by the Health Authority, supporting determination of the food safety is not
compromised by the proposal.
   (C)   The HACCP plan and procedures that are submitted and approved shall be
maintained and provided to the Health Authority, upon request. This includes
all records that demonstrate compliance.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.53 MENU LIMITATION.
   The Health Authority may determine that menu limitation at a food
establishment is necessary for food safety. The food establishment will comply
with any notice of menu limitation issued by the Health Authority
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.54 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   If necessary, to protect against public health hazards or nuisances, the
Health Authority may impose specific requirements in addition to the
requirements contained in this chapter. The Health Authority shall document the
conditions that necessitate the imposition of the additional requirements and
the underlying public health rationale. The documentation shall be provided to
the applicant or permit holder and shall be maintained by the Macon County
Health Department in the food establishment’s file.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
SERVICE OF NOTICE
§ 116.70 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to have properly
served when a copy of the inspection report form, or other notice, has been
delivered personally to the permit holder or person in charge, sent by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the permit holder or person in charge, or prominently posted on the
premises. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the Health
Authority.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.98 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Health Authority may seek administrative or judicial remedy to achieve
compliance with the provisions of this chapter if a person operating a food
establishment or employee:
   (A)   Fails to obtain or have a valid permit to operate a food
establishment;
   (B)   Violates any term or condition of a permit;
   (C)   Allows a priority item violation, or a priority foundation item
violation, or a repeat violation to remain uncorrected beyond the timeframes
for correction that were approved, directed, or ordered by the Health
Authority;
   (D)   Fails to comply with a Health Authority order concerning an employee
suspected of having a disease transmissible through food by infected persons;
   (E)   Fails to comply with a hold order;
   (F)   Fails to comply with an order issued because of a hearing for an
administrative remedy; or fails to comply with a summary suspension order
issued by the Health Authority.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any rules
and regulations adopted herein shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500. In addition, therefore, such person may be enjoined from continuing such
violations. Each day's violation constitutes a separate violation. The State’s
Attorney of Macon County shall bring such actions in the name of the County of
Macon, Illinois, and may bring action for an injunction to restrain such
violation, or to enjoin the operation of any such food establishment causing
such violation.
   (B)   The Health Authority shall not renew a food permit if a permit holder
has failed to pay any outstanding fees or fines pursuant to the Health
Authority’s fee schedule or to any enforcement decision of the Health Authority
or any levy imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction based upon a violation
issued by the Health Authority. In addition, the Health Authority may revoke
the current food permit of a permit holder if the permit holder has fees or
fines that have been outstanding for more than 90 days. The Health Authority
shall not renew and may revoke a food permit if the permit holder is subject to
any active injunction related to this chapter.
(Ord. O-138-12-21, passed 12-9-2021; Ord. O-155-10-24, passed 10-10-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   [Reserved]
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   CODES ADOPTED
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
153.   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS SITING
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   ZONING
      
156.   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY SITING
      
157.   BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS (BESS) SITING
CHAPTER 150: CODES ADOPTED
Section
Electrical Code
   
150.01   Applicability
   
150.02   Definitions
   
150.03   Electrical Code adopted
   
150.04   Term substitutions
   
150.05   Building inspections
   
150.06   Appeals process
   
150.07   Permit required
   
150.08   Service specifications
   
150.09   Code applications; specifically
   
150.10   Service connections
   
150.11   Inspections
   
150.12   Other remedies
   
150.13   Reinspection fees
   
150.14   Withholding of permits
Electrical Commission
   
150.25   Electrical Commission established
   
150.26   Rules and regulations
 
   
150.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was also amended by Ordinance O-71-6-09, passed June 11, 2009.
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.01 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall have, along with the Code adopted hereby, the scope and
applicability set out in the Code, except as modified by the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010; Ord. O-106-
2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The County Electrical Commission as established by this chapter.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The County Planning and Zoning Department, the designated
building inspector, the designated electrical inspector, or any other designee
as may be required for the proper administration of this chapter.
   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR.  Any corporation, partnership, or other person
engaged in the business of installing, altering, or servicing of electrical
equipment as herein defined.
   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. Conductors and other equipment installed for the
utilization of electricity for lights, heat, or power but does not include
radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sound and signals, or
apparatus, conductors, or other equipment installed for or by public utilities,
including common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the State
Commerce Commission for use in their operation as public utilities.
   ELECTRICIAN. Any individual who installs, services, or alters electrical
equipment as herein defined, or who supervises same.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.03 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The National Electrical Code, current Edition, of the National Fire
Protection Association, the same being found and declared by the County Board
to be regulations as defined by applicable statute, is hereby adopted by
reference and the same to be known and which may be cited as the County
Electrical Code, and which shall have the scope and applicability as therein
set out, except as modified by the provisions of this chapter.
(Res. passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed
3-11-2010; Ord. O-102-2-13, passed 2-14-2013 ; Ord. O-106-2-14, passed 2-13-
2014)
§ 150.04 TERM SUBSTITUTIONS.
   Whenever in the Code “the jurisdiction or governmental body having
jurisdiction” is referred to, the reference shall mean this county, and
whenever “the state” is referred to it shall mean this state, and the Code
shall be taken and construed as if the same were expressly set out therein.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.05 BUILDING INSPECTIONS.
   Whenever in the Code reference is made to the authority having jurisdiction,
it shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to mean the Electrical
Inspector as if the designation was fully set out herein.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.06 APPEALS PROCESS.
   Appeals of this Electrical Code or inspections made hereunder may be made to
the County Electrical Commission upon notice to the Control Authority.
Decisions made by the County Electrical Commission may be appealed to the
County Board whose decision shall be final.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.07 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to do electrical work, including temporary service and
all raceway systems and all conductor installations, in the county unless and
until a permit for the same has been obtained when required by and issued in
accordance with the provisions of the County Electrical Code, with the
following exceptions:
   (A)   Minor maintenance such as changing a switch, receptacle, light
fixture, ballasts, and bulbs;
   (B)   Replacing a grounded receptacle with GFCI receptacle;
   (C)   Low voltage wiring for thermostats and other related controls for
heating and air conditioning units in existing buildings;
   (D)   Low voltage wiring for TV, sound systems, alarm systems, computer
data, and telephones in existing buildings;
   (E)   Coax cable for antenna or computers in existing buildings;
   (F)   Wiring replacement furnace or air conditioning equipment from the
existing switch or disconnect where circuit wires are of adequate size;
   (G)   Wiring required for installation of industrial machinery from the
existing switch or disconnect where circuit wires are of adequate size;
   (H)   Wiring for replacement signs from existing switch or disconnect where
circuit wires are of adequate size;
   (I)   Service related work such as replacing fuses, circuit breakers,
motors, or controls in existing buildings or appliances. This would include
heating elements of ranges, furnaces, water heaters, and the like;
   (J)   Replacing broken meter sockets or masts on services where no new
conduit or conductors are changed, enlarged, or replaced; and
   (K)   Permits are valid for a period of six months for new construction and
90 days for renovation or with an approved extension.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.08 SERVICE SPECIFICATIONS.
   All newly installed electrical services shall be in conformance with the
current edition of the National Electrical Code and with the following.
   (A)   N.E.C. 230.2 Number of services – only one service drop or lateral
shall be permitted unless written approval by the Control Authority is obtained
for the conditions (a) through (d) of Article 230.2.
   (B)   N.E.C. 230.43 Service – entrance conductors shall be installed in
accordance with the applicable requirements of this code covering the type of
wiring method used and shall be limited to the following methods:
      (1)   Rigid metal conduit;
      (2)   Intermediate metal conduit;
      (3)   Rigid nonmetal conduit;
      (4)   Any other method described shall have written consent of the
Control Authority and local utility company.
   (C)   N.E.C. 230.70(a) Location – the service disconnecting means shall be
installed at a readily accessible location either outside of a building or
structure, or inside nearest point of entrance of the service conductors, but
not to exceed ten feet.
   (D)   The electrical service shall be bonded to the cold water piping with a
jumper around the water meter where the cold water piping is of metal
construction.
   (E)   Sizing of service entrance conductors shall be one of the following:
      (1)   To main breaker with no reduction of ampere rating;
      (2)   To approved calculated load where multiple disconnects are used,
with no reduction of ampere rating;
      (3)   To rated buss of equipment when no calculated load is provided with
no reduction of ampere rating;
      (4)   PVC risers up utility poles shall be Schedule 80;
      (5)   Metal elbows and conduits at utility poles and building service
shall be connected to an effective grounding path by the electrical contractor
and installed as per N.E.C. 250.80; or
      (6)   All new nonresidential electric services shall have a fault study
provided using the Inspection Department form and be approved before an
electrical permit is issued. Services fed from a 50 KVA or less transformer
will not require the study be done, but the transformer size and address shall
be listed on the form and signed by the preparer.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010; Ord. O-102-
2-13, passed 2-14-2013 ; Ord. O-106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.09 CODE APPLICATIONS; SPECIFICALLY.
   (A)   New buildings of all types.
      (1)   The current edition of the National Fire Protection Association
will be the accepted code for all electrical wiring installations, provided
that Article 210.52(C)(2) and (3) shall be optional.
      (2)   No installation of electrical panels or wires shall be installed
until buildings have an approved roof so as to provide protection from weather.
      (3)   Whenever a new service is installed, the electric meter shall be
located on the outside of the building unless written approval from the local
utility company and the County Inspection Department is obtained.
      (4)   Receptacles of the ground-fault circuit-interrupter type shall be
located in the immediate area where protection is required by code. IMMEDIATE
AREA is to be defined as adjacent baths, the same room, garage, basements, one
side of the outside of buildings, and where receptacles are localized, such as
construction sites.
      (5)   Where feeders are to be used to provide ground-fault protection as
permitted by N.E.C. 215.9, all receptacles and lighting protected shall be
labeled at the panel.
      (6)   Where emergency lighting is required, battery backup type fixtures
shall be used in adequate number and location to provide lighting for
staircases and egress. This shall be required in all installations including
buildings supplied with alternate power supply such as generators or separate
services.
      (7)   Smoke detectors shall be as per § 907.2.10 of the International
Fire Code, 2012 Edition.
      (8)   When wiring hydromassage tubs, all 125V circuits shall be a minimum
of 20 amperes and protected by a switch rated GFCI located a minimum distance
of five feet from the tub or protected by a GFCI circuit breaker at the panel.
      (9)   Permanent and temporary services shall be inspected with sticker
applied before service will be turned on.
   (B)   Existing buildings.
      (1)   Other than new dwellings.
         (a)   All new wiring shall be installed as per this Electrical Code.
         (b)   When it is found that the electrical system in a structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate
service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or
installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the defects
shall be corrected.
         (c)   Whenever a new service is installed, the electric meter shall be
located on the outside of the building unless written approval from the local
utility company and the Control Authority is obtained.
         (d)   Whenever construction remodeling calls for walls or ceilings
(including suspended ceilings) to be opened up, all wiring, boxes, conduit, and
the like exposed by this work shall be in accordance with the Code at the time
of installation or brought up to current Code standards.
      (2)   Buildings or part of buildings used as dwellings.
         (a)   Whenever a new service is installed, the electrical meter shall
be located on the outside of the building unless written approval from the
local utility company and the Control Authority is obtained.
         (b)   Whenever a new electrical service or wiring of new building
additions or rewiring with three or more additional circuits, the following
shall also apply.
            1.   Service. The size and usage of appliance and equipment shall
be used as the basis for determining the need for additional facilities in
accordance with the latest adopted edition of this Electrical Code.
            2.   Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain
at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded type receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at
least one duplex wall receptacle and be protected by a GFCI. Any new receptacle
must be of the grounded type and installed as per the N.E.C. Existing three-
wire grounded type receptacles, wired to a two-wire system, shall either be
grounded as per the N.E.C., protected by a GFCI, or replaced by a two-wire
receptacle.
            3.   Wiring. When wiring hydro massage tubs, all 125V circuits
shall be a minimum of 20 amperes and protected by a switch rated GFCI located a
minimum distance of five feet from the tub, or protected by a GFCI circuit
breaker at the panel.
            4.   Lighting fixtures.  Every public hall, interior stairway,
bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, basements, and attics or utility rooms
used for storage or that contain equipment requiring servicing shall contain at
least one electric lighting fixture controlled by a wall switch at the usual
point of entry.
            5.   Electrical system hazards. The following items are declared to
be hazardous and it shall be unlawful to create, maintain, or permit the same
to exist:
               a.   Conductors or devices carrying electrical energy in excess
of the approved rated capacity;
               b.   Electrical wiring, of all types, not supported in an
approved manner (existing wiring will be allowed on bottom of joists in
basements if secured at intervals to eliminate sagging);
               c.   Splices unenclosed in approved boxes other than knob and
tube wiring inside walls and attics;
               d.   Absence of or use of unapproved connectors for splices and
termination into boxes or cabinets;
               e.   Exposed fuse blocks or cleat type light fixtures;
               f.   Wiring with insulation deterioration or other damaged
conditions;
               g.   Flexible cords, commonly known as lamp or extension cords,
used as a substitute for fixed wiring; or where run through walls, ceilings,
floors, doorways, windows, or where attached to, or run behind building
surfaces such as walls, ceilings, baseboard, and floors;
               h.   The use of the grounded circuit conductor used for
grounding, except as provided by N.E.C. 250.140, Exception, for the listed
appliances;
               i.   Broken porcelain fixtures in basements or cord type
fixtures with frayed or deteriorated insulation;
               j.   Electrical wiring with metal outer covering in contact with
dissimilar metals such as copper water piping, and the like;
               k.   Boxes or conduits with excessive numbers of conductors; and
               l.   Knob and tube wiring in areas other than inside walls or
attics.
   (C)   Disclosure of conditions. In keeping with safe electrical
installations, all unsafe conditions other than specifically noted above should
be disclosed to the owner by the electrical contractor and corrected before
inspection.
   (D)   Swimming pools.
      (1)   N.E.C. 680.2 Definitions.
         (a)   Permanently installed swimming, wading, and therapeutic pools.
Those that are constructed in the ground, or the major portion in the ground,
and all pools installed inside of a building, regardless of water depth,
whether or not served by electrical circuits of any nature.
         (b)   Storable swimming or wading pool. Those that are constructed on
or above the ground and are capable of holding water with a maximum depth of 42
inches (1,067 mm), or a pool with nonmetallic, molded polymeric walls or
inflatable fabric walls, regardless of dimension.
      (2)   N.E.C. 680.23. Underwater Luminaries.
         (a)   This section covers all luminaries (lighting fixtures) installed
below the normal water of the pool.
         (b)   Voltage limitation. No luminaries (lighting fixtures) shall be
installed for operation on supply circuits over 15 volts between conductors.
      (3)   N.E.C. 680.31 Pumps. Storable Pools.
         (a)   A cord-connected pool filter pump shall incorporate an approved
system of double insulation or its equivalent and shall be provided with means
for grounding only the internal and non-accessible non-current-carrying metal
parts of the appliance. The means for grounding shall be an equipment grounding
conductor run with the power-supply conductors in the flexible cord that is
properly terminated in a grounding-type attachment plug having a fixed
grounding contact member. Pumps shall be listed as “storable type” by a
recognized listing agency that is acceptable to the authority having
jurisdiction.
         (b)   Receptacles providing power to the pool filter pump shall be
located a minimum of ten feet from the edge of the pool. Branch circuit wiring
to the receptacles shall be installed in a method as described in § 680.21 of
the N.E.C., except underground wiring shall be installed in an approved
raceway.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010; Ord. O-91-
4-11, passed 4-14-2011; Ord. O-102-2-13, passed 2-14-2013 ; Ord. O-106-2-14,
passed 2-13-2014)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.10 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   The local utility company may connect the electrical service to the
structure when the service is installed permanently on the structure and upon
order of the Control Authority.
   (A)   Where services have been damaged due to weather conditions, a permit
and inspection will be necessary only when new conductors are being installed.
The inspections will be of the electrical service only.
   (B)   During severe weather conditions the Control Authority may waive all
permits and inspections. Under these conditions the repaired services must
remain the same size and materials must be used accordingly. If a larger size
service is requested by the owner, then all such provisions of this code shall
apply.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.11 INSPECTIONS.
   All electrical wiring installed under a permit issued as herein provided
must be inspected before being concealed and must have a final approved
inspection before the certificate of occupancy is eligible for issuance.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the electrical contractor, or those making
electrical installations or alterations, to give timely notice requesting
inspections. It may be necessary at various times to lengthen the time before
inspections can be made and shall be at the discretion of the Control
Authority.
   (B)   Failure to call for final electrical inspections before structures are
occupied or after job completion will be cause for the Control Authority to
submit the case before the Electrical Commission for possible action.
   (C)   The Electrical Commission may revoke a permit or withhold approval of
work in case there has been a false statement or representation as to a
material fact in the application, the plans, or specifications upon which the
approval of the permit was based.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.12 OTHER REMEDIES.
   The imposition of the penalties prescribed in §
150.99 shall not preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent
unlawful construction or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to stop
an illegal act, conduct, business, or operation of electrical equipment or
systems in or about any premises.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.13 REINSPECTION FEES.
   A reinspection fee of $50 shall be assessed against the applicant for an
electrical permit who has requested an inspection which cannot be completed
and/or approved by the Control Authority for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   The work for which the inspection has been requested is not installed
or completed to the extent that an inspection can be made;
   (B)   The inspection reveals that the electrical system has more than three
code violations due to:
      (1)   Equipment not installed per instructions included in the listing or
labeling;
      (2)   Equipment installed without correct polarity;
      (3)   Components not properly grounded;
      (4)   Wiring not installed as to be free from short circuits;
      (5)   Equipment installed with improper ratings; and
      (6)   Devices and fixtures not energized because of loose connections or
broken wires.
   (C)   The Inspector is unable to gain entry at the time requested by the
contractor; and
   (D)   When previously noted violations have not been corrected:
      (1)   Fees assessed as herein provided may be appealed to the County
Board within 14 days of the mailing of notice of the assessment. An appeal
shall the due date for payment until the date of the final order of the Board.
      (2)   The fees shall be assessed by mailing notice of same to the owner
or other person by certified mail, return receipt requested. Payment thereof
shall be due 14 days after mailing of the notice, which notice must contain a
statement of the right of the owner or other person to appeal the same to the
Board and the time limitation thereon.
      (3)   In any judicial proceeding brought by the county to collect fees
which have not been paid as required by the provisions hereof, failure to
receive notice of the assessment of the fee may be a defense thereto, but only
if the notice was not sent to the proper mailing address of the defendant or
was received thereat by someone other than a person upon whom substituted
service may be made pursuant to the State Code of Civil Procedure.
      (4)   Any fee or fees assessed as herein provided, and any judgment
entered for same, shall be in addition to any fine imposed by the Circuit Court
under this chapter.
      (5)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building for
which reinspection fees are unpaid.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.14 WITHHOLDING OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Electrical permits may be withheld from permit applicants in the
following manner:
      (1)   Permit applicants from which permits are to be withheld must be
notified by mailing notice of same to the permit applicant by certified mail,
return receipt requested. The notice shall inform the permit applicant or
licensed subcontractor of the violations which, if corrected, will allow the
county to issue to the permit applicant additional permits. Corrections shall
be made within 14 days after mailing of the notice, which notice must contain a
statement of the right of the permit applicant to appeal the same to the County
Board and the time limitation thereon.
      (2)   Permits withheld as herein provided may be appealed by filing a
notice of the appeal with the Control Authority within 14 days of the mailing
of notice of the withholding. An appeal shall stay the due date for corrections
required until the date of the final order of the Board.
      (3)   Any action to withhold permits as herein provided and/or any
judgment entered for same, shall be in addition to any fine imposed by the
Circuit Court under this chapter.
   (B)   Electrical permits may be withheld from permit applicants for the
following violations:
      (1)   Failure to arrange for inspections required by the county
electrical ordinance;
      (2)   Failure to take reasonable requested action to uncover work which
requires inspection but has been hidden from view of the Inspector;
      (3)   Failure to pay required permit or reinspection fees;
      (4)   Failure to obtain an electrical permit where required prior to
start of work;
      (5)   Failure to take reasonable action to notify and obtain approval
from Control Authority of changes made to original electrical permits;
      (6)   Falsifying information on electrical permit applications;
      (7)   Work performed under an invalid or voided permit; and
      (8)   Failure to obtain a required certificate of occupancy before
occupying or allowing occupancy of new construction or change in use.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
§ 150.25 ELECTRICAL COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created the County Electrical Commission which shall consist
of seven residents of Macon County to be appointed by the County Board
Chairperson, with the advice and consent of the County Board.
   (A)   To the extent practicably possible, the Commission shall include:
      (1)   One electrical contractor;
      (2)   One electrician;
      (3)   One officer of IBEW Local 146;
      (4)   One licensed professional engineer;
      (5)   One representative of an electrical utility;
      (6)   One representative of an electrical product manufacturer; and
      (7)   The Chief of a fire protection district located within the county.
   (B)   No action or decision of the Commission shall be invalid for failure
to have on the Commission, or in attendance at the meeting or hearing where the
action or decision was taken or made, any person meeting any of the criteria
listed herein.
   (C)   Commission members shall serve for a term of three years, the terms to
commence the first day of December.
   (D)   Vacancies shall be filled by the County Board Chairperson with advice
and consent of the County Board for the unexpired terms.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.26 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet and elect officers for each calendar year. A
Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary shall be elected for a term of
one year.
   (B)   The Commission shall meet on a regular basis as necessary to perform
its duties, with the Chairperson reporting to the County Board Chairperson for
consultation and guidance.
   (C)   The Commission shall review all proposed Electrical Code revisions
jointly with the Control Authority, prepare revisions to this chapter
(excluding permit fees), and consult with the Control Authority.
   (D)   The Commission shall promulgate and adopt any necessary and reasonable
rules and regulations not inconsistent with statute, code, or ordinance as may
be required to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and its duties
and responsibilities under the provisions hereof and shall keep a record of the
rules and regulations along with the minutes of all its acts and doings.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not to exceed $500 for each offense
and every day that the violation continues may be deemed to be a separate
offense.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish, install, or operate electrical
equipment regulated by the Electrical Code or this chapter or cause the same to
be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions thereof.
      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful to continue work after a stop order has
been issued, served, or posted under those provisions.
         (b)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating or found to be in
violation of any of the provisions shall upon conviction thereof be fined no
less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, and each day upon which a
violation occurs or is allowed to continue, or a condition is not brought into
compliance after notice, shall be viewed and may be prosecuted as a separate
and distinct offense.
      (2)   Upon determination by the Control Authority that a contractor has
failed to construct, modify or repair a system in compliance with this
Electrical Code, the Control Authority shall notify the contractor and shall
give notice that corrections shall be made within 30 days.
         (a)   If corrections are not made, the Control Authority shall bring
the case to the County Electrical Commission for possible action.
         (b)   Decisions by the County Electrical Commission may be appealed to
the County Board, whose decision shall be final.
(Ord. O-71-5-08, passed 5-8-2008; Ord. O-83-3-10, passed 3-11-2010 ; Ord. O-
106-2-14, passed 2-13-2014)
CHAPTER 151: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Base flood elevation
   
151.04   Duties of the responsible official
   
151.05   Development permit
   
151.06   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
151.07   Protecting buildings
   
151.08   Subdivision requirements
   
151.09   Public health and other standards
   
151.10   Carrying capacity and notification
   
151.11   Variances
   
151.12   Disclaimer of liability
   
151.13   Abrogation and greater restrictions
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to Macon
County by County Statutory Authority in 55 ILCS 5/5-1041 and 5/5-1063 in order
to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available, and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
151.03 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180
days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. 
      (1)   Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster.
Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services,
can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special
populations at risk.
      (2)   Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT. 
      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;
         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences;
         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other alterations of the ground surface;
         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and
liquid_storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that
might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). These two terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of Macon County, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of Macon County, or that may be annexed into
Macon County, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains
of Macon County are generally identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate
Map of Macon County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated June 7,2017. FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as
identified by the community.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal emergency
management agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Big Creek, Big Creek Arm of
Lake Decatur, Friends Creek, Friends Creek Ditch, Independence Branch, Long
Creek, Long Creek Tributary, Northeast Drainage Ditch, Sangamon River, Spring
Creek, Spring Creek Tributary, Spring Creek Tributary East, Stevens Creek,
Stevens Creek Tributary A, Stevens Creek Tributary B, Stevens Creek Tributary
F, Stevens Creek Tributary G, Stevens Creek Tributary 2, Wards Branch shall be
as delineated on the countrywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Macon County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated June 7, 2017. The
floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of Macon County shall be
according to the best data available from the Federal, state, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM. Illinois Department of Natural Resource
Office of Water Resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary
area of 640 acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of any stream
serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or more in a rural area. Construction
on these streams requires a permit from the Department. (Ill. Admin. Code Title
17, pt. 3700.30). The Department may grant approval for specific types of
activities by issuance of a statewide permit which meets the standards defined
in § 
150.06 of this chapter.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
151.07 of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred
regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must
be included in this determination. The term includes REPETITIVE LOSS BUILDINGS
(see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. 
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, enlargement or
improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the building in
which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
         (a)   Equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   Increases the floor area by more than 20%.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
      (3)   The term does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required Federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.03 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best, most
reliable, available base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, the party shall finance the detailed
engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data and
submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the
site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Big Creek, Big
Creek Arm of Lake Decatur, Friends Creek, Friends Creek Ditch, Independence
Branch, Long Creek, Long Creek Tributary, Northeast Drainage Ditch, Sangamon
River, Spring Creek, Spring Creek Tributary, Spring Creek Tributary East,
Stevens Creek, Stevens Creek Tributary A, Stevens Creek Tributary B, Stevens
Creek Tributary F, Stevens Creek Tributary G, Stevens Creek Tributary 2, Wards
Branch shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide
Flood Insurance Study of Macon County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county
wide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Macon County, Illinois.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the countywide flood insurance rate map for Macon
County, Illinois, shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state or sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.04 DUTIES OF THE RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL.
   The Planning and Zoning Department shall be responsible for the general
administration of this ordinance and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of Macon County meet the
requirements of this ordinance. Specifically, the Planning and Zoning
Department shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with §
151.05;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
151.06;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
151.07 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§
151.08;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public
Health standards of §
151.09;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
151.11 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in §
151.99 as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all required
local, state, and Federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any proposed
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about the
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and Federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.05 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Planning and Zoning Administrator, or other
designee. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall not issue a development
permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
151.07 of this chapter; and
      (5)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Planning and Zoning Department shall compare the elevation of the site to the
base flood elevation. Any development located on land that is shown by survey
elevation to be below the current base flood elevation is subject to the
provisions of this ordinance. In addition, any development located on land
shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a
flood source, but not identified as floodplain on the current flood insurance
rate map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any development located
on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base
flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site's
first flood insurance map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Department shall maintain documentation of
the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that
this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map identification.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Department shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other Federal, state and local
permits, approvals or permit- not-required letters that may be required for
this type of activity. The Planning and Zoning Department shall not issue a
permit unless all Federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.06 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources Statewide Permit Number 2;
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 3;
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 4;
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5;
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground utility
lines, light poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding 70 square feet and raising
buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any other
activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6;
      (6)   Outfall Structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7;
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8;
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9;
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10;
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11;
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 12;
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 13; and
      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) if this
section may be permitted only if:
      (1)   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.07 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements §
151.06, of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. The building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet.
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during
the life of the building. If substantially improved, the existing structure and
the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section within 24 months of the date the damage occurred.
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year.
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
151.02.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
      (2)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (a)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
            1.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
            2.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
            3.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
            4.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporated debris or refuse material; and
            5.   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from
or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
         (b)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with
the following:
            1.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts,
piles, walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters;
            2.   All components located below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
            3.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
            4.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood
protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening
on each wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation; and
            5.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris:
               A.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
               B.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space; or
               C.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
   (C)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade;
      (3)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
      (4)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
at any point;
      (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event;
      (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
      (7)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
         (a)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
         (b)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
the impact from debris and ice.
         (c)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
         (d)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this section.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with §
151.06(B), and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 1ll. Admin. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of §
151.07(D) unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck;
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet;
      (6)   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and tires properly
inflated;
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain;
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect;
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model; and
      (10)   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage of shed must be non-habitable.
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or Federal permits.
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot.
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every one square foot of floor area.
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $15,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 576 square feet (24 feet by
24 feet).
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.08 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Macon County Board shall take into account hazards, to the extent
that they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (B)   (1)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements, planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of §§
151.06 and
151.07 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
         (a)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain,
where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the
applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
         (b)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
         (c)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
      (2)   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.09 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
151.06 and
151.07 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, tanks
or any hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
151.07 of this chapter.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permitted within the floodplain only if no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within
the SFHA shall be elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year
flood frequency elevation. In situations where a 500-year flood elevation has
not been determined the flood protection elevation shall be three feet above
the 100-year flood frequency elevation. Floodproofing and sealing measures must
be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released
into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base
flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.10 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, Macon County shall notify adjacent communities in
writing within 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.11 VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to Macon County Zoning Board of
Appeals for a variance. The Macon County Zoning Board of Appeals shall review
the applicants request for a variance and shall submit its recommendations to
the Macon County Board. The Macon County Board may attach such conditions to
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this
chapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities; and
      (6)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP.
   (B)   The Macon County Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protections
standards of §
151.07 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic structures. Variances to the building protection requirements
of §
151.07 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in §
151.02, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
§§
151.06 and
151.07 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Agriculture. 
      (1)   Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided
individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as
those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and
the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be
included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that are
constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
         (a)   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement facilities
cannot be considered agricultural structures.
         (b)   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
         (c)   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures,
the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation,
wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base
flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance
with §
151.07 of this chapter.
         (d)   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in
accordance with §
151.07 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
         (e)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with §
151.07 of this chapter.
   (E)   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with §
151.07(B) this chapter.
   (F)   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain management
floodway provisions of §
151.06 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
   (G)   Wet-floodproofmg construction techniques must be reviewed and approved
by the floodplain administrator and a registered professional engineer or
architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
Macon County or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.13 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Macon
County Board to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program including: June 16, 2011. However, this chapter does not repeal the
original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program.
Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance
easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Macon County Planning
and Zoning Department may determine that a violation of the minimum standards
of this chapter exists. The Macon County Planning and Zoning Department shall
notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
      (1)   Macon County shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this section or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance;
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than $50 or more than $750 for each offense;
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      (4)   Macon County shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   (B)   The Macon County Planning and Zoning Department shall inform the owner
that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages
and therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.
   (C)   (1)   The Macon County Planning and Zoning Department is authorized to
issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-
work order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall
order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the
stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (2)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Macon County Zoning Board of Appeals.
Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall
state:
         (a)   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
         (b)   The time and place of the hearing.
      (3)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Macon
County Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be
suspended or revoked.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall prevent Macon County from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. O-125-03-17, passed 3-9-2017)
CHAPTER 152: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authority
   
152.02   Statement of purpose
   
152.03   Definitions
Permits
   
152.15   Land disturbance permits required
   
152.16   Building permit
   
152.17   Exemptions
   
152.18   Waivers
   
152.19   Conditions for waiver
   
152.20   Land disturbance permit not to be issued where waiver requested
   
152.21   Application for a land disturbance permit
   
152.22   Review and approval of application
   
152.23   Performance bond or performance security
   
152.24   Permit duration
Plan Requirements
   
152.35   BMP manual for stormwater pollution prevention plans
   
152.36   Standards and performance criteria for stormwater pollution prevention
plans
   
152.37   Erosion and sediment control plan requirements
   
152.38   Stormwater management plan requirements
   
152.39   Landscaping and stabilization requirements
   
152.40   Construction, maintenance, inspection, and reporting responsibility
   
152.41   Records of installation and maintenance activities
   
152.42   Failure to meet or maintain design or maintenance standards
   
152.43   Existing locations and developments
   
152.44   Inspection of existing facilities
   
152.45   Illicit discharges
   
152.46   Prohibition of illicit connections
   
152.47   Elimination of stormwater pollutants by the use of best management
practices
   
152.48   Notification of spills
   
152.49   Enforcement authority
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the County
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
   (B)   The County Board adopts this chapter pursuant to its authority to
regulate stormwater management and govern the location, width, course, and
release rate of all stormwater runoff channels, streams, and basins in the
county, in accordance with the County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater
Management Plan. The statutory authority for this chapter is contained in 55
ILCS 5/5-1041, 5-1042, 5-1049, 5-1062, 5-1063, 5-1104, 5-12003 and 5-15001 et
seq., and 415 ILCS 5/43, and other applicable authority, all as amended from
time to time.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.02 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the
environment of the county and the public health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the county by controlling discharges of pollutants to the county’s
stormwater system, by maintaining and improving the quality of the receiving
waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including without limitation
lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the county, and to
enable the county to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System permit (NPDES) and applicable regulations for stormwater discharges in
40 C.F.R. § 122.26.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense. The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is
permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the
meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of
Webster’s Dictionary. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the permitting authority to
administer and enforce this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL. Related to or used for the production of food and fiber,
including but not limited to general farming, livestock and poultry
enterprises, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod production, and wild crop harvesting and includes lands used for
on-site buildings and other structures necessary to carry out those activities.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application for a permit under this
chapter.
   AS-BUILT PLANS. Drawings depicting conditions as they were actually
constructed.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
material storage.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks
that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically.
   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. The initial disturbances of soils associated
with clearing, grading, or excavating activities or other construction
activities.
   COMMUNITY WATER. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells, and other bodies
of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming
a part of the boundaries of the county.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. Preventing or reducing soil
erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activity, whether naturally
occurring or acting in connection with or promoted by human-made activities or
effects.
   CONTAMINANT. Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance
or matter in water.
   DESIGN STORM EVENT. A hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency
interval and duration, used in the analysis and design as associated with
stormwater runoff.
   DISCHARGE. Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak, or place
by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected,
seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct or indirect
entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
   EASEMENT. An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person,
party, firm, corporation, municipality, or other legal entity has in the land
of another.
   EROSION (SOIL EROSION). The detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A written plan (including drawings or
other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated
erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the resulting conditions.
   EXISTING DEVELOPMENT. Buildings and other structures and impervious area
existing prior to adoption of this chapter.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a
new location and shall include the resulting conditions.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. The soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least
70% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures has been established or equivalent stabilization measures (such as
the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
   HOT SPOT or PRIORITY AREA. An area where land use or activities generate
highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of
those typically found in stormwater.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the
municipal separate stormwater system, whether or not the connections result in
discharges into that system.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically
exempted in §
152.45.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any land cover that prevents rain or melting snow from
soaking into the ground, such as roofs (including overhangs), roads, sidewalks,
patios, driveways, and parking lots. For purposes of this chapter, all road,
driveway, or parking surfaces, including gravel surfaces, shall be considered
IMPERVIOUS, unless specifically designed to encourage infiltration and approved
by the local approval authority.
   INCIDENT OF NONCOMPLIANCE or ION. A violation of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan observed during an inspection at a construction site.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any land alterations or activities that may result
in soil erosion, sedimentation, or change in runoff, including but not limited
to removal of ground cover, grading, excavating, and filling of land.
   MAINTENANCE. Any activity necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good
working order so as to function as designed. MAINTENANCE shall include complete
reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed to restore
the facility to its original operational design parameters. MAINTENANCE shall
also include the correction of any problem on the site property that may
directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility.
   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. A document recorded in the land records that acts as
property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of
stormwater management practices.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER
SYSTEM. The conveyances owned or operated by the municipality for the
collection and transportation of stormwater, including the roads and streets
and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels, and storm drains.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT or NPDES PERMIT. A
permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Structural development, including construction of a new
building or other structures; expansion or alteration of an existing structure
that results in an increase in the surface dimensions of the building or
structure; land disturbing activities; or creation or expansion of impervious
surface.
   NON-STRUCTURAL BMPS. Institutional and pollution prevention type practices
through education and source control, recycling, and maintenance that prevent
pollutants from entering stormwater runoff or reduce the volume of stormwater
requiring management.
   NOTICE OF INTENT or NOI. The completed permit form submitted to the State
Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with its rules and regulations
for the authorization to discharge stormwater from a construction site.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION or NOT. The completed form submitted to the State
Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with its rules and regulations
where a construction site has been finally stabilized and all stormwater
discharges from the construction site authorized under a General NPDES Permit
for Storm Water Discharges from Construction Site Activities (ILR10) are
eliminated.
   OFF-SITE FACILITY. A structural BMP located outside the subject property
boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.
   ON-SITE FACILITY. A structural BMP located within the subject property
boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular
point resulting from a storm event.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, or association and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
   PERVIOUS SURFACE. Any land cover that permits rain or melting snow to soak
into the ground.
   PRIORITY AREA. Hot spot; see definition for Hot spot.
   QUALIFIED PERSON or QUALIFIED PERSONNEL. A person or personnel knowledgeable
in the principles and practice of erosion and sediment controls, such as a
licensed professional engineer or other knowledgeable person who possesses the
skills to assess conditions at the construction site that could impact
stormwater quality and to assess the effectiveness of any erosion and sediment
control measures selected to control the quality of stormwater discharges from
the construction activities.
   RUNOFF. The portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is
discharged from the area into the county separate storm sewer system.
   SEDIMENT. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has come to rest at a different site.
   SEDIMENTATION. The deposition of eroded soils at a site different from the
one where the erosion occurred.
   SITE. The bounded area described in an erosion control plan or stormwater
management plan.
   SOILS REPORT. A study of soils on a subject property with the primary
purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The SOILS REPORT shall be
prepared by a qualified person, who shall be directly involved in the soil
characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly
supervising employees.
   STABILIZATION. Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural,
that will prevent erosion from occurring.
   STORM EVENTS. The runoff, rainfall, or flood occurrence having a probability
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (e.g., a two-year event has a
50% probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; a ten-year event
has a 10% probability; a 100-year event has a probability of 1%, and the like).
   STORMWATER. The flow of water which results from, and which occurs during
and immediately following, a rainfall, snow-melt, or ice-melt event.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. Any measures taken to permanently reduce or minimize
the negative impacts of stormwater runoff after land development activities.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The set of drawings and other documents
including the erosion and sediment plan that is part of the stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) that comprise the information and
specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts,
and techniques to be installed during the construction process to control
pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction
operations have been completed.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. All publicly or privately owned facilities by
which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, county streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN or SWPPP. A written document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented to
identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable and assure
compliance with NPDES Permit No. ILR 10 and ILR 40.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The waters derived from rains falling or snow-melt or
ice-melt occurring within a drainage area, flowing over the surface of the
ground and collected in channels, watercourses, or conduits.
   STRUCTURAL BMPS. Practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows
or otherwise limit runoff, and the discharges of pollutants from exposed areas
of a construction site.
   SURFACE WATER. Includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds
created naturally or artificially, including but not limited to streams, other
watercourses, lakes, and reservoirs.
   TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD or  TMDL. The sum of the individual waste load
allocations (WLAs) for point sources and load allocations (LAs) for non-point
sources and natural background. If a receiving water has only one point source
discharger, the TMDL is the sum of that point source WLA plus the LAs for any
non-point sources of pollution and natural background sources, tributaries, or
adjacent segments. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time,
toxicity, or other appropriate measure.
   WATERCOURSE. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or human-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
   WATERSHED. All the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point
along a waterway.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
PERMITS
§ 152.15 LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person shall comply with the county stormwater policy for runoff
control.
   (B)   In addition, a land disturbance permit will be required to be obtained
from the County Planning and Zoning Department in the following cases:
      (1)   Land disturbing activity disturbs one or more acres of land;
      (2)   Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land, if the
activity is part of a larger common plan of development that affects one or
more acres of land;
      (3)   Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land if, in the
discretion of the County Planning and Zoning Department, the activity poses a
unique threat to water, or public health or safety because the activity by
itself or of a cumulative effect negatively impacts water quality;
      (4)   The creation and use of borrow pits; and
      (5)   The creation and use of stockpiles greater than 50 cubic yards in
volume.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-88-1-11, passed 1-13-2011; Ord. O-
134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.16 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a land
disturbance permit where the same is required by this chapter.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.17 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following activities are exempt from the land disturbance permit
requirement:
   (A)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources;
   (B)   Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures not
subject to the minimum standards as set forth in §
152.15;
   (C)   Existing agricultural use of land involving:
      (1)   Any activity directly related to the planting, growing, and
harvesting of agricultural crops;
      (2)   Implementation of conservation measures approved by the USDA-NRCS
and the County Soil and Water Conservation District; or
      (3)   The construction of agricultural structures not subject to the
minimum standards as set forth in §
152.15.
   (D)   Industrial activities having separate NPDES stormwater permits that
are current and for which they are in compliance.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.18 WAIVERS.
   Every applicant shall provide a stormwater pollution prevention plan as
required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to waive this
requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater pollution prevention plan
requirements shall be submitted to the County Planning and Zoning Department
for approval.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.19 CONDITIONS FOR WAIVER.
   The minimum requirements for the stormwater pollution prevention plan may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided at
least one of the following conditions applies:
   (A)   It can be demonstrated the proposed development is not likely to
impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter;
   (B)   Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater
discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been
approved by the County Planning and Zoning Department;
   (C)   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The
off-site facility must be in place and designed to provide the level of
stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be
afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and
maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and
maintenance of the facility; or
   (D)   It is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the County Planning and
Zoning Department that the waiver will not lead to any of the following
conditions downstream:
      (1)   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures;
      (2)   Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
      (3)   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, or
property; or
      (4)   Degradation of biological functions or habitat.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.20 LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT NOT TO BE ISSUED WHERE WAIVER REQUESTED.
   No land disturbance permit shall be issued where a waiver has been requested
until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be
resubmitted with a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.21 APPLICATION FOR A LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT,
   (A)   Each application shall include the following:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the property owner;
      (2)   The address and legal description of the subject property,
including the tax parcel number of the subject property;
      (3)   Name, address, and telephone number of the contractor and any
subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing activity and who shall
implement the erosion and sediment control plan;
      (4)   A description of the nature, extent, and purpose of the land
disturbing activity, including the size of the area for which the permit will
be applicable;
      (5)   A description of the intended sequence of major activities which
disturb soils for major portions of the site (e.g., grubbing, excavation,
grading);
      (6)   The name of the receiving water(s), or if the discharge is through
a municipal separate storm sewer, the name of the municipal operator of the
storm sewer and the ultimate receiving water(s);
      (7)   A copy of the notice of intent submitted, if required, to the State
Environmental Protection Agency; and
      (8)   The applicant shall obtain from any other state or federal agency
any other appropriate environmental permits that pertain to the property.
However, the inclusion of those permits in the application shall not prohibit
the county from imposing additional development requirements and conditions,
commensurate with this chapter, on the development of property covered by those
permits.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   A stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by NPDES IL R10
plus the additional information required by the county. The plan shall include:
         (a)   An erosion and sediment control plan as set forth in §
152.37; and
         (b)   A stormwater management plan as set forth in §
152.38, providing for stormwater management during the construction and after
the construction has been finished.
      (2)   Payment of land disturbance permit and other stormwater management
pollution prevention plans fees, which shall be set by separate resolution or
ordinance.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.22 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The County Planning and Zoning Department will review each application
for a land disturbance permit to determine its conformance with the provisions
of this chapter. The County Planning and Zoning Department shall provide one of
the following responses to the applicant:
      (1)   Approval of the permit application;
      (2)   Approval of the permit application, subject to any reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to substantially secure the objectives of this
chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      (3)   Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the
denial.
   (B)   If the County Planning and Zoning Department has granted conditional
approval of the land disturbance permit, the applicant shall submit a revised
plan that conforms to the conditions established by the County Planning and
Zoning Department. However, the applicant shall be allowed to proceed with his
or her land disturbing activity so long as it conforms to conditions
established by the County Planning and Zoning Department.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.23 PERFORMANCE BOND OR PERFORMANCE SECURITY.
   (A)   The county shall, at its discretion, require the submittal of a
performance security or performance bond prior to issuance of a permit to
ensure the permit holder conforms to the conditions and requirements of the
approved stormwater pollution prevention plan. The amount of the performance
security or performance bond shall be the total estimated construction cost of
the structural and non-structural BMPs approved under the permit plus 10% of
the total estimated costs. The performance security shall contain forfeiture
provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater pollution
prevention plan. The applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost
estimate complete with unit prices which shall be subject to acceptance,
amendment, or rejection by the County Planning and Zoning Department.
Alternatively the County Planning and Zoning Department shall have the right to
calculate the cost of construction cost estimates.
   (B)   The performance security or performance bond shall be submitted and
accepted by the County Planning and Zoning Department prior to the issuance of
a building permit by the county.
   (C)   The performance security or performance bond shall be released in full
only upon submission of record drawings and written certification by a
registered professional engineer licensed to practice in this state that the
structural and non-structural BMPs have been installed in accordance with the
approved plan and other applicable provisions of this chapter. The County
Planning and Zoning Department will make a final inspection of the BMPs to
ensure it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this
chapter prior to the release of the performance bond or performance security.
Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security or
performance bond based on the completion of various development stages may be
made at the discretion of the County Planning and Zoning Department.
   (D)   Occupation permits will not be granted until all corrections to all
BMPs have been made and accepted by the County Planning and Zoning Department.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.24 PERMIT DURATION.
   Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become null and void if
substantial work authorized by the permit has not commenced within 180 calendar
days of issuance, or is not complete within 18 months from the date of the
commencement of construction.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.35 BMP MANUAL FOR STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.
   The county adopts as its best management practices (BMP) manual the
following publications, which are incorporated by reference in this chapter as
is fully set out herein:
   (A)   Illinois Urban Manual, latest amendment prepared by the Association of
Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts. This manual includes a list of
acceptable BMPs including the specific design criteria and operation and
maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be
updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the governing body
of the county, upon the recommendation of the County Planning and Zoning
Department, based on improvements in engineering, science, and monitory and
local maintenance experience. Stormwater facilities that are designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with these BMP criteria will be
presumed to comply with requirements of NPDES Permit No. IL R10;
   (B)   State Department of Transportation Erosion Control/NPDES Guidelines;
   (C)   The county stormwater policy; and
   (D)   Other publications pertaining to best management practices and/or
erosion and sediment control as may be approved, in writing, by the County
Planning and Zoning Department.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.36 STANDARDS AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
PLANS.
   Unless granted a waiver or judged by the County Planning and Zoning
Department to be exempt, the following performance criteria shall be addressed
for the stormwater pollution prevention plan to permanently reduce or minimize
the negative aspects of stormwater runoff after land development activities at
all sites.
   (A)   All site designs shall control the stormwater discharge in compliance
with county requirements.
   (B)   The stormwater pollution prevention plan shall be designed, at a
minimum, for a storm event equal to or greater than a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall
event.
   (C)   The management practices, controls, and other provisions contained in
the stormwater pollution prevention plan must be at least as protective as the
requirement contained in the Illinois Urban Manual.
   (D)   Watercourses shall be protected from degradation through the
application of recommended design and construction guidelines in the BMP
manual.
   (E)   Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land
disturbance permits shall consult with the County Planning and Zoning
Department to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater pollution
prevention plan requirements which may include stormwater discharges:
      (1)   To waters for which there is a TMDL allocation for sediment or a
parameter that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity,
or siltation);
      (2)   To water bodies identified as impaired on the Illinois Section 303
(d) list. This includes Lake Decatur and its tributaries, the Sangamon River
below the Lake Decatur Dam and Stevens Creek;
      (3)   To critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., swimming beaches,
recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) that may be subject to additional
performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater
pollution prevention practices;
      (4)   From “hot spots” that may require the application of specific
structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.37 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The erosion and sediment control plan shall accurately describe the
potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land
disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to
be taken to control these problems. The length in time and the complexity of
the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the
site condition, and potential for off-site damage. The plan shall be sealed by
a qualified person.
   (B)   The plan shall also conform to the requirements found in the BMP
manual as referenced in §
152.35, and shall include at least the following:
      (1)   Project description. Briefly describe the intended project and
proposed land disturbing activity, including number of units and structures to
be constructed and infrastructure required;
      (2)   A topographic map with contour intervals of five feet or less
showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing
activity;
      (3)   All existing drainage ways, including intermittent and wet-weather.
Include any designated floodways or floodplains;
      (4)   A general description of existing land covers. Individual trees and
shrubs do not need to be identified;
      (5)   Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon project
completion, specifying their general location on the property. Differentiation
shall be made between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed, and
proposed planted trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the
diameter of the area involved must also be identified on the plan and shown to
scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed destruction of
exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist.
Complete landscape plans may be submitted separately;
      (6)   Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading, and filling;
      (7)   Approximate flows and location of existing stormwater leaving any
portion of the site;
      (8)   A general description of existing soil types and characteristics
and any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from
existing characteristics;
      (9)   Location, size, and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation
control improvements;
      (10)   Proposed drainage network;
      (11)   Proposed drain tile or waterway sizes;
      (12)   Approximate flows leaving site after construction and
incorporating water runoff mitigation measures. The evaluation must include
projected effects on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage
facilities and systems. The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the
development. When flows are concentrated, the plan must address the capacity of
waterways, if any, accepting stormwater off-site; and what measures, including
infiltration, sheeting into buffers, and the like, are going to be used to
prevent the scouring of waterways and drainage areas off-site, and the like;
      (13)   The projected sequence of work represented by the grading,
drainage, and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major
items of construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and
including the construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or
any other structural or non-structural BMPs;
      (14)   Specific remediation measures to control erosion and sedimentation
runoff. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used;
stabilization measures including vegetation and non-vegetation measures, both
temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a
maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan;
      (15)   Specific details for the construction of rock pads, wash-down
pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points;
eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at
a level acceptable to the County Planning and Zoning Department. Soil,
sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways must be removed by
the end of the work day by machine, broom, or shovel to the satisfaction of the
County Planning and Zoning Department. Failure to remove the sediment, soil, or
debris shall be deemed a violation of this chapter;
      (16)   Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and
identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures, or development
on the site; and
      (17)   Requirement that qualified personnel shall inspect disturbed areas
of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized, structural
control measures, and locations where vehicles or equipment enter or exit the
site at least once every seven calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of
a storm that is one-half inch or greater or equivalent snowfall.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.38 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to
allow the County Planning and Zoning Department to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed
development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and
the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing
stormwater generated at the project site.
   (B)   To accomplish this goal, the stormwater management plan shall be
prepared in accordance with the county storm drainage policy and include the
following:
      (1)   Soils information; when a stormwater management control measure
depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then
a soils report shall be prepared by a qualified person and submitted with the
plan. The soils report shall be based upon on-site boring logs or soil pit
profiles and soil survey reports. The number and location of required soil
borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine
the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the
control measure;
      (2)   A permanent elevation benchmark shall be identified in the plans to
assist in the periodic inspection of the facility using the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD);
      (3)   A landscaping plan detailing the revegetation of the site after the
construction is finished as set forth in §
152.39;
      (4)   A maintenance plan for all stormwater management facilities to
ensure the continued performance of the facilities subject to the approval of
the County Planning and Zoning Department. The plan shall:
         (a)   Identify the parts or components of the facilities that need to
be maintained and inspected;
         (b)   Provide detailed maintenance and repair procedures for the
facilities;
         (c)   Identify necessary training, skills, or certifications that may
be required to maintain, operate, or repair any of the facilities;
         (d)   Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include
but are not limited to:
            1.   The removal of silt, litter, landscape wastes, and other
debris which adversely impact the effectiveness of the facilities;
            2.   The management of landscaped areas integral to the facilities
including the cutting of grass, trimming of bushes and trees or the removal of
vegetation overgrowth that is not incorporated into the stormwater management
plan;
            3.   The replacement of landscape vegetation and damaged or failed
facilities;
            4.   The cleaning of storm drainage inlets, pipes, and structures;
and
            5.   Revising and implementing revisions or additional maintenance
procedures to address inadequacies of the facilities.
         (e)   Provide for the regular periodic review, inspection, and
evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program by qualified
personnel for the purpose of documenting maintenance needs. The reviews and
inspections shall be conducted at least once every year after the construction
is finished;
         (f)   Provide for established reporting procedures; and
         (g)   Provide that maintenance needs are addressed in a timely manner.
      (5)   An executed maintenance agreement as agreed to by the County
Planning and Zoning Department that assigns the responsibility for compliance
with the maintenance plan required in division (B)(4) of this section to the
owner of the property on which the stormwater facilities are located to ensure
compliance with the purpose and requirements of this chapter. The agreement
shall be a part of the owner’s declaration and by appropriate notation
referenced on the plat and:
         (a)   Include as part of the agreement the maintenance plan as
approved by the County Planning and Zoning Department;
         (b)   Provide that the property owner will arrange to have the
periodic inspection of the stormwater facilities specified in the maintenance
plan conducted by a qualified person who will submit a sealed report of the
inspection to the County Planning and Zoning Department;
         (c)   Grant permission to the County Planning and Zoning Department to
enter the property at reasonable times and inspect the stormwater facility to
ensure that it is being properly maintained;
         (d)   Provide that the property owner shall be responsible for
additional maintenance needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined
in the Illinois Urban Manual;
         (e)   Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely
manner, on a schedule determined by the County Planning and Zoning Department;
and
         (f)   Provide that if the property is not maintained in compliance
with the approved schedule, the County Planning and Zoning Department shall
have the authority to have the maintenance work performed at the county’s
expense and bill the same to the property owner, which shall be a lien against
the property.
      (6)   Dedication of easements necessary to ensure access to the site for
the purpose of maintenance and inspection of the stormwater management
facilities. These easements must be binding on the current property owner and
all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded as a
commitment against the property; and
      (7)   The county shall have the discretion to accept the dedication of
any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided the facility
meets the requirements of this chapter, and includes adequate and perpetual
access and sufficient areas, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and
regular maintenance. Any stormwater facility accepted by the county must also
meet the county’s construction standards and any other standards and
specifications that apply to the particular stormwater facility in question.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.39 LANDSCAPING AND STABILIZATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been
either partially or wholly cleared by development activities shall be
revegetated according to a plan approved by the County Planning and Zoning
Department.
   (B)   A plan for establishing permanent vegetative cover to stabilize
disturbed or exposed areas must be submitted with the stormwater pollution
prevention plan. The plan shall describe the vegetative stabilization and
management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed
using BMPs. This plan will explain how the site will be stabilized after
construction, who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the
site and what practices will be employed to ensure adequate vegetative cover is
preserved.
   (C)   Where it is required by the BMP, this plan must be prepared by a
registered landscape architect in this state.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.40 CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, INSPECTION, AND REPORTING RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The permittee must notify the County Planning and Zoning Department in
advance of the commencement of construction.
   (B)   The permittee shall have inspections of the management practices,
controls, and other provisions contained in the stormwater pollution prevention
plan conducted by qualified personnel acceptable to the County Planning and
Zoning Department. The inspections shall be conducted and documented and
written reports prepared in accordance with the NPDES Permit No. ILR 10 that
contain, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   The date and location of the inspection;
      (2)   Name of inspector;
      (3)   Type of inspection. Whether it is a weekly inspection or following
a precipitation event in excess of one-half inch;
      (4)   Name of contractor and, as applicable, subcontractors;
      (5)   Project name;
      (6)   NPDES permit number;
      (7)   Whether all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment controls
in the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) or as subsequently directed
by County Planning and Zoning Department are in place and in compliance with
the SWPPP;
      (8)   Whether all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment controls
that have been installed are operating correctly;
      (9)   Whether erosion and sediment controls are being properly
maintained;
      (10)   Whether there is tracking of sediment from locations where
vehicles and equipment enter and leave the project site;
      (11)   Whether additional controls, adjustments, or maintenance directed
as a result of previous inspection have been implemented within seven calendar
days; and
      (12)   Any incidents of noncompliance and what corrective action has been
undertaken and completed.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.41 RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   The permittee shall retain copies of the stormwater pollution plan and all
reports and notices required by it, and records of all data used to satisfy the
conditions of the stormwater pollution prevention plan for a period of at least
three years. The county may extend this period at any time prior to the
expiration of the three-year period. These records shall be made available to
the County Planning and Zoning Department during inspection of the facility and
at other reasonable times upon request.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.42 FAILURE TO MEET OR MAINTAIN DESIGN OR MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance
standards required for stormwater facilities under this chapter, the County
Planning and Zoning Department, after reasonable notice, may correct a
violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing the
necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event
the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to the environment or the
public health, safety, and welfare, the County Planning and Zoning Department
shall notify, in writing, the party responsible for maintenance of the
stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
person shall have seven calendar days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective action is not
undertaken within that time, the county shall take necessary corrective action.
The cost of any action by the county under this section shall be charged to the
responsible party.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.43 EXISTING LOCATIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS.
   All locations and developments at which land disturbing activities have
occurred prior to the enactment of this chapter and meeting the criteria
established in §
152.15 shall comply as follows.
   (A)   Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and
guidelines specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the
County Planning and Zoning Department.
   (B)   Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation
and/or retaining walls constructed.
   (C)   Drainage ways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with
riprap, channel lining, and the like to prevent erosion.
   (D)   Trash, junk, rubbish, and the like shall be cleared from drainage
ways.
   (E)   Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to
prevent pollution of local waters. The control measures may include but are not
limited to the following:
      (1)   Ponds:
         (a)   Detention pond;
         (b)   Extended detention pond;
         (c)   Wet pond; and
         (d)   Alternative storage measures.
      (2)   Constructed wetlands;
      (3)   Infiltration systems:
         (a)   Infiltration/percolation trench;
         (b)   Infiltration basin;
         (c)   Drainage (recharge) well; and
         (d)   Porous pavement.
      (4)   Filtering systems:
         (a)   Catch basin inserts/media filter;
         (b)   Sand filter;
         (c)   Filter/absorption bed; and
         (d)   Filter and buffer strips.
      (5)   Open channel: swale.
   (F)   The County Planning and Zoning Department shall in writing notify the
owners of existing locations and developments of specific drainage, erosion, or
sediment problems affecting the locations and developments, the actions
required to correct those problems, and specify a reasonable time for
compliance.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.44 INSPECTION OF EXISTING FACILITIES.
   The County Planning and Zoning Department may, to the extent authorized by
state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify that stormwater
management facilities, including those built before as well as after the
adoption of this chapter, are functioning within design limits. These
inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon
complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage
basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type
associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or
with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to
cause violations of the county’s NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections
with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections
may include but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records;
sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control
facilities and other BMPs.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.45 ILLICIT DISCHARGES.
   (A)   For all water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering the
municipality’s separate storm sewer system, no person shall introduce or cause
to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge
that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
   (B)   The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any non-stormwater
discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
      (1)   Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources:
         (a)   Water line and fire hydrant flushing or other potable water
sources;
         (b)   Landscape irrigation water or lawn watering with potable water;
         (c)   Rising groundwater;
         (d)   Groundwater infiltration;
         (e)   Pumped groundwater;
         (f)   Discharges from potable water sources;
         (g)   Foundation drains;
         (h)   Air conditioning condensate;
         (i)   Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation);
         (j)   Springs;
         (k)   Water from crawl space pumps;
         (l)   Footing drains;
         (m)   Storm sewer cleaning water;
         (n)   Water from individual, residential car washing;
         (o)   Routine external building washdown which does not use
detergents;
         (p)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
         (q)   Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges;
         (r)   Residual street wash water;
         (s)   Discharges or flows from firefighting activities;
         (t)   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges;
         (u)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed); and
         (v)   Any other uncontaminated water source.
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the County Planning and Zoning
Department as being necessary to protect public health and safety; and
      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the County Planning and
Zoning Department has so specified in writing.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.46 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes without limitation illicit connections made in
the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law, or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.47 ELIMINATION OF STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES.
   Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is or may be the
source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the person’s
expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to
the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this section.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.48 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, [or] the municipal separate storm sewer
system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of hazardous
materials, the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the County Planning and Zoning
Department in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the County Planning and Zoning
Department within three business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of the establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. The
records shall be retained for at least three years.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.49 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The County Planning and Zoning Department shall be responsible for enforcing
the provisions in this chapter. The County Planning and Zoning Department is
also hereby authorized to promulgate any rules and regulations as may be
necessary to supplement this chapter for effective enforcement, provided the
rules and regulations shall not be valid until they have been filed in the
office of the County Clerk for not less than ten days before their respective
dates.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act
declared unlawful under this chapter, to violate any provision of this chapter,
to violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or to
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or
take corrective action as required. Any person or entity found to be in
violation of the provisions of this chapter of the code shall be fined in an
amount not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, and each day upon
which a violation occurs or is allowed to continue, or a condition is not
brought into compliance after notice, shall be viewed and may be prosecuted as
a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Stop work orders. In addition to the penalties set forth above, the
county may issue a stop work order for any person in violation of any provision
of this chapter.
   (C)   Other remedies. The provisions or imposition of the penalty aforesaid
shall not preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent, abate or
stop acts, activities, work, or maintenance not in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. In addition to any other remedy that may be
provided otherwise, the provisions of this chapter may be enforced in any
appropriate action, by injunction or otherwise.
(Res. O-62-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-134-12-19, passed 12-12-2019)
CHAPTER 153: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS SITING
Section
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   Applicability
   
153.03   Prohibition
   
153.04   Special use permit application
   
153.05   Design and installation
   
153.06   Operation
   
153.07   Liability insurance and indemnification
   
153.08   Decommissioning and site reclamation plan required
   
153.09   Remedies
   
153.10   Fee schedule and permitting processes
   
153.11   Hearing facilitator
   
153.12   Hearing factors
   
153.13   Interpretation
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   APPLICANT.  The entity who submits to the county an application for the
siting and operation of any WECS or substation. All references to applicant in
this chapter shall include applicant's successors-in-interest and assigns,
which includes a WECS Permittee (as defined below).
   COMMERCIAL OPERATION DATE. The calendar date on which the WECS Project
produces power for commercial sale, not including test power.
   COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY FACILITY. A wind energy conversion facility of equal
or greater than 500 kilowatts in total nameplate generating capacity. Also
referred to herein as WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM or WECS or WECS PROJECT.
   FINANCIAL ASSURANCE or FINANCIAL SECURITY or DECOMMISSION SECURITY.
Assurance from a credit worthy party, examples of which include a surety bond
(e.g., performance and payment bond), trust instrument, cash escrow, or
irrevocable letter of credit.
   METEOROLOGICAL TOWER. Those towers which are erected primarily to measure
wind speed and direction plus other data relevant to siting and operation of a
WECS Project. For purposes of this chapter, meteorological towers do not
include towers and equipment used by airports, the Illinois Department of
Transportation, or other similar applications or government agencies, to
monitor weather conditions.
   NOTICE TO PROCEED. A written document, named as such, stating that the
applicant expresses an intent to commence construction activities on a WECS
Project and identifying the date on which the construction activities are
scheduled to commence.
   NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is not a participating
property.
   NONPARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on nonparticipating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for
a permit to develop the WECS Project is filed with the county.
   OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING. Any one or more of the following buildings that
is existing and occupied on the date that the application for a permit to
develop the WECS Project is filed with the county: a school, place of worship,
day care facility, public library, or community center.
   OPERATOR. The person or entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of a wind energy conversion system, including any third-party
subcontractors. The operator must be a qualified wind power professional. All
references to operator in this chapter shall include operator's successors-in-
interest and assigns.
   OWNER. The person or entity or entities with an equity interest in a wind
energy conversion system, including their respective successors-in-interest and
assigns. The owner does not mean: (i) the property owner from whom land is
leased for locating a wind energy conversion system (unless the property owner
has an equity interest in a wind energy conversion system); or (ii) any person
holding a security interest in a wind energy conversion system solely to secure
an extension of credit, or a person foreclosing on such security interest,
provided that after foreclosure, such person seeks to sell a wind energy
conversion system at the earliest practicable date. This definition includes
the definition of facility owner as defined in 55 ILCS 5/5-12020.
   PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is the subject of a written
agreement between a facility owner and the owner of the real property that
provides the facility owner an easement, option, lease, or license to use the
real property for the purpose of constructing a WECS Project or supporting
facilities. PARTICIPATING PROPERTY also includes real property that is owned by
a facility owner for the purpose of constructing WECS Project or supporting
facilities.
   PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on participating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for
a permit to develop the WECS Project is filed with the county.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A qualified individual who is licensed as a
professional engineer in any state in the United States. Where a structural
engineer is required to take some action under terms of this chapter, a
professional engineer may serve as the structural engineer if he or she has the
appropriate structural engineering certification.
   PROTECTED LANDS. Real property that is subject to a permanent conservation
right consistent with the Real Property Conservation Rights Act, or registered
or designated as a nature preserve, buffer, or land and water reserve under the
Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act.
   PUBLIC CONSERVATION LANDS. Land owned in fee title by county, state or
federal agencies and managed specifically for conservation purposes, including
but not limited to county, state and federal parks, state and federal wildlife
management areas, state scientific and natural areas, and federal wildlife
refuges and waterfowl protection areas. Public conservation lands do not
include private lands upon which conservation easements have been sold to
government agencies or non-profit conservation organizations. Public
conservation lands also do not include private lands for which the owners have
entered into contractual relationships with government or non-profit
conservation organizations for conservation purposes.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit approved by the County Board, after a public
hearing, allowing a particular use at a specified location subject to
compliance with certain specified special conditions as may be required by the
County Board.
   SUBSTATION. The apparatus that collects and connects the electrical
collection system of the WECS(s) and increases the voltage for connection with
the utility's transmission lines.
   SUPPORTING FACILITIES. The transmission lines, substations, access roads,
meteorological towers, storage containers, and equipment associated with the
generation and storage of electricity by the WECS.
   WECS PERMITTEE. An applicant who applies for and receives a special use
permit under this chapter for the siting and operation of any WECS or
substation. All references to a WECS permittee in this chapter shall include a
WECS permittee's successors-in-interest and assigns.
   WECS TOWER or WIND TOWER. Means and includes wind turbine tower, nacelle,
and blades.
   WECS TOWER HEIGHT. The distance from the rotor blade at its highest point to
the top surface of the WECS foundation.
   WECS BUILDING PERMIT. A permit necessary for the commencement of work
performed toward the construction, erection or installation of an approved
WECS, substation or operations and maintenance building in connection with a
WECS project. A WECS building permit may be issued by the county after a WECS
project has obtained a special use permit from the County Board and the
Director of Planning and Zoning determines that all conditions, if any, have
been satisfied that are imposed by the special use permit. The WECS building
permit shall require the applicant (WECS permittee) to deliver a written
"Notice to Proceed" for the WECS project to the county prior to commencement of
construction of the WECS project. The term COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION, as
used in this chapter, includes any site development work (e.g., demolition,
grubbing, grading, excavation, road work, construction of project-related
structures and infrastructure improvements, etc.) regarding the WECS project.
   WIND TURBINE. Any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the
kinetic energy of moving wind into electrical energy through the use of
airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter governs the siting of WECS and substations that generate
electricity to be sold to wholesale or retail markets.
   (B)   Owners of WECS with an aggregate generating capacity of 0.5MW or less
who locate the WECS(s) on their own property are not subject to this chapter.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.03 PROHIBITION.
   No WECS Project, WECS or substation governed by this chapter shall be
constructed, erected, installed, or located within the county, unless prior
siting approval has been obtained for each individual WECS Project, WECS and
substation or for a group of WECS Projects and substations under a joint siting
application pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.04 SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   To obtain siting approval, the applicant must first submit a special
use permit application to the county.
   (B)   The special use permit application shall contain or be accompanied by
the following information:
      (1)   A WECS Project Summary, including, to the extent available:
         (a)   A general description of the project, including:
            1.   Its approximate overall name plate generating capacity;
            2.   The potential equipment manufacturer(s);
            3.   Type(s) of WECS(s);
            4.   The number of WECS, and name plate generating capacity of each
WECS;
            5.   The maximum height of the WECS tower(s) and maximum diameter
of the WECS(s) rotor(s);
            6.   The number of substations;
            7.   A project site plan, project phasing plan and project
construction timeline plan; and
            8.   The general location of the project; and
         (b)   A description of the applicant, owner and operator, including
their respective business structures;
      (2)   The name(s), address(es), and phone number(s) of the applicant(s),
owner and operator, and all property owner(s), if known, and documentation
demonstrating land ownership or legal control of the property;
      (3)   A site plan for the WECS Project showing the planned location of
each WECS tower, including legal descriptions for each site, guy lines and
anchor bases (if any), participating and non-participating residences, occupied
community buildings, parcel boundary lines (including identification of
adjoining properties), setback lines, public access roads and turnout
locations, substation(s), operations and maintenance buildings, and permanent
meteorological towers, electrical cabling from the WECS tower to the substation
(s), ancillary equipment, third party transmission lines, the location of any
wetlands, flood plain, drainage structures including surface ditches and
subsurface drainage lines, underground mines, scenic and natural areas within
1,500 feet of the proposed WECS, the location of all known communications
towers within two miles of the proposed WECS, and the layout of all structures
within the geographical boundaries of any applicable setback;
      (4)   All determinations of No Hazard to Air Navigation from the Federal
Aviation Administration;
      (5)   A proposed Decommissioning Plan for the WECS Project including cost
estimations;
      (6)   All required studies, reports, certifications, and approvals
demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (7)   An Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) executed between
the applicant and the Illinois Department of Agriculture;
      (8)   The topographic map shall include the WECS Project site and the
surrounding area;
      (9)   Any other information normally required by the county as part of
its permitting requirements for siting buildings or other structures;
      (10)   Waivers from the setback requirements executed by the occupied
community building owners and/or the non-participating property owners bearing
a file stamp from the County Recorder of Deeds Office confirming that the
waiver was recorded against title to the affected real property;
      (11)   Waivers from the shadow flicker mitigation requirements executed
by the occupied community building owners and/or the non-participating property
owners bearing a file stamp from the County Recorder of Deeds Office confirming
that the waiver was recorded against title to the affected real property;
      (12)   Results and recommendations from the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources obtained through the Ecological Compliance Assessment Tool or
a comparable successor tool;
      (13)   Results of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service's
Information for Planning and Consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool that is consistent with the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service's Land-Based Wind Energy Guidelines;
      (14)   Information demonstrating that the WECS Project will avoid
protected lands; and
      (15)   Any other information requested by the county or the county
consultants that is necessary to evaluate the siting application and operation
of the WECS Project and to demonstrate that the WECS Project meets each of the
regulations in this chapter, including the special use permit standards set
forth below.
   (C)   Material changes to the application are not permitted once the notice
of the public hearing has been published, unless requested or permitted by the
county.
   (D)   The applicant shall submit 12 copies of the special use permit
application to the county, and at least one copy in electronic format.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.05 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION.
   (A)   A Design Safety Certification.
      (1)   WECSs shall conform to applicable industry standards, including
those of the American National Standards Institute ("ANSI"). Applicants shall
submit certificates of design compliance that equipment manufacturers have
obtained from Underwriters Laboratories ("UL"), Det Norske Veritas ("DNV"),
Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie ("CGL"), or an equivalent third party. All
turbines shall be new equipment commercially available; no used or experimental
equipment shall be used in the WECS Project without the approval of a variance
by the County Board.
      (2)   Following the granting of siting approval under this chapter, a
structural engineer shall certify, as part of the WECS Building Permit
application process, that the foundation and tower design of the WECS is within
accepted professional standards, given local soil, subsurface and climate
conditions.
   (B)   Controls and brakes. All WECSs shall be equipped with a redundant
braking system. This includes both aerodynamic overspeed controls (including
variable pitch, tip, tilt, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes.
Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall
not be considered a sufficient braking system for overspeed protection.
   (C)   Electrical components. All electrical components of the WECS shall
conform to applicable local, state, and national codes, and relevant national
and international standards (e.g. ANSI and International Electrical
Commission).
   (D)   Aesthetics and lighting. The following items are recommended standards
to mitigate visual impact:
      (1)   Coatings and coloring. Towers and blades shall be painted white or
gray or another non-reflective, unobtrusive color.
      (2)   Turbine consistency. To the extent feasible, the WECS Project shall
consist of turbines of similar design and size, including tower height.
Further, all turbines shall rotate in the same direction. Turbines shall also
be consistent in color and direction with nearby facilities.
      (3)   Lighting. WECS Projects shall utilize minimal lighting that is
compliant with the applicable FAA regulations, as amended by the FAA. To the
extent that such tower lighting is available, and is approved by the FAA for a
WECS Project, the applicant shall install Aircraft Detection Lighting Systems
("ADLS") or other similar technology to reduce light pollution and visual
impacts caused by the WECS Towers.
      (4)   Intra-project power and communication lines. All power lines used
to collect power from individual turbines and all communication lines shall be
buried underground at a depth in accordance with the Agricultural Impact
Mitigation Agreement until same reach the property line or a substation
adjacent to the property line.
   (E)   Warnings.
      (1)   A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed
at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations, and at all
entrances to the wind towers.
      (2)   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, plastic
sleeves, reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires
and along the guy wires up to a height of 15 feet from the ground.
   (F)   Climb prevention.
      (1)   All WECS towers must be unclimbable by design or protected by anti-
climbing devices such as:
         (a)   Fences with locking portals at least six feet high; or
         (b)   Anti-climbing devices 12 feet vertically from the base of the
WECS tower.
   (G)   Setback requirements. 
      (1)   WECS towers shall be sited as follows, with setback distances
measured from the center of the base of the WECS tower;
         (a)   Occupied community buildings. 2.1 times the maximum blade tip
height of the WECS tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the
structure.
         (b)   Participating residences. 1.1 times the maximum blade tip height
of the WECS tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the structure.
         (c)   Nonparticipating residences. 2.1 times the maximum blade tip
height of the WECS tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the
structure.
         (d)   Boundary lines of participating property. None.
         (e)   Boundary lines of nonparticipating property. 1.1 times the
maximum blade tip height of the WECS tower to the nearest point on the property
line of the nonparticipating property.
         (f)   Public road rights-of-way. 1.1 times the maximum blade tip
height of the WECS tower to the center point of the public road right-of-way.
         (g)   Overhead communication and electric transmission and
distribution facilities (not including overhead utility service lines to
individual houses or outbuildings). 1.1 times the maximum blade tip height of
the WECS tower to the nearest edge of the property line, easement, or right-of-
way containing the overhead line.
         (h)   Overhead utility service lines to individual houses or
outbuildings. None.
         (i)   Fish and Wildlife Areas and Illinois Nature Preserve Commission
Protected Lands. 2.1 times the maximum blade tip height of the WECS tower to
the nearest point on the property line of the fish and wildlife area or
protected land.
      (2)   The setback requirements may be waived by the written consent of
the owner(s) of each affected property. The applicant does not need to obtain a
variance from the county upon waiver by the property owner of the setback
requirement. Any waiver of any of the above setback requirements shall run with
the land and be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of the county.
   (H)   Compliance with additional regulations. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to preempt other applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
   (I)   Use of public roads.
      (1)   An applicant proposing to use any county, municipality, township or
village road(s), for the purpose of transporting WECS or substation parts and/
or equipment for construction, operation, or maintenance of the WECS(s) or
substation(s), shall:
         (a)   Identify all such public roads; and
         (b)   Obtain applicable weight and size permits from relevant
government agencies prior to construction.
      (2)   To the extent an applicant must obtain a weight or size permit from
the county, municipality, township or village, the applicant shall;
         (a)   Conduct a pre-construction baseline survey to determine existing
road conditions for assessing potential future damage; and
         (b)   Any proposed public roads that will be used for construction
purposes shall be identified and approved in writing by the respective Road
District Commissioner and the County Engineer prior to the granting of the
special use permit. Traffic for construction purposes shall be limited to these
roads. All overweight and/or oversized loads to be transported on public roads
may require a permit from the respective highway authority. Any road damage
caused by the transport of the facility's equipment, the installation,
maintenance, or removal, must be completely repaired to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Road District Commissioner and the County Engineer. The
Road District Commissioner and County Engineer may choose to require either
remediation of road repair upon completion of the WECS Project or are
authorized to collect fees for overweight and/or oversized load permits.
Further, financial assurance in an amount to be fixed by the Road District
Commissioner to ensure the Road District or the county that future repairs are
completed to their reasonable satisfaction shall be provided. Applicant shall
submit a draft form of said financial assurance with application for special
use permit.
         (c)   1.   Enter into a road use agreement with the county and each
affected Road District that includes the following provisions, at a minimum:
               a.   Project layout map;
               b.   Transportation impact analysis;
               c.   Pre-construction plans;
               d.   Project traffic map;
               e.   Project scope of repairs;
               f.   Post-construction repairs;
               g.   Insurance; and
               h.   Financial security in forms and amounts acceptable to the
county.
            2.   The road use agreement shall require applicant to be
responsible for the reasonable cost of improving roads used to construct WECS
and the reasonable cost of repairing roads used by the facility owner during
construction of the WECS so that those roads are in a condition that is safe
for the driving public after the completion of the WECS construction. Roadways
improved in preparation for and during the construction of the WECS shall be
repaired and restored to the improved condition at the reasonable cost of the
developer if the roadways have degraded or were damaged as a result of
construction-related activities.
      (3)   All repairs and improvements to county public roads and roadway
appurtenances shall be subject to the prior approval of the county before being
made and shall also be subject to inspection and acceptance by the county after
such repairs and improvements are completed. The county's road use agreement,
and any further agreements contemplated therein, regarding the maintenance and
repair of county public roads and highways, must be approved by the County
Board prior to the Board's approval of any WECS Building Permit applications
related to the construction of the proposed WECS Project.
   (J)   Site assessment. To ensure that the subsurface conditions of the site
will provide proper support for the WECS towers and soil restoration, the
applicant, at its expense, shall provide soil and geotechnical boring reports
to the County Engineer with respect to each WECS tower location, as part of its
WECS Building Permit. The applicant shall follow the guidelines for
Conservation Practices Impact Mitigation submitted by the County Soil and Water
Conservation District (or equivalent regulatory agency). The applicant shall
submit grading plans for the proposed substations for review and comment by the
County Soil and Water Conservation District prior to the issuance of any WECS
Building Permit for the construction of said substations.
   (K)   Communications analysis; interference.
      (1)   The applicant, at its expense, shall have a third party, qualified
professional (after submission of resume and relevant work experience) conduct
an appropriate analysis of the television reception documenting the television
stations that are received within one and one-half miles of the footprint of
the WECS Project. The results of said study shall be public record and will
serve as a baseline reading for television reception conditions prior to the
construction of the WECS Project and shall be submitted as part of the special
use permit application.
      (2)   The applicant, at its expense, shall have a third party, qualified
professional (after submission of resume and relevant work experience), conduct
a communications analysis that indicates that the E9-1-1 communications,
emergency communications or official county and local municipal communications
reception shall not be negatively impacted or influenced by the proposed wind
power facility. Said communication analysis shall be a public record and shall
be submitted as part of the special use permit application.
      (3)   The applicant and the operator, at the applicant's expense, shall
take immediate actions to minimize or mitigate interference with
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves or
television signals and to eliminate any such interference that impacts local
government public safety (police, fire, emergency medical services, emergency
management services, 911 dispatch) communications, caused by the operation of
the WECS. The applicant shall provide the applicable microwave transmission
providers and local emergency service provider(s) (911 operators) copies of the
WECS Project Summary and Site Plan, as set forth in this chapter. To the extent
that the above provider(s) demonstrate a likelihood of interference with its
communications resulting from the WECS(s), the applicant and the operator, at
applicant's expense, shall take reasonable measures to minimize and mitigate
such anticipated interference and with regard to interference with local,
government public safety (police, fire, emergency medical services, emergency
management services, 911 dispatch) communications, the applicant and the
operator, at applicant's expense, shall take all necessary and available
commercial measures to eliminate any such interference. If, after construction
of the WECS, the applicant (WECS permittee) or operator receives a written
complaint related to the above-mentioned interference, the applicant (WECS
permittee) shall take commercially reasonable steps to respond to the
complaint, except in the case of a complaint of interference with local,
government public safety (police, fire, emergency medical services, emergency
management services, 911 dispatch) communications. In the case of local,
government public safety communications, the applicant (WECS permittee) and the
operator, at the applicant's expense, shall immediately take all necessary and
available commercial measures to eliminate any such interference.
      (4)   If, after construction of the WECS, the applicant (WECS permittee)
or operator receives a written complaint related to interference with local
broadcast residential television, the applicant (WECS permittee) shall take
commercially reasonable steps to respond to the complaint. A summary of
complaint and subsequent response from applicant shall be forwarded to the
Macon County Board for review. Once the construction is complete and a
television reception complaint is received by the Director of Planning and
Zoning, who will have 30 calendar days to verify the complaint, the applicant
(WECS permittee) will be given 15 calendar days to respond, in writing
(validation date). Said response shall be addressed and forwarded to both the
Director of Planning and Zoning and the complainant. Such response shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: an acknowledgment that a
complaint was made and evaluated by the applicant (WECS permittee). If
considered valid by the applicant (WECS permittee): an explanation, including a
timeline, as to what the Applicant (WECS permittee) intends to do about the
complaint. The applicant (WECS permittee) of the wind power facility will be
given an additional 15 calendar days from the validation date to resolve said
TV reception issue. If considered invalid by the applicant (WECS permittee), an
explanation, including supporting documentation and expert opinions, as to why
the applicant (WECS permittee) believes the complaint is not valid. Television
reception complaints must be filed within six months from the date each wind
turbine generator goes online.
   (L)   Noise levels. Noise levels from each WECS or WECS Project shall be in
compliance with applicable Illinois Pollution Control Board (IPCB) regulations.
The applicant shall submit manufacturer's wind turbine sound power level
characteristics and other relevant data regarding wind turbine noise
characteristics necessary for a competent noise analysis. The applicant,
through the use of a qualified professional, shall appropriately demonstrate
compliance with the applicable noise requirements in its special use permit
application.
   (M)   Agricultural impact mitigation. Pursuant to 505 ILCS 147/15(a), the
applicant, at its expense, shall enter into an Agricultural Impact Mitigation
Agreement with the Illinois Department of Agriculture prior to any public
hearing required before a siting decision on the WECS Project application. All
impacted agricultural land, whether impacted during construction, operation, or
decommissioning activities, must, at a minimum, be remediated by the applicant
pursuant to the terms of the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement with the
Illinois Department of Agriculture. The applicant shall submit the executed
Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement to the county as part of the special
use permit application.
   (N)   Avian and Wildlife Impact Study. The applicant, at its expense, shall
have a third party, qualified professional (after submission of resume and
relevant work experience) conduct an avian and wildlife impact study and submit
said study to the county as part of the special use permit application. Each
WECS or WECS Project shall be located, designed, constructed, and operated so
as to avoid and if necessary mitigate the impacts to wildlife.
   (O)   As-built map and plans. Within 60 calendar days of completion of
construction of the WECS Project, the applicant or operator shall deliver "as-
built" maps, site plan and engineering plans for the WECS Project that have
been signed and stamped by a professional engineer and a licensed surveyor.
   (P)   Engineer's certificate. The WECS Project engineer's certificate shall
be completed by a structural engineer registered in the State of Illinois or by
a professional engineer with a certification from a structural engineer
registered in the State of Illinois and shall certify that the WECS tower and
foundation design is compatible with and appropriate for each turbine design
proposed to be installed and that the specific soils and subsurface conditions
at the site can support the apparatus, given local soil, subsurface and climate
conditions. All commercially installed wind turbines must utilize self-
supporting, tubular towers. The WECS Project engineer's certificate shall be a
public record and shall be submitted as part of the special use permit
application.
   (Q)   Conformance with approved application and plans. The applicant shall
construct and operate the WECS Project in substantial conformance with the
construction plans contained in a county- approved submitted special use permit
application(s), conditions placed upon the operation of the facility, this
chapter, and all applicable state, federal and local laws and regulations.
   (R)   Additional terms and conditions.
      (1)   All technical submissions as defined in the Professional
Engineering Practice Act of 1989 (225 ILCS 325/4(w)) and contained in the
special use permit application shall be prepared and signed by an Illinois
Professional Engineer (or structural engineer) for the relevant discipline.
      (2)   The county may retain a qualified, independent code inspector or
professional engineer both to make appropriate inspections of the WECS Project
during and after construction and to consult with the county to confirm that
the construction, substantial repair, replacement, repowering and/or
decommissioning of the WECS Project is performed in compliance with applicable
electrical and building codes. The cost and fees so incurred by the county in
retaining said inspector or engineer shall be promptly reimbursed by the
applicant of the WECS Project.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide that locked metal gates or a locked
chain are installed at the access road entrances of all the wind turbine
generator locations. An exception may be made when the landowner has filed a
written statement with the county which states that the owner does not want a
locked metal gate installed and has provided a signed liability waiver to the
county.
      (4)   The special use permit granted to the applicant shall bind and
inure to the benefit of the applicant, its successors-in-interest and assigns.
If any provision in this chapter, or conditions placed upon the operation of
the commercial wind energy facility is held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect any other provision of this chapter that can be given effect without the
invalid provision and, to this end, the provisions in this chapter are
severable.
      (5)   The applicant shall provide an executed road use agreement between
the applicant and, the appropriate governing road and highway jurisdictions or
the Illinois Department of Transportation, to the county showing approved
entrances prior to the issuance of any WECS Building Permit or prior to
construction of the WECS Project.
   (S)   No wind turbine generator shall be installed in any location where its
proximity with existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antenna
for radio, television, or wireless phone or other personal communication
systems would produce electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or
reception. The wind turbine generator shall not be installed in a location
along the major axis of existing microwave communications link where its
operation is likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the link's
operation.
   (T)   The applicant of the WECS Project shall use two methods to detect
icing conditions on turbine blades: (1) sensors that detect when blades become
imbalanced or create vibration due to ice accumulation; and (2) meteorological
data from on-site meteorological towers, on-site anemometers, and other
relevant weather sources that will be used to determine if ice accumulation is
occurring. These control systems will either automatically shut down the
turbines(s) in icing conditions or the applicant will manually shut down the
turbine(s) if icing conditions are identified.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.06 OPERATION.
   (A)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Annual report. The applicant (WECS permittee) must submit, on an
annual basis on the anniversary date of the siting approval application, an
operation and maintenance report to the county. The report shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   A general description of any physical repairs, replacements or
modification(s) to the WECS and/or its infrastructure;
         (b)   Complaints pertaining to setbacks, noise, shadow flicker,
appearance, safety, lighting and use of any public roads received by the
applicant concerning the WECS and the resolution of such complaints;
         (c)   Calls for emergency services;
         (d)   Status of liability insurance; and
         (e)   A general summary of service calls to the WECS. Failure to
provide the annual report shall be considered a material violation of this
chapter and subject to §
153.09.
      (2)   Re-certification. Any physical modification to the WECS that alters
the mechanical load, mechanical load path, or major electrical components shall
require re-certification under Design and Safety Certification as laid out in
this chapter. Like-kind replacements and modifications that are made in the
ordinary course of operations, including expected repairs and warranty items,
shall not require re-certification. Prior to making any physical modification
(other than a like-kind replacement or other modifications made in the ordinary
course of operations), the applicant shall confer with a relevant third-party
certifying entity identified in Design and Safety Certification of this chapter
to determine whether the physical modification requires re-certification.
   (B)   Coordination with emergency responders.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit to the local emergency responders a copy
of the site plan, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Standard Operating
Guidelines (SOGs), and any amendments to such documents, for the wind power
facility so that the local law enforcement, fire protection district and rescue
units, emergency medical service providers and emergency management service
providers that have jurisdiction over each tower site may evaluate and
coordinate their emergency response plans with the applicant of the WECS
Project.
      (2)   The applicant, at its expense, shall provide annual training for,
and the necessary equipment to, the operator and local emergency response
authorities and their personnel so that they can properly respond to a
potential emergency at the WECS Project. Special equipment to be provided
includes, but is not limited to, permanently installed rescue equipment such as
winches, pulleys, harnesses, etc.
      (3)   The applicant and the operator shall cooperate with all local
emergency responders to develop an emergency response plan. The plan shall
include, at a minimum, 24-hour contact information (names, titles, email
addresses, cell phone numbers) for the applicant and the operator and at least
three designated WECS Project representatives (a primary representative with
two alternate representatives, each of whom are on-call "24 hours per day / 7
days per week / 365 days per year"). Any change in the designated WECS Project
representative or his/her contact information shall be promptly communicated to
the county. The content of the emergency response plan, including the 24-hour
contact information, shall be reviewed and updated on an annual basis.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall alleviate the need to comply with all
other applicable life safety, fire / emergency laws and regulations.
   (C)   Water, sewer, materials handling, storage and disposal.
      (1)   All solid wastes related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the WECS shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of
in accordance with all federal, state and local laws.
      (2)   All hazardous materials related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the WECS shall be handled, stored, transported and disposed of
in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws.
      (3)   The WECS Project shall comply with existing septic and well
regulations as required by the County Health Department and the State of
Illinois Department of Public Health.
   (D)   Shadow flicker. The applicant must present to the County Board a model
study on potential shadow flicker. The applicant shall appropriately
demonstrate to the County Board through industry standard modeling that no
occupied community building or non-participating residence will experience an
expected duration of 30 hours or more per year. An occupied community building
owner or a non-participating residence owner may waive this shadow flicker
mitigation requirement. Each waiver of the above shadow flicker mitigation
requirement shall be set forth in a written waiver executed by the occupied
community building owner or non-participating residence owner and filed with
the County Recorder of Deeds Office against title to the affected real
property.
   (E)   Signage. Signage regulations are to be consistent with ANSI and AWEA
standards. A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed
at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations, and at all
entrances to wind towers.
   (F)   Drainage systems. The applicant, at its expense, will repair, in a
prompt and timely manner, all waterways, drainage ditches, agricultural
drainage systems, field tiles, or any other private and public infrastructure
improvements damaged during construction, maintenance and operation phases of
the WECS Project in accordance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation
Agreement.
   (G)   Complaint resolution. The applicant shall, at its expense and in
coordination with the county, develop a system for logging and investigating
complaints related to the WECS Project. The applicant shall resolve such non-
emergency complaints on a case-by-case basis and shall provide written
confirmation to the county. All costs and fees incurred by the county in
attempting to or resolving complaints shall be reimbursed by the applicant of
the WECS Project. The applicant shall also designate and maintain for the
duration of the WECS Project either a local telephone number or a toll-free
telephone number and an email address as its public information / inquiry / and
complaint "hotline" which shall be answered by a customer service
representative 24/7 basis. The applicant shall post the telephone number(s) and
email address(es) for the customer service representative(s) in an prominent,
easy to find location on their websites and at the WECS Project site on
signage.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Commencing with the issuance of a WECS Building Permit, the applicant
shall maintain a current general comprehensive liability policy and automobile
liability coverage covering bodily injury, death and illness, and property
damage with limits of at least $5,000,000 per occurrence and in the aggregate;
and, shall further maintain the above-stated lines of insurance from delivery
of the "Notice to Proceed” by the applicant under the turbine supply and/or
balance of plant construction contract(s) for the WECS Project, in coverage
amounts of at least $5,000,000 per occurrence and $20,000,000 in the aggregate
during the life of the WECS Project. The applicant shall file the original
certificate of insurance upon commencement of project construction prior to the
issuance of a WECS Building Permit, corresponding policies and endorsements to
be provided within 60 days of issuance, and at each subsequent renewal, at
least annually thereafter.
   (B)   The applicant (WECS permittee) shall defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the county and its officers, appointed and elected officials,
employees, attorneys, engineers and agents (collectively and individually, the
“Indemnified Parties”) from and against any and all claims, demands, losses,
suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses and liabilities
whatsoever, including reasonable attorney's fees relating to or arising out of
the issuance of the special use permit or the construction, operation,
maintenance and removal of the WECS and affiliated equipment including, without
limitation, liability for property damage or personal injury (including death
or illness), whether said liability is premised on contract or on tort
(including, without limitation, strict liability or negligence) or any acts or
omissions of the applicant (WECS permitee), the owner or the operator under
this chapter or the special use permit, except to the extent any such claims,
demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses
and liabilities arise from the negligence or intentional acts of such
indemnified parties. This general indemnification shall not be construed as
limiting or qualifying the county's other indemnification rights available
under the law.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.08 DECOMMISSIONING AND SITE RECLAMATION PLAN REQUIRED.
   Applicant (or owner, if different from applicant) must submit a
decommissioning plan with cost estimation to the county as part of the siting
application and provide testimony supporting the calculation of costs provided
in said plan during the public hearing on the application. Prior to receiving
any building permit for the commercial wind energy facility, the applicant or
owner shall provide a Decommissioning Agreement and post file required
financial assurances for the benefit of the county. The Decommissioning
Agreement and financial assurances shall comply with 55 ILCS 5/5-12020.
Periodically, and as required by the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement,
the owner must update the Decommissioning Plan, cost estimations and provide
updated financial assurances to the benefit of the county.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.09 REMEDIES.
   (A)   The applicant's failure to materially comply with any of the
provisions under the special use permit, any conditions imposed on the project,
and/or failure to comply with any law or regulation shall be a default and
shall be grounds for revocation of the special use permit by the County Board.
   (B)   Prior to implementation of the applicable county procedures for the
resolution of default(s), the County Board must first provide written notice to
the applicant and operator, setting forth the alleged default(s) and provide an
opportunity for the applicant or the operator to cure the default(s) within a
30 calendar day period from the date of the notice. Should the applicant
commence the cure within that 30-day cure period, and diligently pursues a
cure, then the applicant shall receive an additional 60 days to continue to
pursue the cure before the county pursues procedures for the resolution of
default. If the default relates to a life safety issue or interference with
local, government public safety (police, fire, emergency medical services,
emergency management services, 911 dispatch) communications, the applicant or
the operator shall take all necessary and available commercial measures to
immediately cure the default. If the applicant or operator cannot cure the
default(s) or resolve the alleged default(s) within the cure period, then
applicable county ordinance provisions addressing the resolution of such
default(s) shall govern.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.10 FEE SCHEDULE AND PERMITTING PROCESSES.
   (A)   Application fees.
      (1)   Prior to processing any application for a commercial wind energy
facility, the applicant must submit a certified check to the county for the
application fee equal to $          per megawatt (mW) of proposed nameplate
capacity, up to a maximum fee of $         . These funds shall be placed in an
FDIC insured account and will be used to cover the county's cost incurred in
processing the application.
      (2)   Should the actual costs to the county exceed the submitted
application fee, the applicant shall be responsible for those additional costs
and shall remit additional funds to the county within 15 days of receipt of a
request from the county. No hearings on an application shall be conducted nor
final decisions rendered on an application if there are application fees due to
the county.
      (3)   Any unused amounts of the application fee shall be refunded to the
applicant within six months of the County Board rendering a final decision on
the matter, unless any pending litigation, disputes or negotiations involving
the county exist regarding the commercial wind energy facility, in which case
any amounts owed to the applicant shall be refunded within six months of the
conclusion of the litigation, disputes or negotiations. An applicant may
request any unused application fee be applied toward the building permit fees
for the facility.
   (B)   Building permit fees.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of building permits, the building permit
applicant must deposit a building permit fee equating to $            per
megawatt (mW) of nameplate capacity. If the total nameplate capacity is less
than 1 mW, the building permit fee shall be reduced pro rata.
   (C)   All costs to be paid by applicant or owner. In addition to all fees
noted above, the applicant or owner shall pay all costs incurred by the county,
including but not limited to, those costs associated with all offices, boards
and commissions of the county, and third-party costs incurred by the county.
This includes, but is not limited to, the direct or indirect costs associated
with the hearing, permitting, operations, inspections, decommissioning,
litigation, disputes, and/or negotiations.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.11 HEARING FACILITATOR.
   (A)   The county may engage the services of a hearing facilitator. The
hearing facilitator shall be an independent contractor who shall conduct a
hearing in accordance with all applicable rules of the Board and the county but
has no adjudicatory responsibility other than ruling on requests for
continuances, procedural matters, admissibility of evidence and the propriety
of any arguments.
   (B)   The hearing facilitator shall be an attorney, licensed to practice in
the State of Illinois. The applicant shall reimburse the county for the fees
and costs charged by the facilitator.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
2023 S-10
§ 153.12 HEARING FACTORS.
   (A)   The County Board may approve a commercial wind energy facility special
use permit application if it finds the evidence complies with state, federal
and local law and regulations, and with the standards of this zoning code,
including the factors listed below. The factors below are applied as a
balancing test, not individual requirements to be met.
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the WECS Project
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare;
      (2)   The WECS Project will not be injurious to the uses and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values of surrounding
properties;
      (3)   The establishment of the WECS Project will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding properties;
      (4)   Adequate public utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or will be provided;
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
      (6)   The proposed WECS Project is not contrary to the objectives of the
current comprehensive plan of the county (if any); and
      (7)   The WECS Project shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of this chapter and the zoning district in which it is
located (if a zoning ordinance is in effect), except as such regulations may,
in each instance, be modified pursuant to the recommendations of and approved
by the County Board.
   (B)   Special use permit conditions and restrictions. The County Board may
stipulate conditions, guarantees and restrictions, upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the WECS Project as are
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards and requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Revocation.
      (1)   In any case where a special use permit has been approved for a WECS
Project, the applicant shall apply for a WECS building permit from the county
and all other permits required by other government or regulatory agencies to
commence construction, and commence and actively pursue construction of the
project within 36 months from the date of the granting of the special use
permit. If the applicant fails to apply for a WECS building permit from the
county and all other permits required by other government or regulatory
agencies prior to construction and/or fails to commence and actively pursue
construction of the project within the 36 month period, then without further
action by the County Board, the special use permit authorizing the construction
and operation of the WECS Project shall be automatically revoked and void. Upon
written request supported by evidence that the applicant has diligently pursued
issuance of all necessary government and regulatory permits for the project
required to commence construction and that any delay in commencement of
construction of the project is due to conditions out of his/her/its control,
the County Board, in its sole discretion, may extend the above 36 month period
by passage of an ordinance that amends the special use permit.
      (2)   The special use permit shall be subject to revocation if the
applicant dissolves or ceases to do business, abandons the WECS Project or the
WECS ceases to operate for more than 12 consecutive months for any reason.
      (3)   Subject to the provisions of §
153.09, a special use permit may be revoked by the County Board if the WECS
Project is not constructed, installed and/or operated in substantial
conformance with the county-approved project plans, the regulations of this
chapter and the stipulated special use permit conditions and restrictions.
   (D)   Transferability; owner or WECS permittee. The applicant shall provide
written notification to the County Board at least 30 days prior to any change
in ownership of a WECS Project of any such change in ownership. The phrase
"change in ownership of a WECS Project" includes any kind of assignment, sale;
lease, transfer or other conveyance of ownership or operating control of the
applicant, the WECS Project or any portion thereof. The applicant or
successors-in-interest or assignees of the special use permit, as applicable,
shall remain liable for compliance with all conditions, restrictions and
obligations contained in the special use permit, the provisions of this chapter
and applicable county, state and federal laws.
   (E)   Modification. Any modification of a WECS Project that alters or
changes the essential character or operation of the WECS Project in a way not
intended at the time the special use permit was granted, or as subsequently
amended, shall require a new special use permit. The applicant or authorized
representative, shall apply for an amended special use permit prior to any
modification of the WECS Project.
   (F)   Permit effective date. The special use permit shall become effective
upon approval of the ordinance by the County Board.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 153.13 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of these regulations shall be held to the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health,
safety and general welfare of Macon County. These regulations are not intended
to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations
or laws of Macon County nor conflict with any statutes of the State of
Illinois.
(Ord. O-147-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Referenced standards
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   Plat jurisdiction
   
154.004   Definitions
   
154.005   Approval of subdivision plats
   
154.006   Sale of unapproved subdivisions
   
154.007   Pre-application conferences
   
154.008   Approval of preliminary or final plat
Preliminary Plat
   
154.025   Plat jurisdiction
   
154.026   Requirements
   
154.027   General review agencies
   
154.028   Municipal review agencies
   
154.029   Township review agencies
   
154.030   Time-frame for comment by review agencies
   
154.031   Committee recommendation
   
154.032   Committee review
   
154.033   County Board review
   
154.034   Minor subdivision procedures
   
154.035   Replat
Final Plat
   
154.050   Generally
   
154.051   Plat dimensions
   
154.052   Plat requirements
   
154.053   Legal description
   
154.054   Copies
General Design Considerations
   
154.065   Acre subdivision
   
154.066   Streets in relation to railroads
   
154.067   Bicycle facilities and bicycle paths
   
154.068   Permanent markers; monuments
   
154.069   Erosion and sediment control
   
154.070   Standards for subdivisions in the floodplain
   
154.071   Parks, school sites, and the like
   
154.072   Street names
   
154.073   Planned unit development
Project Design
   
154.085   Specifications
   
154.086   Right-of-way dedications and easements
   
154.087   Street design
Lot and Block Design
   
154.100   Blocks
   
154.101   Lots
   
154.102   Building lines
Character of Development
   
154.125   Minimum standards
   
154.126   County certificate
   
154.127   Bonds
Construction Documentation
   
154.140   Completion notification
   
154.141   Registered professional engineer to perform inspection
Fees
   
154.155   Preliminary and final plats
   
154.156   Plat adjustments by developer/subdivider
   
154.157   Engineering review costs, construction permits, and inspections
   
154.158   Adjustments relative to taxes
Approvals
   
154.170   Minor changes
   
154.171   Subdivider requirements
   
154.172   Committee approval
   
154.173   County Board review
   
154.174   County Board approval
   
154.175   Board disapproval
   
154.176   Re-subdivision of blocks
   
154.177   Filing of plat
Enforcement
   
154.190   Dedications
Administration
   
154.205   Change to more restricted use district
   
154.206   Variations and exceptions
   
154.207   Amendments to chapter
   
154.208   Conflicts
Appeals
   
154.220   Requirements
   
154.221   Notice of appeal
   
154.222   Stay
   
154.223   Hearing
   
154.224   Committee decisions
   
154.225   Judicial review
   
154.226   Reversal of decision
   
Appendix A: Typical Cross-Section for Urban Residential Street
   
Appendix B: Typical Cross-Section for Rural Residential Street
   
Appendix C: Typical Residential Lot Grading
   
Appendix D: Typical Lot Drainage Detail
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 REFERENCED STANDARDS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD FOR ROADWAY LIGHTING. The most recent edition of
American National Standard for Roadway Lighting prepared by the American
National Standards Institute, published by the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association (NEMA), and duly adopted by reference from time to
time by the County Board.
   BLR MANUAL. The most recent edition of Bureau of Local Roads and Streets
Manual published by the State Department of Transportation, Bureau of Local
Roads and Streets (BLR), and duly adopted by reference from time to time by the
County Board.
   HIGHWAY STANDARDS. The most recent edition of Highway Standards published by
the State Department of Transportation, Bureau of Design, and duly adopted by
reference from time to time by the County Board.
   IDOT.  The Illinois Department of Transportation.
   MUTCD. The most recent edition of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
published by the Federal Highway Administration and duly adopted by reference
from time to time by the County Board.
   NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE. The National Electrical Code published by the
National Fire Protection Association and duly adopted by reference from time to
time by the County Board.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROAD AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION. The most recent
edition of Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction published
by the State Department of Transportation and duly adopted by reference from
time to time by the County Board.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR WATER AND SEWER MAIN CONSTRUCTION IN ILLINOIS.
The most recent edition of Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois published jointly by the State Society of Professional
Engineers, Consulting Engineers Council of Illinois, State Chapter of the
American Public Works Association, State Municipal League, the Associated
General Contractors of Illinois and duly adopted by reference from time to time
by the County Board.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subdivision review process is to develop a set of
guidelines for reviewing and approving subdivision plats in this county. The
procedures contained herein are established to ensure proper development of the
county and to promote the public health, safety, convenience, prosperity, and
general welfare of the county and its citizens.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.003 PLAT JURISDICTION.
   This subdivision review process shall govern all divisions of land within
the plat jurisdiction of the county in which any parcel of land less than five
acres in size or any new easement of access are created. The provisions of this
subdivision review process do not apply to transfers of interest in land by
will or pursuant to court order, leases for a term not to exceed five years,
and the sale of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if
additional lots are not thereby created and the resulting lots are not reduced
below the minimum sizes required by the zoning ordinance of the county.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMITTEE. The County Environment, Education, Health, and Welfare (EEHW)
Committee of this county.
   PLAT or TRACT. A plat of each subdivision and each tract of land as herein
defined, having been prepared and sealed by a duly licensed surveyor and having
the approval by the proper authorities, shall be recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds in the county.
   SUBDIVISION OF LAND. The division of a parcel of land into two or more parts
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or possession, building development,
or any division of land in which a new street or new easement of access is
created when appropriate to the content of this chapter, the term shall relate
to the process of subdivision, or to the land subdivided, and shall include re-
subdivisions.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.005 APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   All subdivision plats of land with the unincorporated area of the county
shall be approved by the County Board before the plat can be recorded. Where
the subdivision plat lies within that portion of the unincorporated area over
which an officially appointed municipal planning commission has subdivision
jurisdiction (area within one and one-half mile of corporate limits), the plat
shall be submitted to the municipal planning commission and receive the
approval of the municipal planning commission before the Committee shall
examine the plat for approval.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.006 SALE OF UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISIONS.
   Any person who transfers or sells or attempts to transfer or sell any lot in
an unapproved subdivision may be enjoined by the County Board from the transfer
or sale by injunction. No public improvements shall be laid in any street of an
unapproved subdivision. Whoever sells or offers for sale or leases for any time
exceeding five years, any lot or block before all the requirements of this
chapter have been complied with, shall be fined $250 for each lot or block or
part thereof so disposed of, offered for sale, or leased.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.007 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCES.
   (A)   This subdivision review process requires that before the county
accepts for review any preliminary subdivision plat, final plat, plan
development zoning plat, or any other survey made for the purpose of dividing
land, that the subdivider or his or her agents shall first meet with the County
Regional Planning Commission staff and the Highway Department personnel for
pre-application conferences and site investigations.
   (B)   The purpose of the pre-application meeting and investigations are as
follows:
      (1)   To determine the proper classification or procedure which the
subdivider should follow in the subdivision of land in question;
      (2)   To ensure that the subdivider fully understands all the provisions
of this chapter and other county codes related to the development of land;
      (3)   To ensure that the subdivider is thoroughly familiar with the
standards, materials, and specifications of the county and/or other
governmental bodies governing the construction of streets, and other public
facilities in the area he or she intends to subdivide;
      (4)   To determine whether or not any other action such as rezoning,
annexation to an incorporated village or city, or street vacation needs to be
taken prior to the development of land;
      (5)   To ensure that the subdivider will conduct adequate background
studies to allow him or her to properly design his or her subdivision and to
afford the county proper information to review the subdivision plan; and
      (6)   To ensure that the subdivision will be designed consistently with
the comprehensive plan for the county and/or the official plans of any other
governmental bodies having subdivision powers in the area of the subdivision,
and to ensure that the subdivider is aware of all the provisions of the plan
which would affect the overall design of his or her subdivision.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.008 APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY OR FINAL PLAT.
   The recommendations of approval of a preliminary or final plat cannot be
made by the Committee unless the proposed plat or subdivision bears the
approval of the Township Commissioner of Highways of the township in which the
proposed plat or subdivision is situated. If the proposed subdivision is
situated partly in more than one township, the Township Commissioner of
Highways of each township shall specifically state his or her approval of the
system of streets and alleys in the proposed plat or subdivision. Maintenance
and inclusion of the streets and alleys into the township road system shall be
accepted only by a separate resolution set forth by the Township Commissioner
of Highways after construction is completed in accordance with all requirements
of this chapter.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
PRELIMINARY PLAT
§ 154.025 PLAT JURISDICTION.
   No preliminary plan is required on maps or plats of land exempted in §
154.003 or those detailed in §§
154.034 and
154.035.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.026 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   After the subdivider has satisfied the pre-application requirements,
he or she shall then prepare and submit two paper copies and one electronic
copy in an acceptable format of his or her preliminary plat to the County
Regional Planning Commission for review.
   (B)   All preliminary plats submitted to the County Regional Planning
Commission shall be on 24-inch by 36-inch paper and contain the following
information:
      (1)   The location of present property lines, streets, buildings,
watercourses, and other existing features within the area to be subdivided, and
similar facts regarding existing conditions in properties immediately adjacent;
      (2)   The proposed location and width of streets, lots, and building
lines;
      (3)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground
structures within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto. The relative
location and size of the nearest water mains and sewers shall be indicated in a
general way upon the plat if none exist within the immediate area of the
subdivision;
      (4)   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded,
the date submitted, scale, north arrow, the names and addresses of the
subdivider, engineer, and surveyor platting the tract;
      (5)   The names of all adjoining subdivisions; and
      (6)   In addition, the review agency may require a contour map showing
contour intervals of two feet or less.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.027 GENERAL REVIEW AGENCIES.
   The subdivider shall also prepare and submit one paper copy of the
preliminary plat to each of the following entities for review:
   (A)   County Highway Department;
   (B)   County Soil and Water Conservation District;
   (C)   EEHW Committee of the County Board;
   (D)   Affected utilities companies;
   (E)   Municipality having subdivision review powers; and
   (F)   Any other agency that merits the opportunity to review and comment on
the plan.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.028 MUNICIPAL REVIEW AGENCIES.
   If the tract lies within one and one-half miles of a municipality having
subdivision review powers, the subdivider shall also prepare and submit 11
paper copies of the plat to that municipality for review. All preliminary plats
submitted to the municipality shall contain the following information detailed
in §
154.026(B)(1) through (6).
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.029 TOWNSHIP REVIEW AGENCIES.
   If the tract lies within a township having an established township planning
board, the subdivider shall also prepare and submit two paper copies of the
plat to that township planning board for review. All preliminary plats
submitted to the township planning board shall contain the information detailed
in §
154.026(B)(1) through (6).
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.030 TIME-FRAME FOR COMMENT BY REVIEW AGENCIES.
   It shall be a requirement of this subdivision review process that all
reviewing agencies have 15 days in which to make comments concerning the
preliminary plat, addressing them to the County Regional Planning Commission.
However, if the tract lies within one and one-half miles of a municipality
having subdivision review powers or a township having an established township
planning board, the municipality or township planning board shall have 50 days
in which to make written comments. Preliminary plan approval by the review
agencies does not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision; its approval,
however, does inform the subdivider that the review agencies do accept the
general character and development details of the subdivision.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.031 COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATION.
   The Committee will meet to consider recommendations of approval to the
County Board of the preliminary plat. The developer or his or her
representative must be present at this review for the plat to be approved.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.032 COMMITTEE REVIEW.
   Within 30 days after the Committee review, the Committee shall transmit the
plat, all documents accompanying the same, and exhibits offered or introduced
therewith, to the County Board, and shall therewith submit to the Board its
recommendation as to whether the Committee approves the proposed plat. The
recommendation of the Committee may be accompanied by a statement of the
Committee setting forth its reasons for the recommendation. The plat and
recommendations along with all other matters and things required to be
submitted therewith shall be submitted to the County Board not later than 90
days after the submission of the plat to the County Regional Planning
Commission, unless the period shall be extended by order of the County Board
upon which duly made by a member thereof and passed at any regular, special, or
called meeting thereof.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.033 COUNTY BOARD REVIEW.
   The County Board, may approve or disapprove, or in part approve and in part
disapprove, the recommendations of the Committee and may adopt any ordinance
amending provisions hereof in conformity with the approval, disapproval, or
partial approval and disapproval, as a majority of all the members of the Board
may by their favorable vote choose to enact.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.034 MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The minor subdivision procedures shall be allowed when it is
determined in the pre-application conference that five lots or less will be
created; the subdivision fronts on an existing adequately improved street; does
not involve any new streets; easements of access or the extension of other
municipal facilities; does not adversely affect the development of the
remainder of the parcel or adjoining property; and does not conflict with any
provisions of the official map or other applicable regulations or plans.
   (B)   After the classification of the proposed subdivision as a minor
subdivision it shall be processed in one step in accordance with the following
procedures.
      (1)   (a)   The subdivider shall have a survey plat prepared and stamped
by a state professional licensed surveyor. The original, two paper copies, one
electronic copy in an acceptable format, and the letter of application shall be
submitted to the County Regional Planning Commission for review. The subdivider
shall also submit one copy of the certified survey map to each of the utility
companies to ascertain whether any utility easements are required; and one copy
to the tax officer to ascertain whether there are any unpaid taxes.
         (b)   These agencies should submit comments to the County Regional
Planning Commission within 15 days. If no comments are received within 15 days
it shall be considered that there are no objections to the plat. The Committee
shall then have a period of 30 days to approve, conditionally approve, or
reject the plat. If the Committee rejects the subdivision, its objections shall
be in writing.
      (2)   When a minor subdivision is approved by action of the Committee,
the Chairperson of the Committee shall sign the plat and within 15 days submit
the original, bearing his or her name and date, submitting one signed copy to
the developer.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.035 REPLAT.
   (A)   The replat procedures shall apply when an alteration, redesign, or
resubdivision is proposed for an existing legally recorded subdivision or part
thereof. The replat may be processed in one or two steps depending upon whether
or not it is necessary to vacate or alter any streets, easements, lots, or
other public facilities. In the instance where no public facilities, easements,
lot records, or other improvements are involved and where the plan change
corresponds with the provisions of the County Comprehensive Plan, the further
subdivision or other alteration of lots in existing subdivision shall follow
the same procedures as described under a minor subdivision; in all other
instances involving subdivision classified as replats, the original plat must
be vacated according to the following division (B).
   (B)   (1)   Vacation of existing plat. Any person, firm, or agent thereof
wishing to have vacated existing lot lines, public streets, highways, or alleys
or any easement other than easements granted between individual property owners
shall file a written instrument and plat with the Committee showing what
easements and rights-of-way are to be vacated. The Plan Commission, the County
Engineer, and the affected utility companies shall review the instrument and
replat. A jurisdictional control review of any street, road, or highway right-
of-way to be vacated shall be performed by the County Engineer. Should the
results of this review indicate the right-of-way is not under the control of
the county, the author of the instrument shall seek approval from the entity
controlling the right-of-way. The Committee after receiving the comments of
these agencies shall make their recommendations on the plat to the County
Board. If the County Board concurs with the vacation, the County Clerk shall
submit the resolution to the County Board, the instrument and plat to the
County Recorder of Deeds, who then shall officially record and cancel the
entire plat of record or specific portions thereof.
      (2)   Review of plat. After a vacation of a previous plat has been
approved by the County Board and recorded in the office of the County Recorder
of Deeds, the subdivider may then submit his or her petition for the replat of
the subdivision involved. The subdivision shall be classified by the Committee
as either major, minor, or planned unit development (PUD) and shall then
proceed in accordance with the regulations established for the classification
given to the subdivision.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
FINAL PLAT
§ 154.050 GENERALLY.
   After the subdivider has received approval of his or her preliminary plat,
he or she shall proceed with the final plat procedure. The final plat will be
approved by the review agency, provided no significant changes have occurred
since the review of the preliminary plat and the following conditions are met.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.051 PLAT DIMENSIONS.
   The final plat shall be drawn (sheet size 24 inches by 36 inches) and shall
be at a scale of 50 feet to the inch when longest dimension of tract is 100
feet, 100 feet to the inch when the longest dimension of tract is 1,320 feet,
and 200 feet when the longest dimension is over 1,320 feet. In certain
instances where the subdivided area is of unusual size or shape, the Committee
may permit a variation in the scale of the final plan. Plats must be drawn
accurately to whatever the required scale may be. Where necessary, the plat may
be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire
subdivision.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.052 PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be a requirement of this subdivision review process that all final
plats be submitted to the review agency contain the following information:
   (A)   The boundaries of all properties; the lines of all proposed streets
with their width and names; and any other portions intended to be dedicated to
public use. In the case of branching streets the lines of departure from one
street to another shall be indicated;
   (B)   The lines of all adjoining properties; the lines of adjacent streets
and alleys, with their widths and names;
   (C)   All lot lines, the number for all lots and blocks; building lines and
easements with figures showing their dimensions;
   (D)   All dimensions, linear and angular, necessary for locating boundaries
for subdivisions, lots,
streets, easements, and building lines and any other similar public or private
use. The linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and tenths of a foot;
   (E)   Radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency, central angles for all
curvilinear streets and radii for all rounded corners;
   (F)   All monuments together with their descriptions;
   (G)   Title and description of property subdivided, showing its location and
extent, north arrow, scale of plan, and the name and address of the subdivider,
engineer and surveyor platting the tract; also classification of property under
the zoning law;
   (H)   Cross-sections may be required of all streets and alleys. Major
streets shall, insofar as possible,
conform to the contours and avoid grades in excess of 5%, and attempts should
be made to provide similar grades on minor streets;
   (I)   Any private restriction or references thereto shall be shown on the
plat and plats shall contain
proper acknowledgments of owners and mortgagees accepting the platting and
restrictions;
   (J)   A certificate shall accompany the final plat showing all taxes due
shall have been previously paid; and
   (K)   Drainage calculations in accordance with §
154.087(J).
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.053 LEGAL DESCRIPTION.
   The plat and surveyor’s certificate shall contain a correct legal
description of the parcel of land being platted and the owner shall provide a
suitable name or description of the plat not involving a metes and bounds
description so that the tract or parcel may be described and known by the name
or description on the records in the office of Recorder of Deeds and tax books
of this county.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.054 COPIES.
   Upon approval of the final plat, electronic copies of the plat shall be
provided by the subdivider to the County Highway Department, Planning and
Zoning Department and the County GIS Coordinator. The format of the files shall
meet the requirements of each department. All information shall be in the
proper state plane coordinates accurately defining the location of the
subdivision.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
GENERAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
§ 154.065 ACRE SUBDIVISION.
   Whenever the area is divided into lots containing one or more acres and
there are indications that the lots will eventually be re-subdivided into
smaller building lots, consideration must be given not only to street and lot
arrangement of the proposed subdivision, but also to the placement of future
minor streets to ensure a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.066 STREETS IN RELATION TO RAILROADS.
   When the area to be subdivided adjoins a railroad right-of-way, a street
shall be dedicated which is parallel to the railroad. The distance of the
street from the line of the railroad right-of-way shall be approved by the
Committee, but if the intervening property is to be used for industrial,
commercial, or residential purposes, the distances shall not be less than 130
feet.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.067 BICYCLE FACILITIES AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   Bicycle facilities and paths shall be designed according to the BLR Manual
and AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.068 PERMANENT MARKERS; MONUMENTS.
   Not less than two concrete monuments approved by the County Engineer shall
be located within the boundaries of simple rectangular plats. Sufficient
additional approved concrete monuments shall be placed on large plats to locate
all major boundary lines and allow for the re-establishment of all lot corners.
Five-eighths inch iron pins shall be set at all lot corners.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.069 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
   (A)   As of March of 2003, the county has been mandated to follow the
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge and Elimination System (NPDES)
permit program as promulgated by Congress in the Clean Water Act. Under Phase
II of the program, the county was required to control non-point source
pollution such as stormwater runoff containing sediment, fertilizers, waste
oil, and other pollutants as targeted. Due to the program standards, the county
was deemed to possess a municipal separate stormwater system (MS4). The county
is required to have an approved permit program as promulgated by the State
Environmental Protection Agency and is required to follow the rules regarding
erosion and sediment control. The county has passed an ordinance requiring any
project disturbing more than one acre of ground to incorporate proper erosion
and sediment controls.
   (B)   All developers, builders, and subdividers disturbing more than one
acre of ground are required to adhere to the county ordinance on erosion and
sediment controls. They should contact the County Planning and Zoning office to
determine current requirements for site plans, review of construction plans,
ongoing site inspections, expectations and responsibilities of the contractor
and follow-up reviews. These requirements are likely to change over time, so it
is incumbent upon the applicant to know what is expected by the county before
design work begins.
   (C)   All developers and subdividers are strongly encouraged to design for
low impact development (LID) in regards to stormwater design. LID preserves
open space and minimizes land disturbances. This leads to the protection of
natural features and areas both on and off the development site. For example,
the use of buffer strips along natural drainage ways and existing drainage
swales and waterways helps lower the impact of stormwater leaving the site. It
also leads to fewer human-made controls that need to be installed to meet the
NPDES permit requirements. There are many emerging techniques, both natural and
human-made, that are available for LID. Many of these techniques can lead to
lower design and construction costs versus traditional methods when properly
applied.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.070 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS IN THE FLOODPLAIN.
   All subdivisions which are located in whole or in part within a special
flood hazard area (SFHA) as depicted on the county floodplain maps (dated
December 4, 1984) prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the
National Flood Insurance Program, shall provide that:
   (A)   All aspects of the subdivision shall be designed to minimize flood
damage to the proposed subdivision as well as to other properties;
   (B)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
water and street systems shall be designed, located, elevated and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
   (C)   Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
   (D)   For any proposed subdivision greater than 50 lots or five acres,
whichever is the lesser, the developer shall show the base flood elevation date
for each lot of the subdivision, and if the base flood elevation data is not
available, the developer shall compute and provide this data for each lot of
the subdivision.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.071 PARKS, SCHOOL SITES, AND THE LIKE.
   In subdividing property, due consideration shall be given to the dedication
of suitable sites for schools, parks, and playgrounds, so as to conform as
nearly as possible to the recommendations of the Committee and county zoning
regulations. The provisions should be indicated on the preliminary plan in
order that the determination may be made regarding the manner in which the
areas will be dedicated to or acquired by the county, or other public agency.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.072 STREET NAMES.
   (A)   All streets shall be named and marked by metal street signs per the
County Emergency Telephone System Board. Each street in an addition shall have
a minimum of two of the street signs; one at the end of each street and one at
each intersection. The signs shall be placed prior to the final approval of the
plat as per plat rules.
   (B)   If requested by the subdivider, the County Highway Department shall
install the required street signs and bill the subdivider for the work.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.073 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Any parcel of land five acres or more can be considered as developable
as a planned unit development (PUD) when both the subdivider and the Committee
concur in the pre-application conference that the land is best developed as a
PUD. The Committee shall approve the PUD only if it finds that the PUD
satisfies all of the following standards:
      (1)   Is consistent with the comprehensive plan of the county;
      (2)   Makes appropriate provisions for the necessary drainage ways,
wooded areas, rough terrain and other similar areas for an effective and
unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site;
      (3)   Is in harmony with existing and proposed development in the area
surrounding the project site; and
      (4)   Its approval will not represent any increased maintenance burden on
roads, drainage ways, or public utilities to the county over the normal
maintenance that would have been incurred if the subdivision were developed as
a standard subdivision.
   (B)   (1)   Upon classification of any plat as a PUD by the Committee, the
subdivider is then required to submit to the County Zoning Administrator a
letter requesting joint subdivision and zoning action. This letter should
contain an outline of the development proposals and a copy of the PUD plat
drawn in accordance with the standards of §§
154.025 through
154.035. The Zoning Administrator shall arrange to have a joint meeting of the
Committee and the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days of the submission of
the plat and give notice to the subdivider of the time and place of the
meeting.
      (2)   Zoning Board of Appeals and the Committee approval: the plat shall
be processed the same as any other subdivision plat. All PUDs must be approved
by a two-thirds vote of the members of the County Board. Since PUDs combine
zoning and subdivision procedures, all hearings shall comply with publication
and notice requirements of the state and the county zoning ordinance.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
PROJECT DESIGN
§ 154.085 SPECIFICATIONS.
   Unless stated otherwise in this chapter, all construction of public
improvements shall be performed in accordance with the latest revised edition
of the State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (SSRB)
adopted by the State Department of Transportation (IDOT), the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, Bureau of
Local Roads and Streets Manual (BLR), Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD), American National Standard for Roadway Lighting, and the National
Electrical Code. If an engineering design or construction situation arises not
covered by the above cited standard specifications or in the following
sections, the direction provided by the County Engineer or county
representative shall be followed.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.086 RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATIONS AND EASEMENTS.
   (A)   When the subdivider owns the land on both sides of a proposed street,
the entire right-of-way for the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider.
   (B)   When the subdivider owns the land on only one side of an existing
street, the existing right-of-way of which is narrower than that required by
these regulations, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way which
lies between the centerline of the existing right-of-way and the outside edge
of the additional right-of-way equal to at least one-half of the required
right-of-way width.
   (C)   Subdividers shall dedicate right-of-way for streets and alleys, in
accordance with the BLR Manual and the state statutes.
   (D)   Minimum right-of-way requirements for cul-de-sacs shall not be less
than 100 feet in diameter.
   (E)   Easements for utilities, where required, should be at least ten feet
wide centered on rear or side lot lines. Easements of greater width may be
required along rear lot lines or where necessary for the extension of sanitary
sewer mains and other utilities.
   (F)   When a stream or important surface drainage course is located in an
area being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate an adequate easement along
each side of the stream, for the purpose of maintenance, widening, deepening,
sloping, improving, or protecting the stream for drainage.
   (G)   The subdivider shall design all street and roadway profiles, lot
grading, and right-of-way to allow driveway access meeting the requirements of
the BLR Manual.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.087 STREET DESIGN.
   The following requirements shall be incorporated into the design of all
roads.
   (A)   Horizontal alignment.
      (1)   Horizontal curves. When a roadway has a deflection angle of one
degree or greater, the designer must design the roadway with a horizontal
curve. The arterials and collectors should have a minimum centerline radius of
300 feet but should avoid minimum radii to minimize using maximum
superelevation rates. All other types of streets shall have a minimum radius of
100 feet. The arterials and collectors should have a minimum length of curve of
500 feet if the deflection angle is five degrees or less. If the deflection
angle is five degrees or greater, the minimum length of curve shall be
consistent with the BLR Manual.
      (2)   Superelevation. The selection of a maximum allowable superelevation
and superelevation rate shall conform to the appropriate articles of the latest
revision of the BLR Manual.
   (B)   Vertical alignment.
       (1)   Grades. The maximum profile grade for all streets shall be 8% and
the minimum grade on all streets shall be 0.50%. All grades shall be subject to
the approval of the County Engineer. If an engineering design or construction
situation arises not covered by the ordinance herein, the option of the County
Engineer or county representative shall be final.
      (2)   Vertical curves. All grade changes shall be connected by vertical
curves. The length of the vertical curve will depend on the algebraic
difference between the two tangent grades and required site distance. The
minimum crest and sag vertical curve length for all arterial and collector
streets shall be consistent with the BLR Manual. The minimum crest and sag
vertical curve length for all other roadways shall be 30 feet.
   (C)   Cross-section elements.  
      (1)   Guidelines. All streets to be constructed by the subdivider shall
be in accordance with the following guidelines and the BLR Manual, which are
subject in every case to the discretion of the County Engineer. See Appendix A
and Appendix B for additional details.
      (2)   Widths.
         (a)   Generally.
Type of Street Pavement Width (Edge of Pavement to Edge of Pavement)
Pavement Width for Rural Functional Classification Categories
Type of Street                     Pavement Width (Edge of Pavement to Edge of
                                   Pavement)
Pavement Width for Rural Functional Classification Categories
    1.   Minor arterials     24 feet minimum
    2.   Major collectors    24 feet minimum
    3.   Minor collectors    24 feet minimum
    4.   Local roads         20 feet minimum
    5.   Streets with a cul-d24 feet minimum
    6.   Alleys              10 feet minimum
Urban Functional Classification Categories
    7.   Minor arterials     24 feet minimum
    8.   Collector streets   20 feet minimum
    9.   Local streets       20 feet minimum
   10.   Streets with a cul-d24 feet minimum
   11.   Alleys              10 feet minimum
 
         (b)   Increased width. Increased widths may be used depending in the
anticipated traffic volumes and parking demands. The pavement widths shall be
determined by the County Engineer after consultation with the subdivider’s
engineer.
      (3)   Parking.  The subdivider shall evaluate the demand for parking as
required in the BLR Manual.
      (4)   Medians and islands. The subdivider shall evaluate the need for
medians and islands as required in the BLR Manual. No sign may be installed in
the median which blocks the sight distance at the intersection. If a sign is to
be installed, detailed plans for the sign shall be submitted with the
construction plans for approval. In no case shall an island or median contain
any other sign or structure except as may be placed for traffic control under
the direction of the County Engineer. The subdivider may landscape medians or
islands. Ground cover may not exceed a maximum height of 12 inches. Any
additional living plant material must be installed to allow visibility across,
over, or through medians and islands at a height of three to ten feet above the
adjacent roadway pavements.
      (5)   Curb and gutter. The subdivider shall design the barrier curb and
gutter in accordance with the BLR Manual. Mountable curb and “V” gutters shall
not be allowed adjacent to roadway pavement or shoulders.
      (6)   Cross slopes. All streets with the exception of an alley shall have
a minimum transverse cross slope of 1.5% sloping away from the centerline of
the roadway. Alley cross-sections may be V-shaped with transverse slopes up to
2.5% toward or away from the centerline of the roadway. If the alley has a
transverse slope toward the center of the roadway, the vertical alignment shall
be designed to ensure positive drainage to a storm sewer system.
      (7)   Sidewalks. All sidewalks constructed by the subdivider shall comply
with the State Accessibility Code, being 71 Ill. Admin. Code §§ 400.110 et seq.
The minimum sidewalk width shall be five feet and minimum thickness shall be
five inches. The minimum clear width at any isolated point along an accessible
route shall be three feet. The sidewalk cross slope shall not exceed 2.0%.
Sidewalks should be separated from roadways by curbs, planted parkways, or
other barriers, which will be continuous except at driveways or alleys.
   (D)   Driveways. Residential driveway widths shall be 12 feet minimum and
shall not exceed 24 feet, with a minimum thickness of six inches of PCC
pavement. Commercial and industrial driveway widths vary from 24 feet to 35
feet depending on volume of traffic. For two-way driveways, the centerline
should be at right angles to the roadway. Angles less than 60 degrees should
only be used for one-way residential driveways.
   (E)   Cul-de-sacs. There shall be a minimum outside radius of 50 feet for
residential, commercial, and industrial cul-de-sacs. Streets with cul-de-sacs
should not be greater than 500 feet in length unless approved by the Committee
and County Board.
   (F)   Intersections.
      (1)   Curb or radius pavement returns at street intersections shall be
rounded by radii of at least 25 feet.
      (2)   Roads shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles, and the angle of intersection should be within 15 degrees of the
perpendicular. Under restricted conditions, where obtaining the right-of-way to
straighten the angle of intersection would be impractical, an intersection
angle up to 30 degrees from the perpendicular may be used.
      (3)   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining
additions (or their proper protection where adjoining property is not
subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. The width
of the streets in new subdivisions shall not be less than the minimum street
widths established herein. The street arrangement must also be so as to cause
no hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and
seek to provide convenient access thereto.
   (G)   Electric distribution. The underground electrical distribution system
shall be installed on utility easements along rear or side lot lines per §
154.086.
   (H)   Street lighting. The subdivider shall have the option to install
street lights along public streets in the county in accordance of the American
National Standard For Roadway Lighting prepared by the American National
Standards Institute, published by the National Electrical Manufacturers
Association (NEMA), and duly adopted by reference from time to time by the
County Board. If the subdivider chooses to install street lighting, the layout
of the streetlights are required on a photometric plan for approval by the
Committee and the County Engineer. The lighting performance standards shall
meet the City of Decatur Zoning Ordinance, § XXVIII.
   (I)   Pavement design.  
      (1)   The subdivider shall design the pavement structure according to
soil boring information taken from the proposed site with the methods detailed
in the BLR Manual. The minimum pavement thicknesses shall not be less than the
pavement thicknesses detailed in Appendix A and Appendix B. The pavement
structure shall be constructed according to the requirements of the SSRB
adopted by IDOT including supplement specifications of this state.
       (2)   These requirements are the minimum standards of construction only
and do not preclude construction of roads and streets to higher standards, at
the subdivider’s expense upon approval by the County Engineer.
   (J)   Drainage design.
      (1)   Methods of determining stormwater runoff rate and volume. Drainage
and storage facilities shall be designed using the Rational Method of
calculating runoff discharge rate and total volume for watersheds 50 acres or
less. The Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) Method (TR20 or TR55)
can be used for any watershed but shall be required for watersheds over 50
acres.
      (2)   Detention. The detention reservoir shall be sized using one of the
methods stated in division (J)(1) above releasing a ten-year storm event for
the existing pre-developed condition while detaining the 50-year storm event
for the proposed post-developed condition. If the imperviousness is reduced by
the proposed development, no detention shall be required. The stormwater
storage area shall be provided with a method of emergency overflow in the event
that a storm in excess of the 50-year return frequency storm occurs. The
emergency overflow shall be designed to safely convey a 100-year storm.
      (3)   Controlling entity. If the detention reservoir is being released
into a watershed governed by a more controlling entity, the detention reservoir
shall meet the controlling entities’ design criteria on detention reservoir
design.
      (4)   Retention. Retention reservoir stormwater system shall be designed
with all the items required for detention storage and the following. There
shall be a restrictor, weir, or other device to reduce flow out of the
reservoir in order to store the required volume above normal pool elevation.
Minimum normal water depth shall be six feet. If fish are to be used to keep
the reservoir clean, a minimum normal depth of ten feet shall be required.
Aeration hardware to prevent pond stagnation shall be provided, if necessary.
Design calculations to prove the effectiveness of the aeration hardware shall
be submitted with the construction plans.
      (5)   Freeboard. Detention/retention reservoirs shall have adequate
capacity to contain the storage volume of tributary stormwater runoff with a
minimum of one foot of freeboard above the water surface of flow in a 100-year
emergency overflow storm event.
      (6)   Stormwater facilities. Where development of a property presents the
threat of flooding or damage by flash flood runoff to downstream residents, the
facilities for stormwater runoff control shall be constructed prior to any
other construction on the project site.
      (7)   Ditch. When the rural estate section for streets is allowed, the
pipe running longitudinally along the roadway shall conform to the requirements
of division (J)(9) below, storm sewers, and the details shown in Appendices B
and D to this chapter. If the ditch capacity calculations show the headwater
for the maximum design year encroaching onto the roadway, the subdivider shall
provide additional appropriately spaced inlets to convey the water away from
the roadway. If it is not feasible to outlet the water from the proposed site
to a natural drainage course using the rural estate section, with prior
permission from the County Engineer, the subdivider may use the open ditch
method for rural residential streets. If the open ditch method is utilized, the
minimum ditch grade allowed shall be 0.3% to minimize ponding. All ditch grades
greater than 4% shall be paved with concrete, as directed by the County
Engineer. The open ditch shall be trapezoidal in shape with a one-foot minimum
ditch bottom. The foreslopes and backslopes shall not be greater than 1V:2H.
Design storm frequencies for rural and urban roadways shall be in accordance
with the BLR Manual. All ditch capacities shall be determined with the methods
described in the latest revision of the IDOT Drainage Manual.
      (8)   Typical residential lot grading. All lot drainage patterns for
residential development shall convey positive drainage away from the proposed
residence as shown in Appendix C and Appendix D.
      (9)   Storm sewers. Storm sewers shall be designed in accordance with the
BLR Manual. Size the storm sewer system using a ten-year flood event. The
minimum size for storm sewers shall be 12 inches for main lines and eight
inches for lateral lines along all roadways. The minimum velocity allowed in
storm sewer systems is three feet/second flowing full. Pipe and fittings shall
be solid wall conforming to Class B material requirements in § 550 of the SSRB.
Single-wall corrugated plastic pipe will not be allowed.
      (10)   Culverts. All culverts shall be designed in accordance with the
IDOT Drainage Manual. The minimum permissible diameter culvert for entrances is
12 inches and 18 inches for all other roadway facilities.
      (11)   Surface and subsurface drains. All lots shall have access to a
drain inlet placed on public right-of-way for surface and subsurface stormwater
sources. All surface and subsurface drains such as sump pumps, roof drains, and
the like shall be connected to these inlets underground. Maintenance of these
drainage systems shall be the responsibility of the homeowner from the point of
connection at the inlet back to the source of water collection. Water from
these sources shall not be allowed to dump from a lot onto the surface of the
roadway right-of-way. Directing this drainage towards an existing surface swale
or drainage way such as a creek or stream will be allowed, provided all other
applicable drainage design requirements of this chapter are satisfied.
         (a)   Curb and gutter sections. Inlets and manholes shall be placed on
public right-of-way allowing access for each lot to connect to a drainage
structure.
         (b)   Rural estate sections. The subdivider shall require the home
builder to install an inlet or catch basin on the storm sewer line. This
requirement shall be included on the subdivision plat. The drainage structure
shall be installed upstream of the driveway entrance to the lot if possible.
The subdivider shall install the storm sewer in such a manner that each lot
will have access to it.
   (K)   Final plans. Final engineering plans shall show complete details for
all items covered in this section. Plans, specifications, and all calculations
for stormwater runoff control and storm sewers shall be submitted for review
and approval as part of the final plat submittal.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
LOT AND BLOCK DESIGN
§ 154.100 BLOCKS.
   (A)   No block shall be longer than 1,000 feet between street lines. Blocks
750 feet or longer shall have a cross walk near the center of the block. The
right-of-way for these walks shall not be less than ten feet in width.
   (B)   (1)   Where it is desirable to subdivide a parcel of land which
because of its size or location, does not permit any allotment directly related
to a normal street arrangement, there may be established a “place”.
      (2)   A PLACE may be in the form of a court, a non-connecting street or
other arrangement; provided, however, that proper access shall be given to all
lots from a dedicated place (street or court) and the minimum size of each
allotment of this sort shall be permanently established so as to ensure a
building arrangements commensurate with the foregoing requirements for the
customary forms of subdivision of land. When a court is not used, provisions
shall be made for utility vehicles, including snowplows, to turn around at the
non-connecting end of the street. These provisions shall meet the approval of
the County Engineer.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.101 LOTS.
   (A)   All lots shall directly abut a public street, other than an alley,
unless a permanent easement of access to a public street was of record prior to
the adoption of this chapter.
   (B)   All sidelines of lots shall be at right angles to street lines, or
radial to curved street lines.
   (C)   Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the
maintenance of building lines on both front and side. In normal cases the width
shall not be less than the amount of the established building lines on the side
streets plus a minimum width for a building and any side yard requirements as
may be provided for by a zoning ordinance.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.102 BUILDING LINES.
   Building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use of
any character and on commercial lots immediately adjoining residential areas;
the building lines shall not be less than required by the zoning ordinance, but
no building line shall be nearer than 35 feet to the right-of-way. Provisions
shall be made by deed requiring all enclosed parts of buildings to be set back
to the building lines.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
CHARACTER OF DEVELOPMENT
§ 154.125 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Committee shall have the right to agree with the subdivider
regarding the type and character of development that will be permitted in the
subdivision, and may require that certain minimum regulations regarding this
matter be incorporated in the deed restrictions. The regulations shall be
intended to protect the character and value of the surrounding development and
shall also tend to secure the most appropriate character of the development of
the property being subdivided.
   (B)   Among the minimum standards that may be required are the following:
      (1)   Sections 154.085 through 154.087, project design; and
      (2)   Sections 154.140 and 154.141, construction documentation.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.126 COUNTY CERTIFICATE.
   The subdivider shall secure a certificate from the County Engineer, setting
forth the type and cost of the roadway construction, sewers and culverts
necessary to provide access to the proposed subdivision. The Planning and
Zoning Department shall collect the estimated cost of this work when collecting
the filing fees and deposit it with the County Treasurer in the County Highway
Fund to be paid back on the estimates of the County Engineer, as the
construction progresses. However, the owner may with the approval of the
Committee furnish, in lieu of the cash deposit, a corporate surety bond in the
amount of the estimated improvements or personal surety bond with three co-
signers in double the amount of the estimated improvement, which personal
surety bond shall show under oath the net worth of the principal and the three
co-signers; the surety bond except as aforesaid covering double the cost of
roadway construction as estimated by the County Engineer, including sewers and
culverts, running in favor of the county, and specifying the time of completion
by more than one year unless the subdivider receives permission by resolution
of the County Board, upon recommendation of the Committee of the Board, for an
extension of time, which extension shall be written into the bond given by the
subdivider with the consent and approval by the County Board upon
recommendation of the Committee of this Board and the County Engineer of this
county and shall run in favor of this county.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.127 BONDS.
   If the improvements as aforesaid have been made, the subdivider shall give
immediate notice to the Committee of the Board who shall give notice in
writing, by registered mail, to the subdivider, to the County Engineer and to
the Township Road Commissioner in which the improvements are made, of a hearing
at least ten days in the future, the hearing for the purpose of determining
whether or not the County Engineer and the Township Road Commissioner of
aforesaid have accepted the roadways as being made and improved in the manner
specified by the rules and regulations of this Board for that purpose and by
the County Engineer and the Township Road Commissioner as aforesaid. If the
roadways have been so accepted, and the improvements have been made as
aforesaid, then the Committee of this Board shall recommend to the County
Board, at its next regular or special meeting that the bond or bonds be
canceled.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTATION
§ 154.140 COMPLETION NOTIFICATION.
   The subdivider will be required to notify the County Engineer at the
completion of each phase of street construction, producing all tickets
certifying weights and gallons of materials used. The subdivider will proceed
with construction only after proper inspection and acceptance by the County
Engineer.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.141 REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER TO PERFORM INSPECTION.
   The subdivider shall secure a competent inspector, approved by the County
Engineer, and employed by and under the direction of the subdivider’s
registered engineer to perform construction observation during the duration of
the project. All documentation shall be submitted to the county when the
project is complete for final approval. After the subdivider’s registered
engineer has certified the completion of the roads per the requirements listed
herein, the County Engineer shall inspect the roads to ensure the new
development was constructed per the requirements listed herein. Thereupon, the
County Engineer shall submit a written report to the Township Commissioner,
stating whether or not the roads are complete and ready for acceptance by the
township.
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
FEES
§ 154.155 PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS.
   Upon the filing of any plat with the Committee, there shall be attached
receipt from the County Clerk showing all fees have been paid as specified on
the following fee schedule:
 
Preliminary Plat                        Fee
1) Minor, single-family residential     $250 plus $25 per lot
subdivision
2) Standard, single-family residential  6 to 10 lots - $500 plus $25 per lot
subdivision                             11 or more lots- $750 plus $25 per lot
3) Multi-family residential subdivision $200 plus $10 per lot
4) Commercial and/or industrial         $200 plus $10 per acre, or fraction
subdivision                             thereof
 
Final Plat                      Fee
1) Residential subdivision      $20 plus $1 per lot
2) Commercial and/or industrial $20 plus $1 per acre, or fraction thereof
subdivision
 
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.156 PLAT ADJUSTMENTS BY DEVELOPER/SUBDIVIDER.
   These fees are applicable only towards the review of the plat for a specific
site; the applicability of these fees is conditional upon there being no major
changes in concept or design of the subdivision initiated by the developer/
subdivider. Major changes in the concept or design of the subdivision,
initiated by the developer/subdivider will require another fee to be paid;
specific changes initiated by the reviewing authority shall not be deemed to
require another fee to be paid.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.157 ENGINEERING REVIEW COSTS, CONSTRUCTION PERMITS, AND INSPECTIONS.
   These fees are apart from any fees and changes which may otherwise be
assessed for engineering review costs, construction permits, or construction
inspections.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.158 ADJUSTMENTS RELATIVE TO TAXES.
   All adjustments relative to any and all taxes must be made before recording.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
APPROVALS
§ 154.170 MINOR CHANGES.
   The Committee shall have the power to make changes as conditions may require
and which do not materially deviate from substantial conformity to the
provisions herein.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.171 SUBDIVIDER REQUIREMENTS.
   The subdivider shall submit the following to the Committee:
   (A)   The final plat of the addition which shall be recorded in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds;
   (B)   Paper copy of final plat or map;
   (C)   Electronic file of the final plat or map in the format specified by
the County Engineer;
   (D)   Certificate from the County Engineer setting forth the grading,
paving, sewer, or culvert requirements; certificate of approval of drainage
from Township Highway Commissioner of the township in which the proposed plat
or subdivision is to be located;
   (E)   Receipt from the County Clerk for deposit covering cost of grading,
paving, sewers, and culverts; and
   (F)   Receipt from the County Clerk for filing fee.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.172 COMMITTEE APPROVAL.
   If the final plat map shall be approved, the Committee shall stamp the same:
   “Approved by the County Board this __________ day of ______________, A.D.
20_____.
                        ________________________________
                        Chairperson”
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.173 COUNTY BOARD REVIEW.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the Committee review, the Committee shall
transmit the plat and all documents accompanying the same, exhibits offered or
introduced therewith, to the County Board, and shall therewith submit to the
Board its recommendation as to whether the Committee approves, the proposed
plat.
   (B)   The recommendation of the Committee shall be accompanied by a
statement of the Committee setting forth its reasons for the recommendation.
   (C)   That plat, and recommendations, along with all other matters and
things required to be submitted therewith shall be submitted to the County
Board not later than 90 days after the submission of the plat with the County
Regional Planning Commission, unless the period shall be extended by order of
the County Board upon motion duly made by a member thereof and regularly passed
at any regular, special, or called meeting thereof.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.174 COUNTY BOARD APPROVAL.
   The County Board may approve or disapprove, or in part approve and in part
disapprove, the recommendations of the Committee and may adopt any ordinance
amending provisions hereof in conformity with the approval, disapproval, or
partial approval and disapproval as a majority of all the members of the Board
may by their favorable note choose to enact. However, the Board may approve the
plat over the Committee’s recommendation for denial, but only on a two-thirds
vote of its members.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.175 BOARD DISAPPROVAL.
   In case the Board disapproves the map or plat, it shall be returned by the
County Clerk to the owner giving reasons therefor. In that case, the deposit
covering the grading, surfacing, and culverts shall be returned to the
subdivider.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.176 RE-SUBDIVISION OF BLOCKS.
   A final plat of a re-subdivision of blocks in any plat previously approved
and recorded may be submitted under these provisions without the formality of
submitting a preliminary plat, provided all other requirements of these rules
have been met.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.177 FILING OF PLAT.
   After the approval of the final plat by the Board, the plat shall be filed
with the County Recorder within 30 days and if not so filed the plat shall have
no validity and shall not be recorded without re-approval.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.190 DEDICATIONS.
   In all cases of dedications, the officers and employees of the county are
directed to compel compliance with the laws of the state and the requirements
as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.205 CHANGE TO MORE RESTRICTED USE DISTRICT.
   Whenever property is subdivided with the intention that it shall have a more
restricted use than that designated on the zoning plan, the subdivider shall
petition for rezoning to the proper classification as in conformance with the
county zoning ordinance.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.206 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   Whenever the strict enforcement of these regulations would entail practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships, the Committee may vary or modify them in
such a way that the subdivider is allowed to develop his or her property in a
reasonable manner, while protecting the public welfare and interest of the
county and preserving the general intent and spirit of the regulations.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.207 AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER.
   This chapter may be amended from time to time upon the recommendation of the
Committee, and when approved by a majority of the County Board.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.208 CONFLICTS.
   All provisions in other county ordinances governing plats and subdivisions
of land in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
APPEALS
§ 154.220 REQUIREMENTS.
   An appeal from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the Administrative Officer may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any
officer, department, board, or bureau of the county. The appeal shall be taken
within a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the issuance of the
matter appealed from, as shall be prescribed by the Board by general rule, by
filing with the Administrative Officer and with the Committee a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, the form of which notice shall be
prescribed by the Board by general rule, and by paying to the County Treasurer
a filing fee of $100 receipt for which shall be filed with the Committee along
with the notice.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.221 NOTICE OF APPEAL.
   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Administrative Officer shall
forthwith transmit to the Committee all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.222 STAY.
   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Committee
after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril of life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Committee or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from
whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.223 HEARING.
   The Committee shall fix a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days from the
filing of the notice of appeal, for the hearing of an appeal, and shall give
notice of the time and place of the hearing at least 15 days prior thereto by
mailing a copy of the notice to the party seeking the appeal and depositing a
copy of the notice with the Administrative Officer.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.224 COMMITTEE DECISIONS.
   The Committee shall reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be
done in the premises, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.225 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Final administrative decisions of the Committee shall be subject to judicial
review pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Review Act, being 735
ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., of this state and amendments thereto, and the rules
adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
§ 154.226 REVERSAL OF DECISION.
   The concurring vote of four members of the Committee shall be required to
reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Administrative Officer or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon
which the Committee is required to pass under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-63-9-06, passed 9-14-2006; Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
APPENDIX A: TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION FOR URBAN RESIDENTIAL STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-32.jpg]
 
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
APPENDIX B: TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION FOR RURAL RESIDENTIAL STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-34.jpg]
 
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
APPENDIX C: TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL LOT GRADING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.jpg]
 
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
APPENDIX D: TYPICAL LOT DRAINAGE DETAIL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/11703192565b725c1e9f1836e8e489e7b626c4ab/
IMAGES/0-0-0-38.jpg]
 
(Ord. O-72-5-08, passed 5-8-2008)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Amendment
   
155.003   Effective date
   
155.004   Intent and purpose
   
155.005   Exclusions
   
155.006   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
155.007   Rules and interpretations
   
155.008   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.020   Organization
   
155.021   The Office of the Zoning Administrator
   
155.022   The Zoning Board of Appeals
   
155.023   Zoning certificates
   
155.024   Building permits and occupancy certificates
   
155.025   Administration and enforcement
   
155.026   Application for and approval of variances, special use permits, and
amendments
   
155.027   Variances
   
155.028   Amendments
   
155.029   Special use
   
155.030   Compliance with regulations
General Regulations
   
155.045   Interpretation
   
155.046   Separability
   
155.047   Scope of regulations
   
155.048   Regulations for specific uses
   
155.049   Sewage disposal and water supply
   
155.050   Number of buildings on a zoning lot
   
155.051   Accessory buildings
   
155.052   Bulk regulations
   
155.053   Off-street parking and loading facilities
   
155.054   Existing special uses
Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses
   
155.065   Intent
   
155.066   Nonconforming lots of record
   
155.067   Nonconforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only)
   
155.068   Nonconforming structures
   
155.069   Nonconforming use of structures or of structures and premises in
combination
   
155.070   Repairs and maintenance
Established Zones
   
155.085   Establishment of districts
Agricultural District
   
155.100   A1 – Agricultural District
Residential Districts
   
155.115   R1 – Single Family Residential District
   
155.116   R2 – Single Family Residential District
   
155.117   R4 – Single Family Residential District
   
155.118   RE5 – Single Family Estate District
   
155.119   R6 – Multiple Dwelling District
   
155.120   RMH1 – Single Family Residential District
   
155.121   RMH2 – Single Family Residential District
   
155.122   RMH4 – Single Family Residential District
   
155.123   RMH5 – Single Family Estate District
Business Districts
   
155.135   B1 – Neighborhood Shopping District
   
155.136   B2 – Commercial District
   
155.137   B3 – Planned Shopping Center District
Manufacturing Districts
   
155.150   M1 – Light Industrial Districts
   
155.151   M2 – Heavy Industrial District
Overlay Districts
   
155.165   General requirements
   
155.166   District requirements
Special Regulations
   
155.180   Special uses
   
155.181   Hearing
   
155.182   Compliance
   
155.183   Height and area regulations
   
155.184   Exceptions and modifications
Off-Street Parking, Off-Street Loading Facilities
   
155.195   Scope of regulations
   
155.196   Existing parking facilities
   
155.197   Permissive parking and loading facilities
   
155.198   Damage or destruction
   
155.199   Control of off-street facilities
   
155.200   Off-street parking
   
155.201   Off-street loading requirements
Zoning Maps
   
155.215   Incorporation of zoning maps
   
155.216   Township index map
   
155.217   Zoning maps
Cannabis Businesses
   
155.300   Cannabis business establishments prohibited
   
155.301   Public nuisance declared
 
   
155.999   Penalty
Editor’s note:
Several sections of this chapter were previously amended on January 13, 1981;
August 1, 1984; May 14, 1985; May 13, 1986; May 11, 1987; May 12, 1987; January
12, 1988; April 12, 1988; January 8, 1991; June 10, 1999; August 10, 2000;
February 8, 2001; July 12, 2001; July 21, 2001; and December 9, 2010.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This comprehensive amendment shall be known, cited, and referred to as the
County Zoning Ordinance or this chapter.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.002 AMENDMENT.
   The zoning ordinance, originally passed by the County Board of Supervisors
on December 14, 1943, and as amended, is herewith and now comprehensively
amended to read as follows in this chapter; and the zoning maps made a part of
the original zoning ordinance passed by the County Board of Supervisors on
December 14, 1943, as amended, is amended by the maps attached to Ordinance O-
95-2-12, which are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.003 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The comprehensive amendment shall take effect upon passage and due
publication.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.004 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter to the county zoning ordinance is adopted for the following
purposes, which does not represent a prioritization of purposes:
   (A)   To promote and to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and
morals of the people;
   (B)   To zone all properties in such a manner as to reflect their highest
and best use to the owner and the community and to conserve and enhance their
value;
   (C)   To check existing congestion and to prevent future congestion by
limiting the development of land to a degree consistent with the capacity to
furnish adequate public services;
   (D)   To prevent overcrowding of land with buildings and thereby ensure
maximum living and working conditions and prevent blight and slums;
   (E)   To protect agricultural, residential, business, and manufacturing
areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that
land allocated to a class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate
uses;
   (F)   To fix reasonable zoning standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform;
   (G)   To prevent additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures that would not comply with the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereinafter;
   (H)   To ensure high standards of light, air, and open spaces in areas where
people live and work;
   (I)   To relieve street congestion through adequate requirements for off-
street parking and loading facilities;
   (J)   To foster a rational pattern of relationships between agricultural,
residential, business, and manufacturing uses for the mutual benefit of all;
   (K)   To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance-producing
uses;
   (L)   To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, and
other hazards;
   (M)   To define the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies, as provided hereinafter; and
   (N)   To prescribe penalties for the violations of the provisions of this
chapter, or of any amendment thereto.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.005 EXCLUSIONS.
   Nothing contained in these regulations shall impose restrictions or require
a permit with respect to land zoned or to be used for agricultural purposes, or
with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair, alterations, remodeling, or
extension of buildings or structures used or to be used for agricultural
purposes upon the land, except that the buildings or structures for
agricultural purposes shall conform to building or setback lines; nor shall
these regulations be deemed to specify or regulate the type or locations of any
poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, or any other similar
distributing equipment of a public utility as defined in the act entitled An
Act Concerning Public Utilities, being 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.006 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines;
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following the lot lines;
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city or village limits
shall be construed as following the city or village limits;
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks;
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow the shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be
construed as moving with the actual shore lines; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow the centerlines;
   (F)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A) through (E) above shall be so construed. Distanced
not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the map;
   (G)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances
not covered by divisions (A) through (F) above, the Board of Appeals shall
interpret the district boundaries; and
   (H)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may
permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the district line
into the remaining portion of the lot.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.007 RULES AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   In the construction of this chapter, certain words, terms, and phrases shall
be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this section and §
155.008, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words in
the singular include the plural, and those in the plural include the singular.
   (B)   The word “used” as applied to any land or structure shall be construed
to include “arranged”, “designated”, “maintained”, “occupied”, and “intended”.
   (C)   The word “building” includes all other structures of every kind
regardless of similarity to buildings.
   (D)   The word “shall” is mandatory.
   (E)   The word “may” is permissive.
   (F)   The word “lot” shall include the words “piece”, “parcel”, and “tract”.
   (G)   Any words not defined as follows shall be construed in their general
accepted meanings as defined in the most recent publication of Webster’s
Dictionary.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. One which:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal
building or principal use served;
      (3)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants
of the principal building or principal use served; and
      (4)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served, with the single exception of any accessory off-street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization
or transporting organization.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time to
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   ADVERTISING DEVICE. Any advertising sign, billboard, or poster panel which
directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment not
exclusively related to the premises where the sign is located or to which it is
affixed; but does not include those advertising signs, billboards, or poster
panels which direct attention to the business on the premises or to a brand
name of a product or commodity with which the business is specifically
identified and which is sold on the premises.
   AGRICULTURE. Land, or land, buildings, and structures, the principal use or
uses of which is growing of farm or truck garden crops, dairying, pasturage,
apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, or animal or poultry
husbandry, and accessory uses customarily incidental to agricultural
activities, including but not limited to farm dwellings, dwellings for tenants
and full-time hired workers, dwellings or lodging rooms for seasonal workers,
and uses for treating, packing, or storing produce; provided, however, that the
operation of the accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal
agricultural uses.
   ALLEY. Any public right-of-way with a width of not less than 16 feet nor
more than 24 feet which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to
abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an ALLEY.
   ALTERATION. Any change in size, shape, character, location, occupancy, or
use of a building or structure.
   APARTMENT. A dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit having an
entrance to a common hallway or balcony.
   APARTMENT HOTEL. A building designed for or containing both apartments and
individual guest rooms or suites of rooms and apartments, including services
ordinarily furnished by hotels, such as drugstore, barber shop, cigar and
newsstand, when the uses are located entirely within the building with no
entrance from the street, and having no sign or display visible from the
outside of the building indicating the existence of the use.
   AUTOMOBILE, ABANDONED. Any motor vehicle or portion thereof which when
operated on a highway is required to be registered by this state, having no
registration or expired registration. Notwithstanding the foregoing definition,
a motor vehicle or portion thereof stored within a permitted building or
structure shall not be considered to be an ABANDONED AUTOMOBILE.
   AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY. A building or portion thereof containing facilities for
washing automobiles using production-line methods with a chain conveyor,
blower, steam-cleaning device, or other mechanical devices.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGES. Any premises used for supplying gasoline and oil,
tires, accessories and services for automobiles at retail direct to the
motorist consumer, including the making of minor repairs and such major repairs
as:
      (1)   Spray painting;
      (2)   Body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring, and
frame repairs;
      (3)   Major overhauling of engines requiring removal therefrom of the
cylinder-head or crankcase pan;
      (4)   Repairs of radiator requiring removal thereof; and
      (5)   Complete recapping or retreading of tires.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (GAS, FILLING STATION). Any premises used for
supplying gasoline and oil, tires, accessories, and services for automobiles at
retail direct to the motorist consumer, including the making of minor repairs,
but not including such major repairs as:
      (1)   Spray painting;
      (2)   Body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring, and
frame repairs;
      (3)   Major overhauling of engines requiring removal therefrom of the
cylinder-head or crankcase pan;
      (4)   Repairs of radiator requiring removal thereof; or
      (5)   Complete recapping or retreading of tires.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING. The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or
trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled,
obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. An area of land where two or more motor vehicles,
not in running condition, or parts thereof are stored in the open and any land,
building, or structure used for wrecking or storing of the motor vehicles or
parts thereof.
   AVERAGE GROUND ELEVATION. The average level of the finished surface of the
ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building wholly or partly below the average ground
elevation.
   BOARDING HOUSES. A building other than a motel, apartment hotel, or hotel
where, for compensation and by arrangement, lodging or lodging and meals are
provided for three or more but less than ten unrelated individuals. A rooming
house or furnished rooming house shall be deemed to be a BOARDING HOUSE.
   BORROW PIT. Any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, or other
material is removed by excavation or otherwise, below the grade of surrounding
land, for any purpose other than that necessary and incidental to grading or to
building construction or operation on the premises.
   BUILDABLE AREA OF A LOT. The portion of a lot bounded by the required rear
and side yards and the building setback line.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or moveable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land.
   BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, buildings, or structures by a permanent roof and by
exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or
exit doors.
   BUILDING COVERAGE. The percent of a lot which may be covered by the main
building and accessory building.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average ground elevation to
the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to deck line of a mansard
roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and
gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING LINE. A line on a lot parallel to a lot line or street right-of-way
line at a sufficient distance to provide the required yards, delimiting the
area in which structures are permitted, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which a principal use of
the lot on which it is located is conducted.
   BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL. A residential building which is arranged, designed,
used, or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one or more families
or lodgers and which includes but is not limited to the following types:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings; and
      (4)   A row of single- or two-family attached dwellings developed
initially under single ownership or control.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A building line established the minimum allowable
distance between a street right-of-way and any structure.
   BULK. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes
the following:
      (1)   Size and height of buildings;
      (2)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets, or to other buildings;
      (3)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio);
      (4)   All open spaces allocated to buildings; and
      (5)   Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
   CABIN or COTTAGE. A dwelling unit designed for temporary or seasonal
occupancy.
   CAMP. Any land, including structures, used for assembly or temporary
occupancy by persons and providing outdoor recreational facilities.
   CAPACITY IN PERSONS. Of an establishment or use, the maximum number of
persons that can avail themselves of the services (or goods) of the
establishment at any one time with reasonable comfort and safety.
   CARPORT. An open-sided, roofed automobile shelter usually formed by
extension of the roof from the side of a building.
   CLINIC. An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight are
admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or allied
practitioners practicing together.
   CLUB, PRIVATE (NONPROFIT). A nonprofit association of persons, who are bona
fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building, or
portion thereof; the use of the premises being restricted to members and their
guests. The affairs and management of the PRIVATE CLUB are conducted by a board
of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at
their annual meeting. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on the
premises, provided adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are
available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be
allowed provided it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some other
common objective of the organization, and further provided that the sale of
alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state, and
county laws.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per net acre or gross acre, as
indicated for the appropriate zoning district in the schedule of district
regulations.
   DORMITORY. A building not open to transients, where lodging or lodging and
meals are provided, for more than ten persons. Kitchen facilities shall not be
included for each unit. If kitchen facilities are included in any unit other
than for management personnel, then the building shall be defined as a
multiple-family dwelling. A DORMITORY may have a central kitchen facility to
provide meals for inhabitants of the dormitory.
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. One which accommodates the patrons’ automobiles,
from which the occupants may watch, purchase, or otherwise conduct business
from automobiles.
   DWELLING. A building, exclusive of mobile homes, travel trailers, apartment
hotels, hotels, motels, and boarding houses, as herein defined, containing as
the principal use one or more DWELLING units.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED. One which is joined to another dwelling at one or more
sides by a party wall or walls.
   DWELLING, DETACHED. One which is entirely surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building designed for and occupied
by three or more families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling designed for and occupied exclusively by
one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling designed for two families and occupied by
no more than two families with completely separate entrances.
   DWELLING UNIT. Consists of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed,
or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and
complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall be included for each
DWELLING UNIT.
   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room exclusive
of bathrooms, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the
principal room, providing the dining alcove does not exceed 125 square feet in
area.
   EMPLOYEE(S). In regard to off-street parking requirements, mean all who work
in the enterprise including owners, partners, management, and office personnel.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or
overhead, gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, elevated and underground
water storage tanks, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, traffic signals and signs, hydrants, and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by the public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare,
but not including building or public utility substations as herein defined.
   FAMILY. Any individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
legal adoption or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants)
who need not be related by blood or marriage, living together as a single
housekeeping unit and occupying a single-family dwelling unit.
   FLOOR AREA (for determining floor area ratio). The sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating
two buildings. The FLOOR AREA of a building shall include the basement floor
area when more than one-half of the basement height is above the established
curb level or above the finished lot grade level where curb level has been
established, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for
mechanical equipment–except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the
roof–penthouses, attic space having balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches,
and floor area devoted to accessory uses. However, any space devoted to bulk
storage of materials–including but not limited to grain elevators and petroleum
storage tanks–shall be determined on the basis of height in feet: i.e., ten
feet in height shall equal one floor.
   FLOOR AREA (for determining off-street parking and load requirements).
      (1)   When prescribed as the basis of measurement for off-street parking
spaces and loading berths for any use, shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal area of the several floors of the building, or portion thereof,
devoted to that use, including accessory storage areas located within selling
or working space such as counters, racks, or closets, and any basement floor
area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods,
or to business or professional offices.
      (2)   However, FLOOR AREA for the purpose of measurement for off-street
parking spaces shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to storage
purposes (except as otherwise noted herein); floor area devoted to off-street
parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space;
or basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, to the
production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The FLOOR AREA RATIO of the building or building on
any zoning lot is the floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning
lot divided by the area of the zoning lot, or, in the case of planned
developments, by the net site area. The FLOOR AREA RATIO requirements, as set
forth under each zoning district, shall determine the maximum floor area
allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area of both principal and
accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An area attached to a dwelling or a detached accessory
building designed or used for the storage of privately owned motor-driven
vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the dwelling to which it is
accessory and not for storing more than one truck or commercial vehicle or any
vehicle which exceeds a two-ton capacity.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof, other than private or storage
garage, which is designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles.
   GRADE. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to
the exterior walls of the building or structure.
   GUEST HOUSE. A detached accessory building located on the same zoning lot as
the principal building and containing living quarters for temporary guests; the
quarters shall not be rented.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation carried on by a member of the immediate
family residing on the premises not involving the conduct of a wholesale,
retail, or manufacturing business, provided that:
      (1)   No person other than members of the family residing on the premises
shall engage in that occupation;
      (2)   There is no display that will indicate from the exterior that the
building is being utilized for any purpose other than that of a dwelling other
than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, non-illuminated and
mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
      (3)   The products of the HOME OCCUPATION are produced only on the
premises;
      (4)   The use of the dwelling unit for the HOME OCCUPATION shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall
be used in the conduct of the HOME OCCUPATION;
      (5)   The home occupation must be confined to the principal structure and
no accessory building shall be used for the HOME OCCUPATION;
      (6)   No traffic shall be generated by the HOME OCCUPATION in greater
volumes than would normally be expected be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of the HOME
OCCUPATION shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard;
      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used in the HOME OCCUPATION which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot if the occupation is conducted in a
single-family residence or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than
a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment
or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises; and
      (8)   A professional person may use his or her residence for
consultation, emergency treatment, or performance of religious rites but not
for the general practice of his or her profession and further a barber or
beauty shop, dentist, physician, insurance, or real estate offices shall not be
construed to be HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   HOTEL. An establishment which is open to transient guests and which provide
customary hotel services such as maid person service, furnishing and laundering
of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of
furniture, and bell person service.
   JUNKYARD. The use of more than 500 square feet of open storage on any tract
of land as a place where personal property is or may be salvaged for re-use,
resale, or reduction, or similar disposition and is owned, possessed,
collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted, including but not limited to
used or salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or combinations, used or
salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber, lumber, millwork, brick, and
similar property except animal matter, and used motor vehicles, machinery, or
equipment which are used, owned, or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or
salvaging parts therefrom. A JUNKYARD does not include uses established
entirely within enclosed buildings.
   KENNELS. Any premises or portion thereof on which more than three dogs,
cats, or other household domestic animals, over age four months are kept for
the purpose of sale, or on which more than two animals are maintained, boarded,
bred, or cared for in return for enumeration.
   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Adequate space, logically and conveniently
located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected
to be used and accessible to the vehicles at all times. Required OFF-STREET
LOADING SPACE is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation
of required off-street parking space.
   LODGE. A hall or meeting place of a local branch or the members composing
such a branch of a fraternal order or society such as the Masons, Knights of
Columbus, Moose, American Legion, and other similar organizations. It shall be
permissible to serve food and meals on the premises, provided adequate dining
room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcohol beverages
to members and their guests shall be allowed, provided that it is secondary and
incidental to the promotion of some other common objective by the organization,
and further provided that the sale of alcoholic beverage is in compliance with
the applicable federal, state, and county laws.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building originally designed for or used as a single-family
or two-family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms which
accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper’s family. Lodging or
meals or both are provided for compensation on a weekly or monthly basis.
   LODGING ROOM. A room rented as sleeping and living quarters without cooking
facilities.
   LOT. A single parcel of land which may be legally described as such. For
residential uses, the LOT shall abut on a street or place for a least 60% of
the lot width prescribed for the district in which the LOT is located. The LOT
may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded
in the office of County Recorder, or it may include parts of or a combination
of parcels when adjoining one another and used as a single unit.
   LOT AREA, GROSS. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side,
and rear lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two streets at their juncture, when the
interior angle formed is less than 135 degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting
the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of
the side lot lines in the rear.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which is along an existing or
dedicated public street, or, where no public street exists, is along a public
way; where the public way is not a dedicated street, the right-of-way of the
public way shall be deemed to be 66 feet, unless otherwise provided. On corner
lots the FRONT LOT LINE shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is, or
is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of this county or a parcel
of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
of this county prior to the enactment of this chapter. A recorded lot may or
may not coincide with a zoning lot.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
   LOT WIDTH. The width of the lot at the building line.
   LOT, ZONING. A parcel of land composed of one or more recorded lots,
occupied or to be occupied by a principal building or buildings, or principal
use or uses, along with permitted accessory buildings or uses meeting all the
requirements for area, buildable area, frontage, width, yards, setbacks, and
any other requirements set forth in this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing
facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a seal
certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Code being 25 C.F.R. §§ 3220.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS CODE. Title VI of the
1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq.), as
amended (previously known as the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq.), rules and regulations adopted thereunder
(including information supplied by the home manufacturer, which has been
stamped and approved by a design approval primary inspection agency, an agent
of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to HUD rules),
all of which become effective for mobile/manufactured home construction on June
15, 1976.
   MARINA. A boat basin and recreational facility located on waterfront
property, providing moorings for boats and one or more of the following
facilities: boat launching ramps, boat livery, boat sales, maintenance shops,
marine supply store, and fuel dock.
   MARQUEE or CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a building and overhangs a public way.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure larger than 320 square feet, designed
to be used as a year-round residential dwelling, and built prior to June 15,
1976.
   MOTEL. An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living
or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a single
zoning lot and designed for use by transient motor vehicle tourists. A MOTEL
furnishes customary hotel services such as maid person service and laundering
of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep of
furniture. In a MOTEL, less than 50% of the living and sleeping accommodations
are occupied or designed for occupancy by person other than transient
automobile tourists.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by motor
truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate and interstate
shipment by motor truck.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, or
semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
   NONCONFORMING USE. The use of land or a building or portion thereof which
use does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is
situated which use legally existed therein or thereon before the date of this
amendment.
   NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS. Material which is capable of causing injury to
living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental
effects upon the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
   NURSERY SCHOOLS. A school–private, semi-private or public–providing
organized instruction and care for children prior to their enrollment as
required by law in a school which has a course of study which meets applicable
state and national standards for an accredited elementary school. (A NURSERY
SCHOOL may provide meals but not lodging rooms for students.)
   PARKING AREA. An open space other than a street or alley designed for use or
used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles exclusively, whether free or
for compensation, in which no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold and
no other business is conducted.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. A space not located within a street right-of-way
containing adequate space for parking an automobile with room for opening doors
on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or
alley (intended to mean forward motion as opposed to backing out) and
maneuvering room.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criterion established to control noise, odor, smoke,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire, and explosive hazards, or glare or
heat generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land three acres or more in area developed
under single ownership or control, the development of which is unique and of a
substantially different character than that of surrounding areas.
   PREFABRICATED HOUSING UNIT. A factory-assembled structure or structures
equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily
movable as a unit or units on flatbed or other trailers, or detachable wheels
or on its (their) own running gear, and designed as a single-family housing
unit suitable for year-round occupancy and meeting all required building,
plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes.
   PROPERTY LINES. The lines bounding a zoning lot, as defined herein.
   PUBLIC WAY. A sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare
whether built, dedicated, or merely an easement for road purposes.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
   RECREATIONAL CLUB. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases land or buildings or
portions thereof, the use of the premises being restricted primarily to the
principal use, which is a generally recognized sport or recreational activity.
The premises shall be restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and
management of a RECREATIONAL CLUB are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on the premises,
provided adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The
sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed,
provided it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some recognized
sport or recreational activity, and further provided that the sale of alcohol
beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state, and county laws.
   RESERVOIR PARKING.  RESERVOIR PARKING facilities are those off-street
parking spaces allocated to automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
   REST HOME or NURSING HOME. A private home for the care of children or the
aged or infirm.
   ROADSIDE STAND. A structure for the display and sale of agricultural
products with no space for customers within the structure itself.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A residential building or portion thereof, other than a
motel, apartment hotel, or hotel, containing lodging rooms for accommodations
of three or more persons who are not members of the keeper’s family and where
lodging without meals is provided by prearrangement and for definite periods.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. An area used for the disposal of refuse by the method of
daily spreading and covering the refuse with earth.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance measured between a building
foundation or structure and the right-of-way line or centerline of a street,
alley, stream, or railroad right-of-way; the measurements will be the minimum
distances measured perpendicular to the centerlines or right-of-way.
   SHELTER CARE HOME. A private boarding home, institution, building,
residence, or other place, which through its ownership or management provides
sheltered care to three or more adults who are not related to the operator or
owner by blood or marriage.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of more than six commercial establishments planned,
developed, and managed as a unit, located on a zoning lot of at least five
acres, with off-street parking provided on the property.
   SIGN. Any object used to identify, advertise, or attract attention to any
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm,
group, commodity, profession, enterprise, industry, or business, which is
intended to be seen from off the premises or from a parking lot. The word SIGN
shall include signs which are affixed to the inside of windows and glass doors
and are intended to be seen from roadways or parking lots. No other indoor sign
shall be deemed a SIGN within this chapter.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where the sign is located or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when the
sign is in use. For the purpose of this chapter, any revolving, illuminated
sign shall be considered a FLASHING SIGN.
   SIGN, GROSS AREA OF. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the sign and in no case passing through or
between any adjacent elements of the same.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR. A device, structure, or part of a device or structure (ie.
array, panel, etc.) installed for transforming solar energy into thermal,
mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY. Radiant energy received from the sun that is collected in the
form of heat or light by a solar collector.
   SOLAR FARM. A use of land where a series of solar collectors are placed in
the area for the purpose of converting solar energy into electrical power for
interconnection with the power grid primarily for off-site energy consumption.
The term includes any associated cabling, devices, equipment, and structures
located on site that are associated with the operation of a solar farm. The use
of solar collectors for residential or business consumption that occurs on-site
is not considered a solar farm.
   STORAGE CONTAINER. A large, van like reusable box/container designed for the
storage of commercial, industrial, agricultural or residential household goods,
that does not contain wheels for movement.
   STORAGE TRAILER. A large van/wagon drawn by a truck or tractor, used
especially in hauling freight by road without current license plates.
   STORY. The portion of the building, other than a cellar or basement (except
one used for business or residence), included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there isn’t a floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STORY, HALF. A partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four
feet above the floor of the story; except that any partial story used for
residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his or her family,
or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full
story.
   STREET. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means
of vehicular access to abutting property.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from a major street to a
local street.
   STREET, HIGHWAY. A street primarily designed for inter-urban or inter-
regional travel.
   STREET LINE. A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
   STREET, LOCAL. A street primarily designed for access to abutting properties
and for access to collector streets.
   STREET, MAJOR. A street designed to carry traffic from one part of the city
to another part of the city through neighborhood areas, including streets
designed to carry heavy business or industrial traffic.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change other than normal maintenance which would
tend to prolong the life of a supporting member of a structure such as a
bearing wall, column, beam, girder, or any substantial change in the roof or
exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts,
and arbors and carports.
   TAVERN. A place where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises.
   TENT. Any structure or enclosure, the roof of which and/or one-half or more
of the sides are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, or a similar light
fabric.
   TOURIST HOME. A building designed for or used as a single-family or two-
family dwelling on which sleeping rooms are provided or offered to transient
guests for compensation.
   TRAILER. Any structure used for temporary living, sleeping, business, or
storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks,
horses, or skirtings and which is, has been, or reasonably can be equipped with
wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place,
whether by motor power or other means. The term TRAILER shall include CAMPER
and VAN.
   TRAILER OR TOURIST CAMP. Any lot or parcel used for one or more auto
trailers, tents, house or camp cars, or other portable or mobile shelters used
for temporary living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or any structure thereon is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained and
shall include any manner of performance of the activity with respect to the
performance standards of this chapter.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to the principal use and located on the
premises serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use.
Residential ACCESSORY USES may include storage of household goods, parking
areas, gardening, servants’ quarters, private swimming pools, and private
emergency shelters.
   USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations,
and performance standards of the district.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or building as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. It may be either a “permitted” or a “special
use”.
   USE, SPECIAL. A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in any
particular district or districts.
   VARIANCE. A relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where the
variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a VARIANCE is authorized only for
heights, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces;
establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed
by VARIANCE, nor shall a VARIANCE be granted because of the presence of
nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
   WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment engaged in selling to
retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building unobstructed from the
ground upward.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot
lines, and between the street line and the front face or faces of the main
building. On corner lots, the FRONT YARD shall be considered to be parallel to
the street upon which the lot has the smaller dimensions.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot, between the side lot
lines, and between the rear lot line and the rear face or faces of the main
building.
   YARD, REQUIRED (OR MINIMUM). For purposes of determining building lines, the
REQUIRED (OR MINIMUM) YARD shall be the least horizontal distance between the
lot line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than the
projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, terraces, or uncovered
porches.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending between the front and rear yard lines and
between the side lot line and the side face or faces of the main building.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas of the unincorporated territory of the
county for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot, and bulk
of buildings and premises are uniform.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012; Ord. O-131-09-18, passed 9-13-2018; Ord. O-
136-01-20, passed 1-9-2020)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.020 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The administrative responsibilities of this chapter are hereby vested
in two offices of the government of the county:
      (1)   The Office of the Zoning Administrator; and
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   This subchapter shall first set out the authority of each of these two
offices and shall then describe the procedures and substantive standards to the
following administrative functions:
      (1)   Issuance of zoning certificates;
      (2)   Issuance of occupancy certificates;
      (3)   Variations;
      (4)   Appeals;
      (5)   Amendments;
      (6)   Special uses;
      (7)   Planned unit developments;
      (8)   Fees;
      (9)   Compliance with regulations; and
      (10)   Penalties.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.021 THE OFFICE OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created the Office of the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall be the head of this office and
shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the County Board, by and with the
consent and advice of the County Board. The Zoning Administrator may be removed
by the Chairperson of the County Board for cause. Any other employees of the
Office of the Zoning Administrator shall be appointed as shall be authorized by
the County Board in its annual appropriation ordinance.
   (B)   Duties of the Office of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall enforce this chapter and in addition thereto and in
furtherance of that authority, he or she shall:
      (1)   Issue all zoning certificates, and make and maintain records
thereof;
      (2)   Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and maintain records
thereof;
      (3)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
      (4)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including
but not limited to all maps, amendments and special uses, variations, appeals,
and applications therefor;
      (5)   Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all
matters arising out of this chapter;
      (6)   Receive, file, and forward to the County Board (with copies to the
Zoning Board of Appeals) all applications for special uses, variations, and for
amendments to this chapter;
      (7)   Receive, file, and forward to the Zoning Board of appeals all
applications for appeal or for other matters on which the Board is required to
pass under this chapter;
      (8)   Review all property which has been subject of legal action,
invalidating the zoning as applied by this chapter and submit an amendment for
classification of the property to the County Board;
      (9)   Review all property which has been disconnected from a municipality
or that has come within the jurisdiction of the county as the result of the
dissolution of a municipality and submit an amendment for reclassification of
the property to the County Board;
      (10)   Determine use, lot, and bulk requirements in specific instances,
as stipulated in §§
155.115 through
155.123,
155.135 through
155.137,
155.150,
155.151,
155.165,
155.166, and
155.180 through
155.182;
      (11)   Allow parking lots in residence districts to be illuminated
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when necessary for the public
safety or welfare;
      (12)   Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this chapter, and make reports of his or her recommendations to
the Zoning Committee of the County Board, not less frequently than annually;
      (13)   Develop and implement policies and procedures to promulgate the
regulations of this chapter;
      (14)   Issue stop work orders to prohibit any activity that is in
violation of this chapter; and
      (15)   To allow a waiver of bulk requirements within any zoning district
under the following circumstances:
         (a)   The waiver does not permit more than a cumulative 10% variation
from the bulk requirements of the zoning district;
         (b)   In the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, all the standards
for variances, as enumerated in §
155.027(B), are met by the applicant; and
         (c)   Before the waiver is granted, the Zoning Administrator shall
send a notice by certified mail to all adjoining landowners of the intent to
issue the waiver. If any adjoining landowner files a written objection with the
Zoning Administrator within 15 days of receipt of the notice, no waiver shall
be granted.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.022 THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)    Creation and membership. A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby
authorized to be established. Whenever the word BOARD is used in this section,
it shall be construed to mean the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall
consist of five members, plus two alternate members if desired, appointed by
the Chairperson of the County Board by and with the consent and advice of the
County Board to serve, respectively, for the following terms: one for one year,
one for two years, one for three years, one for four years, and one for five
years; and the alternate members shall serve respectively for four years and
five years. The successor to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of
five years. Alternate members, if appointed, shall serve as members of the
Board only in the absence of regular members, with the alternate member who has
the greatest amount of time remaining in his or her term to have priority over
the other alternate member in determining which alternate member shall serve in
the absence of a regular member. All members of the Board shall be residents of
separate congressional townships at the time of their appointment. One of the
members so appointed shall be named as Chairperson at the time of his or her
appointment, and in case of vacancy, the appointing authority shall designate a
Chairperson. The appointing power shall have the power to remove any member of
the Board for cause, after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose place has
become vacant.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby vested with the
following jurisdiction and authority:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the Zoning Administrator under this chapter;
      (2)   To hear all applications for special uses, variations, and
amendments to this chapter in the manner prescribed by, and subject to, the
standards established herein, and report the findings and recommendations to
the County Board;
      (3)   To hear and decide all applications for variations to this chapter
in the manner prescribed by, and subject to, the standards established herein;
and
      (4)   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this chapter as prescribed by the statute.
   (C)   Meetings and rules. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be held at the call of the Chairperson and at times as the Board may determine.
Hearings shall be conducted by the Board and shall be open to the public. Any
person may appear and testify at a hearing, either in person or by duly
authorized agent or attorney. The Chairperson is empowered to administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every
amendment, and every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Board shall be filed immediately in the office of the Zoning Administrator and
shall be a public record. The Board shall adopt its own rules and procedure,
not in conflict with this chapter or with the applicable state statutes, and
may select or appoint any officers as it deems necessary.
   (D)   Finality of decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals. All decisions
and findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeal of administrative
decision shall, in all instances, be final and shall be subject to review by
court as by law may be provided.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.023 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Certificate required. Except as hereinafter provided, no permit
pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by any officer,
department, or employee of the county unless the application for the permit has
been examined by the Office of the Zoning Administrator and has affixed to its
certificate of the Office of the Zoning Administrator indicating that the
proposed building or structure complies with all provisions of this chapter.
Any permit or certificate of occupancy issued in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter shall be null and void.
   (B)   Plats.  
      (1)   Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by:
         (a)   A copy of the deed; and
         (b)   A plat, in triplicate, drawn to scale in a form as may from time
to time be prescribed by the Zoning Administration, showing the ground area,
heights, and bulk of the building or structure or land and any other
information as may be required by the Zoning Administration for the proper
enforcement of this chapter.
      (2)   One copy of each of the two plats shall be attached to the
application for a building permit when it is submitted to the Office of the
Zoning Administration for a zoning certificate and shall be retained by the
Zoning Administrator as a public record.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.024 BUILDING PERMITS AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Any building or structure that is longer than ten feet on any side, or
any addition to the building or structure, shall be required to be issued a
building permit by the Office of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to issue stop work orders or revoke
previously issued building permits based on failure to comply with the rules or
regulations promulgated by the Office of the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   No building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date
of this chapter, and no addition to a previously existing building shall be
occupied, and no land vacant on the effective date of this chapter shall be
used for any purpose, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Office of the Zoning Administrator. No change in use other than that of a
permitted use shall be made until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the Office of the Zoning Administrator. Every certificate of occupancy shall
state that the use or occupancy complies with all the provisions of this
chapter.
      (1)   Application for occupancy certificate. Every application for a
building permit shall be deemed to be an application for an occupancy
certificate. Every application for an occupancy certificate for a new use of
land where no building permit is required shall be made directly to the Office
of the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Issuance of occupancy certificate. No occupancy certificate for a
building or addition thereto constructed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be issued until construction has been completed and the premises
inspected and certified by the Office of the Zoning Administrator to be in
conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate
was based. No occupancy certificate for a building or addition thereto,
constructed after the effective date of this chapter, shall be issued and no
addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied until the premises
have been inspected and certified by the Office of the Zoning Administrator to
be in compliance with all the applicable performance standards of the zoning
district in which it is located. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate,
a temporary certificate may be issued, to be valid for a period of not to
exceed six months from its date during the completion of any addition or during
partial occupancy of the premises.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.025 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any
person aggrieved by a decision of the Office of the Zoning Administrator. The
appeal shall be taken within a time as shall be prescribed by the Zoning Board
of Appeals by general rule, by filing with the Office of the Zoning
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all of
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
   (B)   Findings on appeals.  
      (1)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of
Appeals after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her that by
reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion,
cause eminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court on application, on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown.
      (2)   The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing
of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a
written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. The Board may affirm
or may, upon the concurring vote of three members, reverse, wholly or in part,
or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination, as in its opinion
it determines ought to be done, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain complete records of all
actions of the Board relative to appeals.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012; Res. G-4111-6-14, passed 6-12-2014)
§ 155.026 APPLICATION FOR AND APPROVAL OF VARIANCES, SPECIAL USE PERMITS, AND
AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Application. An application for a variance, special use permit, or
amendment may be made by any person owning or having an interest in the subject
property. Petitions for zoning amendments may also be filed by a member of the
County Board, by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and by the Zoning Administrator.
The application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, in a form as
required by the Zoning Administrator and the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
application shall be accompanied by any information, plans, plats, and/or data
as required by the Zoning Administrator and the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   Filing fees.
      (1)   Any application for an amendment, special use, or variance shall be
accompanied by a fee. The fee shall be established by resolution of the County
Board. All fees shall be collected by the Zoning Administrator for deposit with
the County Treasurer. There shall be no fee, however, in the case of
applications filed in the public interest by members of the County Board, the
Zoning Administrator, or the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (2)   An additional filing fee shall be paid in connection with the
filing of any amended petition or request in the event the terms of this
chapter require the republication of notice of hearing on the petition or
request. The additional fee shall be in the amount equal to one-half of the
original filing fee; provided, however, that no additional fee shall be
required in the event no notice of a hearing on the original petition or
request has been published in a newspaper under the terms of this chapter.
      (3)   In cases where additional hearings and/or meetings are required
because of the complex nature of an application, an additional fee shall be
assessed by the County Board. The additional fee shall cover the extraordinary
costs of newspaper notice, per diem expenses of member of the County Board and
the Zoning Board of Appeals, secretarial work, photo copying, travel, postage,
and the like.
   (C)   Public hearings. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing on each application at a time and place designated by the Chairperson.
The hearing shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings shall be
preserved in a manner as the Zoning Board of Appeals shall, by rule, prescribe
from time to time.
   (D)   Notice of public hearing.
      (1)   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be
published at least once, at least 15 days in advance thereof in a newspaper of
general circulation published in the township or road district in which the
property is located. If no newspaper is published in the townships or road
district, then the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the county and having circulation where the property
is located. In addition, at least 15 days prior to each hearing, a copy of the
notice shall be mailed to the clerk of each municipality, the corporate limits
of which lie within one and one-half miles of the property in question.
Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the
Zoning Board of Appeals may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
      (2)   At least 15 days before the hearing, a sign shall be posted on the
road or street frontage of the property in question, giving notice that an
application for zoning action has been filed.
      (3)   Where the application is initiated by a Board Member of this
county, the Zoning Administrator, or by the Zoning Board of Appeals of its own
motion, a true copy of the application or of the Board’s order shall be served
upon the owner or owners of record in person or by certified United States mail
within ten days after the filing of the application or the entry of the Board
order initiating the proceeding. Where the application is filed by a person
having an interest in the subject property, a notice and copy of the
application shall be served by the applicant in like manner upon each of the
other co-owners or those having an interest. The foregoing notice and service
requirements shall be in addition to the posting and publishing requirements of
this division (D).
   (E)   Required vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals. After a public hearing,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall vote to determine its action or
recommendation on the application. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not
recommend in favor of an application unless the Board shall make findings as
required in §§
155.027,
155.028, and
155.029, where applicable. The affirmative vote of three members of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be necessary to act or recommend in favor of an
application.
   (F)   Action by the County Board.
      (1)   The County Board shall not act upon an application until it has
received a written report and recommendation from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (2)   The County Board may, with or without further public hearing as the
majority of the members thereof shall by motion direct, approve, or disapprove,
or in part approve and in part disapprove, the recommendation of the Board of
Appeals. Any application which fails to receive a recommendation for approval
from the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be passed by the County Board except
by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the County Board.
      (3)   In addition to the preceding regulations, the following shall also
apply to the approval of special use permits and amendments, only:
         (a)   An amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance may be passed
by a simple majority of the elected County Board members, unless written
protests against the proposed text amendment are signed by 5% of the land
owners of the county, in which case the amendment shall not be passed except by
the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the County Board; and
         (b)   Special use permits and amendments to the zoning map may be
passed by a simple majority of the elected County Board members, except that in
case of written protest against any application that is either: signed by the
owner or owners of at least 20% of the land in question; or signed by the owner
or owners of land immediately touching or immediately across a street, alley,
or public right-of-way from at least 20% of the perimeter of the land in
question, or in cases where the land affected lies within one and one-half
miles of the limits of a zoned municipality, or in the case of a proposed text
amendment to the zoning ordinance by resolution of the corporate authorities of
the zoned municipality with limits nearest adjacent, filed with the County
Clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-
fourths of all the members of the County Board. In those cases, a copy of the
written protest shall be served by the protestor or protestors on the applicant
for the proposed zoning action and a copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if
any, by certified mail at the address of the applicant and attorney shown in
the application filed with the Zoning Administrator.
   (G)   Effect of denial. No application which has been denied wholly or in
part by the County Board shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the
date of the order of denial except on grounds of changed conditions.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012; Res. G-4111-6-14, passed 6-12-2014)
§ 155.027 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Purpose. The Zoning Board of Appeals after a public hearing may
approve a variance, only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth, where
the Board makes findings of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter
prescribed, and further finds that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this chapter.
   (B)   Standards for variances.  
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary the regulations of this
chapter, as authorized in division (A) hereof, unless it shall make findings
based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
         (a)   Because of the physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved, a hardship to the owner would
result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the
regulation were carried out;
         (b)   The conditions upon which the petition for a variance is based
are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not
applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning district;
         (c)   The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         (d)   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and
has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the
property;
         (e)   The granting of the variance will not be significantly
detrimental to the public welfare or substantially injurious to other property
or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; and
         (f)   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property; substantially increase the congestion in
the public streets; increase the danger of fire; endanger the public safety; or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve any conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards established in this division (B) to reduce or
minimize the effect of the variance upon other property in the neighborhood and
to better carry out the general intent of this chapter.
   (C)   Authorized variances. Variances shall be approved by the Zoning Board
of Appeals only in accordance with the standards established in division (B)
above, and may be considered in the following instances:
      (1)   To permit any yard or setback less than the yard or setback
required by the applicable regulations;
      (2)   To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited
solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, but in no
event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than 90%
of the required area and width;
      (3)   To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two or more uses, provided the substantial use of the
facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of
the same days of the week;
      (4)   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities
required by not more than one parking space or loading space or 20% of the
applicable regulations, whichever number is greater;
      (5)   To increase by not more than 25% the maximum distance that required
parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served; and
      (6)   To increase by not more than 10% the maximum gross floor area of
any use so limited by the applicable regulations.
   (D)   Effect of denial. No application for variation which has been denied
wholly or in part by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be resubmitted for a
period of one year from the date of the order of denial except on grounds of
changed conditions.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.028 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Authority. For the purposes of promoting the public health, safety,
morals, welfare, and conserving values of property throughout the county, and
lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways, the County
Board may from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the
regulations imposed and the districts created by this chapter, provided that in
all amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this section, due
allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation of property
values, the direction of building development to the best advantage of the
entire county, and the use to which property is devoted at the time of adoption
of any amendatory ordinance.
   (B)   Findings of fact and recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals.  
      (1)   Within a reasonable time after the close of the hearing on a
proposed amendment, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make written findings of
fact and shall submit the same together with its recommendation to the County
Board. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the
zoning classification of particular property, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case
with respect to the following matters:
         (a)   Existing use of property within the general area of the property
in question;
         (b)   The zoning classification of property within the general area of
the property in question;
         (c)   The suitability of the property in question for the uses
permitted under the existing zoning classifications; and
         (d)   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes, if any, which may have taken place
since the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning
classification.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend the adoption of a
proposed amendment unless it finds the adoption of such an amendment is in the
public interest. The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend the adoption of an
amendment changing the zoning classification of the property in question to any
higher classification than that requested by the applicant. For the purpose of
this division (B)(2), the R1 District shall be considered the highest
classification and the M2 District shall be considered the lowest
classification.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.029 SPECIAL USE.
   (A)   Purpose. The development and execution of a zoning ordinance is based
upon the division of the county into districts, within which districts the use
of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that
there are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot
be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land
and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. The
special uses fall into two categories:
      (1)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally concerning a public
interest; and
      (2)   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
   (B)   Standards. No special use shall be recommended by the Zoning Board of
Appeals unless the Board shall find that:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use
will not substantially be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
welfare, and morals;
      (2)   The special use will not substantially be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted, or substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood;
      (3)   The establishment of the special use will not substantially impede
the normal and orderly development and improvements of surrounding property for
uses permitted in the district;
      (4)   The adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in public streets; and
      (6)   The special use shall in all other aspects conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as the
regulations may in each instance be modified by the County Board pursuant to
the recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (C)   Planned developments. Planned developments are of a substantially
different character from other special uses that specific and additional
standards and exceptions are hereby established to govern recommendation of the
Zoning Board of Appeals and the action of the County Board.
      (1)   Use exceptions. In the case of residential, business, or
manufacturing planned developments, the Zoning Board may recommend, and the
County Board may authorize, that there be in part of the area of the
development and for the duration of development, specified uses not permitted
by the use regulations of the district in which the development is located,
provided the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find:
         (a)   The uses permitted by the exception are necessary or desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;
         (b)   The uses permitted by the exception are not of such a nature or
so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood;
         (c)   Not more than 20% of the ground area or of the gross floor area
of the development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by the exception;
         (d)   In a manufacturing planned development, the additional uses
allowed by exception shall conform with the performance standards of the
district in which the development is located, as set forth in §§
155.135 through
155.137; and
         (e)   The use exceptions so allowed are reflected by the appropriate
zoning district symbols and so recorded on the zoning district maps.
      (2)   Bulk regulations. In case of any planned development, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may recommend, and the County Board may authorize, exceptions
to the applicable bulk regulations of this chapter within the boundaries of the
development, provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find:
         (a)   The exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less than beneficial to the residents or occupants of
the development, as well as of neighboring properties, than would be obtained
under the bulk regulations of this chapter for buildings developed on a
separate zoning lots;
         (b)   The overall floor area ratio of a residential planned
development would not exceed by more than 15% the maximum floor area ratio
which would be determined on the basis of the floor area ratio required for the
individual uses in the planned development, as stipulated in §§
155.183 and
155.184;
         (c)   The maximum lot area per dwelling unit requirements of this
chapter shall not be decreased by more than 15% in any development containing
residential uses, and that there shall be available to each residential
building and immediately adjacent thereto (including the land area upon which
it is erected) the minimum amount of land area required for the building under
the lot area per dwelling unit provisions of this chapter;
         (d)   The spacing between principal buildings shall be at least
equivalent to such spacing as would be required between buildings similarly
developed under the terms of this chapter on separate zoning lots, due
consideration being given to the openness normally afforded by intervening
streets and alleys; and
         (e)   Along the periphery of the planned developments yards shall be
provided as required by the regulations of the district in which the
development is located.
   (D)   Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any special use
permit the Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the County Board shall
stipulate any conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance, and operation of the special use as deemed necessary
for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the
standards and requirements specified in division (B) of this section. In all
cases in which special uses are granted, the County Board shall require
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.030 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   Except as hereinafter specifically provided:
   (A)   No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district
in which it is located;
   (B)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed,
moved, or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a
use permitted in the district in which the building is located;
   (C)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which the building is located;
   (D)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the
district in which the building is located;
   (E)   No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent
specifically provided hereinafter except in conformity with the off-street
parking and loading regulations of the district in which the building is
located;
   (F)   The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open spaces, including lot area
per family, required by this chapter for each and every building existing at
the time of passage of this chapter or for any building hereafter erected,
shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space
or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be
reduced below the requirements of this chapter for the district in which the
lot is located; and/or
   (G)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one
main building on one lot except as specifically provided hereinafter.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012) Penalty, see §
155.999
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 155.045 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, and welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by the provision of this chapter upon the
use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provision of this chapter or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation of any kind, the regulations are more restrictive (or which impose
higher standards or requirements) shall govern.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or
any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this
chapter are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than
the easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this
comprehensive agreement shall govern.
   (D)   No building, structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of this chapter; and to the extent that, and in any
manner that, the lawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this chapter, the building, structure, or use remains lawful
hereunder.
   (E)   All territory which may hereafter become a part of the unincorporated
area of this county, by the dissolution of any incorporated city, village, or
town, or by detachment from any city, village, or town, shall automatically
become classified as a part of the zoning district under this chapter most
closely analogous to the district classification the territory was in while a
part of the incorporated area, if it was subject to zoning regulation while
within the incorporated area. If the territory, while within the incorporated
area, was not subject to zoning regulations, then it shall automatically, in
the event aforesaid, become classified as part of the zoning district under
this chapter most closely analogous to and which includes the use or uses
actually being made of the territory at the time of the dissolution or
detachment, which classification shall remain until changed by the order of the
County Board enacted as near as may be in the manner provided for the district
amendments as set out in §
155.027.
   (F)   Whenever any street, alley, highway, or other public way is vacated by
official action, the zoning district adjoining each side of the street, alley,
or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of the vacation,
and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to
all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
   (G)   (1)   All areas within the unincorporated territory of the county,
which are under water and not shown as included within any district, shall be
subject to all of the regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the
water area.
      (2)   Where the water area adjoins two or more districts, the boundaries
of each district shall be construed to extend to the center of the water area.
   (H)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be a consent,
license, or permit to use any property or to locate, construct, or maintain any
building, structure, facility, or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation,
or activity.
   (I)   The provisions in this chapter are cumulative and additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinance, heretofore passed or which may
be passed hereafter, governing any subject matter in this chapter.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.046 SEPARABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the County Board that the
several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the
following:
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge any provisions of
this chapter to be invalid, that judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this chapter not specifically included in the judgment; and
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building, or other structure, that judgment shall not affect the application of
the provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically
included in the judgment.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.047 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of existing
buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing
uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter
which are applicable to the zoning districts in which the buildings, uses, or
land shall be located.
   (B)   However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been
issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
provided that construction is begun within six months of the effective date and
diligently prosecuted to completion, the building or structure may be completed
in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit
has been issued, and further may upon completion be occupied under a
certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject
thereafter to the provisions of §§
155.065 through
155.070, nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses.
   (C)   Where the Zoning Administrator has issued a special use permit, or a
permit for a variance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the permit
shall become null and void unless work thereon is substantially underway within
one year of the date of issuance of the permit by the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular
special use and shall expire if the special use shall cease for more than one
year for any reason.
   (E)   Where a lot is to be occupied for a permitted use without buildings,
the side yards and front yard required for the lot shall be provided and
maintained unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter, except that side yards
shall not be required on lots used for garden purposes without buildings or
structures, nor on lots used for public recreation areas.
   (F)   No land which is located in a residential district shall be used for
driveway, walkway, or access purposes to any land which is located in a
business or manufacturing district, or used for any purpose not permitted in a
residence district.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.048 REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES.
   (A)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be exercised so as to
impose regulations or require permits with respect to land use or to be used
for agricultural purposes, or with respect to the erection, maintenance,
repair, alteration, remodeling, or extension of buildings or structures used or
to be used for agricultural purposes upon the land, except that the buildings
or structures for agricultural purposes shall be required to conform to
building or setback lines. In the event that the land ceases to be used solely
for agricultural purposes, then and only then shall the provisions of this
chapter apply.
      (2)   The following uses, being exempted by the county zoning statute,
are permitted in any district: poles, towers, wires, cables, vaults, pipelines,
laterals, or any similar distributing equipment of a public utility.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
155.053, a fence, wall, or hedge may be erected, placed, maintained, or grown
along a lot line on residentially zoned property to be a height of not
exceeding eight feet above the ground level, except that no fence, wall, or
hedge which is located in a required front or corner side yard shall exceed a
height of three and one-half feet. No electric or barbed wire fence shall be
permitted in any residential district except for the RE5 and RMH5 – Single
Family Estate zones.
      (2)   No fence, wall, hedge, or shrubbery shall be erected, placed,
maintained, or grown along a lot line on any nonresidentially zoned property,
adjacent to residentially zoned property, to a height exceeding eight feet.
      (3)   In any residence district no fence, wall, hedge, or shrubbery shall
be erected, constructed, maintained, or grown to a height exceeding three feet
above the street grade nearest hereto, within 25 feet of the intersection of
any street lines or of street lines projected.
   (C)   Mobile homes and manufactured homes. The following regulations apply
to mobile homes and manufactured homes.
      (1)   A mobile home or manufactured home shall not be considered to be
permissible as an accessory building.
      (2)   No person shall park, store, or occupy a mobile home for living
purposes except in an approved mobile home park, or where permitted by a
special use permit, or in an agricultural district when used for agricultural
purposes.
      (3)   A mobile home or manufactured home may be used as a temporary
office or shelter incidental to construction on or development of the premises
on which the home is located, only during the time construction or development
is actively underway.
      (4)   Foundations for manufactured homes shall be the same design as
required for conventionally build homes.
   (D)   Television satellite dishes. The following regulations shall apply to
the placement of all television satellite dishes and similar devices (except
those used for sales/display purposes only), whether attached to a building or
structure, mounted on a permanent foundation, mounted on a temporary
foundation, or placed on the ground.
      (1)   Any device mounted on the roof of a building must be set back from
all property lines the same distances that are required for the building to
which it is attached.
      (2)   Except as regulated in division (D)(1) above, all devices must be
set back at least 35 feet from the front property line; at least 35 feet from a
side property line along a street; at least three feet from a side property
line not along a street; and at least three feet from the rear property line.
      (3)   No separation between these devices and any building shall be
required.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.049 SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND WATER SUPPLY.
   Regardless of other provisions of this chapter, in all classifications and
in all districts there shall always be sufficient ground area left unoccupied
by a structure or paving for a proper system of sewage disposal and water
supply conforming with the standards and requirements of the County Plumbing
Code and all amendments relative thereto, the County Health Department, and the
State Department of Public Health. Plot plans accompanying building permit
applications shall show clearly the proposed sewage disposal system and well
locations, if any.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.050 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT.
   Except in the case of planned developments, not more than one principal
detached residential building shall be located on a zoning lot, nor shall a
principal detached residential building be located on the same zoning lot with
any other principal building.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.051 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUILDING. This definition is broadened to also include structures built
for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
movable property of any kind but which are not permanently affixed to the land,
such as structures built on skids and/or merely placed on the ground.
      STRUCTURE. The definition is broadened to also include anything
constructed or erected but which is not permanently affixed to the land.
   (B)   Regulations. The follow regulations shall apply to all accessory
buildings. Where any two regulations are in conflict with each other, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply.
      (1)   Stables, barns, and any building housing animals, livestock, or
poultry must be set back at least 75 feet from all property lines.
      (2)   Special setbacks in the interchange overlay districts (see §
155.165). Building and structures shall be set back at least 80 feet from the
right-of-way line of intersecting highways, or 160 feet from the centerline,
whichever is more restrictive, 100 feet from the freeway right-of-way line and
30 feet from the right-of-way line of frontage roads and other roads of the
internal circulation system. In the case of unusual changes in alignment of the
intersection highway or unusual topographical characteristics which would cause
undue hardship in the application of this requirement, a variance for a lesser
setback distance from the intersecting highway may be granted.
      (3)   Front setback.
         (a)   The front setback required for an accessory building shall be
the same as the front setback which would be required for a principal building
fronting on that street. The required setback would be either the front setback
specified for the zoning district in §
155.183, or the average setback of the existing buildings in that block, but
not over 50% more than the specified setback for the zoning district (see §
155.184(B)(1) and (4)).
         (b)   On lots having double frontage, a front setback shall be
required from both front property lines.
      (4)   Side setback.
         (a)   Except as noted below, all accessory building must be set back
from any side property line at least the distance specified as the side setback
for a principal structure in the zoning district (see §
155.183).
         (b)   On corner lots, the street-side setback shall be the same as the
front yard setback which would be required for a principal building fronting on
that street. The non-street-side setback shall be the same as the side setbacks
identified in division (B)(4)(a) above.
         (c)   Where a side property line abuts an alley, no side setback shall
be required.
         (d)   If an accessory building is not used as a residence or to store
livestock and is to be set back at least 60 feet from the front property line,
then the side setback may be reduced to three feet.
      (5)   Rear setback.
         (a)   Except as noted below, all accessory buildings must be set back
from any rear property line at least the distance specified as the side setback
for a principal structure in that zoning district (see § 155.183).
         (b)   On residential corner lots, the rear lines of the corner
property shall be treated as side property lines and require the applicable
side setback.
         (c)   Where a rear property line abuts an alley, no rear setback shall
be required.
         (d)   If an accessory building is not used as a residence or to store
livestock and is to be set back at least 60 feet from the front property line,
then the rear setback may be reduced to three feet.
      (6)   Accessory building shall not cover more than 30% of the required
rear yard, and not more than 50% of any required side yard, as specified for
that zoning district in §
155.183.
      (7)   No accessory building shall be placed closer than ten feet from a
principal building. No accessory building shall be attached to a principal
building unless the accessory building meets all of the construction
requirements for a principal building.
      (8)   Residential accessory building, including those on less than ten
acres zoned A1 – Agricultural, shall not exceed 25 feet in height, measured
from the top of the lower floor to the peak of the roof.
      (9)   Building permits.
         (a)   A building permit shall be required for any accessory building
which is longer than ten feet on any side.
         (b)   No accessory building shall be constructed and no building
permit shall be issued for an accessory building prior to the time of
construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
      (10)   Mobile homes and manufactured homes used as accessory buildings.
See §
155.048.
      (11)   Accessory building shall only be built for and used for permitted
accessory uses. Guest houses, servants quarters, apartments, and the like shall
not be permitted as accessory buildings, except when issued a special use
permit.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.052 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Continued conformity with bulk regulations. The maintenance of yards
and other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall
be a continuing obligation of the owner of the building or of the property on
which it is located, as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no
legally required yards, other open space, or minimum lot area allocated to any
building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be
used to satisfy yard, other open space, or minimum lot area requirements for
any other building.
   (B)   Division of zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be
divided into two or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting
from each division shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of
the zoning district in which the property is located. However, with respect to
the resubdivision of improved zoning lots in the R6 Districts, side yard
requirements shall not apply between attached buildings.
   (C)   Location and required open space. All yards and other open spaces
allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same zoning
lot as the building or dwelling group.
   (D)   Required yards; existing buildings. No yards now or hereafter provided
for a building existing on the effective date of this chapter shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the
minimum yard requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction.
   (E)   Permitted obstructions in required yards. The following shall not be
considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
      (1)   In all yards. Open terraces not over four feet above the average
level of adjoining ground but not including a permanently roofed-over terrace
or porch; awnings and canopies; steps four feet or less above grade which are
necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from
a street or alley; chimneys projecting 18 inches or less into the yard;
recreational and laundry-drying equipment, arbors and trellises; and flag
poles;
      (2)   In front yards. One-story bay windows projecting three feet or less
into the yard; overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet or less into
the yard; fuel pumps and air and water service, provided they shall be set back
at least 15 feet from the front lot line;
      (3)   In rear yards. Enclosed, attached, or detached off-street parking
spaces; open off-street parking spaces; accessory sheds, tool rooms, and
similar building or structures for domestic or agricultural storage; balconies;
breezeways and open porches; one-story bay windows projecting three feet or
less into the yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet or
less into the yard; and
      (4)   In side yards. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 18 inches
or less into the yard; fuel pumps and air and water service, provided they
shall be set back at least 15 feet from the side lot line.
   (F)   Floor area ratio application in particular cases. In all cases where
two or more continuous zoning lots are in common ownership and there was at the
adoption date of this chapter an existing building on one of the lots with less
than the permitted maximum floor area ratio; the owner may elect to add the
unused portion of the floor area ratio of the existing building to the maximum
floor area ratio of any addition to the existing building to be constructed on
the adjoining zoning lot; and in the event the existing building was lawfully
existing at the date of adoption of this chapter and exceeds the permitted
maximum floor area ratio, an addition to the existing building to be
constructed on an adjoining lot shall be entitled to the maximum floor area
ratio permitted in the district in which it is located.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.053 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Scope of regulations. The off-street parking and loading provisions of
this chapter shall apply as follows.
      (1)   For all building and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date of this chapter, accessory parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the
districts in which the buildings or uses are located. However, where a building
permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
provided that construction is begun within six months of the effective date and
diligently prosecuted to completing, parking, and loading of the facilities in
the amounts required for the issuance of the building permit may be provided in
lieu of any different amounts required by this chapter.
      (2)   When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises
shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required
parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required
herein shall be provided for the increase in intensity of use. However, no
building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be required to provide the additional
parking or loading facilities unless and until the aggregate increase in units
of measurement shall equal not less than 15% of the units of measurement
existing upon the effective date of this chapter, in which event parking or
loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for the total increase;
provided, however, that in the case of the expansion or alteration of
residential buildings required parking or loading facilities shall be provided
on the basis of the total required units of measurement for the entire capacity
of the building.
      (3)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall
hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be
provided as required for the new use. However, if the building or structure was
erected prior to the effective date of this chapter, additional parking or
loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements
for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were
subject to the parking and loading provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Existing parking facilities. Accessory off-street parking facilities
in existence on the effective date of this chapter and located on the same lot
as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if
already less than shall not be further reduced below, the requirements for a
similar new building or use under the provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Permissive parking and loading facilities. Nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or
loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings provided that
all regulations herein governing the location, design, and operation of the
facilities are adhered to.
   (D)   Damage or destruction. For any conforming or legally nonconforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date of this chapter,
which subsequently thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse,
explosion, or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished, or
repaired, off-street parking or loading facilities need not be provided, except
that parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of
the damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However,
in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading
facilities in excess of those required by this chapter for equivalent new uses
or construction.
   (E)   Control of off-site parking facilities. In cases where parking
facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served is located, the facilities shall be in the same
possession as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the
parking facilities are accessory. The possession may be either deed or long-
term lease, the term of the lease to be determined by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be
located shall be bound by covenants filed on record in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds, requiring the owner, his or her heirs, and assigns to
maintain the required number of parking facilities for the duration of the use
served or of the lease, whichever shall terminate sooner.
   (F)   Submission of plot plan. Any application for the building permit, or
for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall
include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensional, showing
any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.054 EXISTING SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Where a use is classified as a special use in the district in which it
is zoned under this chapter, and exists as a special or permitted use under the
terms of this chapter immediately prior to the date of the adoption of this
chapter, it shall be considered to be a legal special use.
   (B)   Where a use is not allowed as a special or permitted use in the
district in which it is zoned under this chapter, and exists as a special use
under the terms of this chapter immediately prior to the date of the adoption
of this chapter, it shall be considered to be a nonconforming use and shall be
subject to the applicable nonconforming use provisions of §§
155.065 through
155.070.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
§ 155.065 INTENT.
   (A)   Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that
may later be adopted there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures,
characteristics of use, and signs which were lawful before this chapter was
passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted
under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this
chapter to permit those nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but
not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
   (B)   Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a
structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and
land in combination, shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this
chapter by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to
be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, of a nature
which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
   (C)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been carried on diligently. ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in a permanent
position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or
removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to
rebuilding, the excavating or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be
actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.066 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   (1)   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
chapter. The lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership.
      (2)   This provision shall apply even though the lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the
district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those
applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations
for the district in which the lot is located.
      (3)   Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action
of the Board of Appeals.
   (B)   In any district, if two or more lots or combinations of lots and
portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at
the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the
lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an individual parcel for the purpose of this
chapter, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which
diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this
chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with
width or area below requirements stated in this chapter.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.067 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND (OR LAND WITH MINOR STRUCTURES ONLY).
   Where at the time of the passage of this chapter lawful use of land exists
which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and
where the use involves no individual structure with a reasonable fair market
value exceeding $1,000, the use may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, provided:
   (A)   No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   (B)   No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion
of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by that use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   (C)   If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than six months, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which the land is
located; and
   (D)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.068 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its
location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
   (A)   No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity;
   (B)   Should the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its
reasonable fair market value at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; and
   (C)   Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.069 NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN
COMBINATION.
   If a lawful use exists, involving individual structures with a reasonable
fair market value of $1,000 or more, or of structure and premises in this
chapter, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this
chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;
   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for that use at the time of
adoption or amendment to this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside the building;
   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may as a conditional use be changed to
another nonconforming use, provided the Board of Appeals, either by general
rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed
use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district then the
existing nonconforming use. In permitting the change, the Board of Appeals may
require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of
this chapter;
   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter
be resumed;
   (E)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six months the structure, or
structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and
   (F)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. DESTRUCTION, for the purpose of this division
(F), is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50% of the reasonable fair
market value at the time of destruction.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.070 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
    (A)   On any nonconforming structure or portion of any structure containing
a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on
ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures,
wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 10% of the current reasonable
fair market value of the nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may
be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall
not be increased.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
the official.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
ESTABLISHED ZONES
§ 155.085 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter, this
county is hereby divided into the following districts:
Agricultural District:
Agricultural District:
   A1 – Agricultural District
Residential Districts:
   R1 – Single Family Residential District
   R2 – Single Family Residential District
   R4 – Single Family Resident District
   RE5 – Single Family Estate District
   R6 – Multiple Dwelling District
   RMH1 – Single Family Residential District
   RMH2 – Single Family Residential District
Residential Districts:
   RMH4 – Single Family Residential District
   RMH5 – Single Family Estate District
Business Districts:
   B1 – Neighborhood Shopping District
   B2 – Commercial District
   B3 – Planned Shopping Center District
Manufacturing Districts:
   M1 – Light Industrial District
   M2 – Heavy Industrial District
Overlay Districts:
   IR – Interchange Residential District
   IB – Interchange Business District
   IM – Interchange Industrial District
   IA – Interchange Agricultural
 
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 155.100 A1 – AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose.  The regulation set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section are the regulations
in the A1 – Agricultural District.
   (B)   Goal. The agricultural zone is established as a zone in which
agricultural and certain related uses are encouraged as the principal uses of
land. The specific intent is to facilitate the proper use of lands best suited
to agricultural through preventing the admixture of urban and rural uses which
creates incompatibility and conflict, places unbalanced tax loads on
agriculture lands to help pay for urban services, and contributes to the
premature termination of agricultural pursuits. This zone is also designed to
prevent the health hazards brought about by the illogical placement of
inappropriately high residential densities in otherwise open countryside.
   (C)   Use regulations. A lot or premises shall only be use for the following
uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted only on a
ten-acre minimum tract size:
         (a)   Farming, including the usual buildings and structures used for
agricultural purposes;
         (b)   Truck and flower gardening, nurseries, orchards, and
greenhouses;
         (c)   Single-family dwellings, including mobile homes and manufactured
homes, within the limitations set forth in division (C)(1)(i) below;
         (d)   Public elementary and high schools, or private schools with a
curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public elementary and high schools;
         (e)   Roadside stands offering for sale only farm products which are
produced on the premises;
         (f)   Riding stables, or the keeping of small animals; provided that
any building housing animals be located at least 75 feet from all property
lines;
         (g)   Grain elevators and the usual accessory structures including
buildings for seasonal or temporary storage of grain whenever the elevator and
temporary storage are located upon or adjacent to a railroad right-of-way;
         (h)   Home occupation;
         (i)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of
the above uses. A farm may contain dwellings for workers employed on the
premises or direct relatives of the farm owner, but no more than one dwelling
unit per ten acres of tillable land; and
         (j)   The following uses shall be permitted on tracts less than ten
acres, but no smaller than one acre in size:
            1.   Single-family dwellings, in cases where:
               a.   The property contained a habitable residence on or before
January 1, 1970; and
               b.   If the property no longer contains a habitable residence,
the use of the property for crop production is significantly restricted by the
presence of the remnants of the homestead, such as dilapidated structures,
building foundations, or concrete walkways and/or driveways.
            2.   Home occupation; and
            3.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of
the above uses.
      (2)   Special uses.
         (a)   All permitted uses of the A1 District;
         (b)   Skeet or gun clubs, but only when located not less than 1,000
feet from any R District;
         (c)   Fish hatcheries; and
         (d)   Country clubs, golf course, miniature golf courses, and practice
driving tees.
   (D)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (E)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.115 R1 – SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations
in the R1 – Single Family Residence District.
   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes and manufactured
homes;
         (b)   Publicly owned or operated park, playground, or community
building, museum, library, or art gallery, provided that the building shall be
located not less than 40 feet from any side or rear lot line;
         (c)   Church or other place of worship or Sunday School, provided that
the building shall be located not less than 40 feet from any side or rear lot
line;
         (d)   Public school, kindergarten, elementary and high, or a private
school having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in a public school,
provided that the building shall be located not less than 40 feet from any side
or rear lot line;
         (e)   Country club or golf course, except those that are lighted,
miniature course, or practice driving tee operated for commercial purposes;
         (f)   Home occupation;
         (g)   Accessory building or use, including a private garage
customarily incidental to the above uses, but not involving the conduct of a
business; and
         (h)   A church or public bulletin board or temporary sign appertaining
to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, which sign or bulletin
board shall not exceed ten square feet in area.
      (2)   Special uses.
         (a)   Governmental structures, facilities, and utilities, including
but not limited to the following: police and fire stations, libraries, college
or university, highway and road maintenance facilities, water towers, pump
stations and all accessory uses normally incidental to the above uses;
         (b)   Parking lots when abutting a permitted use in the business or
manufacturing districts, when incidental to the permitted use; and
         (c)   Day care or day nursery facilities.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (D)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking space shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.116 R2 – SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the
regulations in the R2 – Single Family Residential District.
   (B)   Use regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All those uses permitted in R1 District.
      (2)   Special uses. The same as those for R1 District.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (D)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.117 R4 – SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the
regulations in the R4 – Single Family Residential District.
   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   All those permitted in the R1 District; and
         (b)   Truck gardening, including a temporary roadside stand, offering
for sale only those agricultural and nursery products produced upon the
premises, provided that the stand shall be removed during any season or period
when not in use.
      (2)   Special uses. The same as those for R1 District.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed
   (D)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.118 RE5 – SINGLE FAMILY ESTATE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the
regulations in the RE5 – Single Family Estate District.
   (B)   Goal. The RE5 zone is established to provide that area which is
topographically and locationally well suited to meet the metropolitan market
for two-acre and larger residential lots, are set aside and used for that
purpose; to encourage the orderly transition from agriculture to low density
residential use; and to prohibit any uses which are incompatible with this
objective.
   (C)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be uses only for the
following purpose:
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   All uses permitted in the R4 – Single Family District; and
         (b)   The keeping of livestock or poultry, providing that any
structure, excluding fences for their shelter, shall be located not less than
75 feet from any street or lot line.
      (2)   Special uses. The same as the R4 – Single Family District.
   (D)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (E)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.119 R6 – MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section are the regulations
in the R6 – Multiple Dwelling District.
   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the R1 – Single Family Residential District;
      (2)   Two-family dwelling;
      (3)   Multiple dwelling;
      (4)   Rooming or boarding house;
      (5)   Institution of a religious, educational, eleemosynary, or
philanthropic nature, but not a penal or mental institution;
      (6)   Hospital or sanitarium, except a criminal, mental, or animal
hospital;
      (7)   Nursing or convalescent home;
      (8)   Fraternity or sorority;
      (9)   Nursery schools accommodating more than three children and private
day or residential schools providing special education facilities; and
      (10)   Accessory buildings or use customarily incidental to any of the
above uses, including a storage garage on a lot occupied by the uses.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (D)   Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading space
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set
forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.120 RMH1 – SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section are the regulations
in the RMH1 – Single Family Residential District.
   (B)   Goal. This district is created to preserve and enhance property values
in the county by providing designated distinctive areas in which manufactured
homes, as well as site-built and modular homes, may be situated for residential
dwelling purposes. It is the intent that this district be a desirable permanent
area providing adequate open space, and essentially the same considerations
given to residents in R1 Districts.
   (C)   Use regulations. Building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All those uses permitted in the R1 District
including manufactured homes.
      (2)   Special use. Same as R1 District.
   (D)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (E)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.121 RMH2 – SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section are the regulations
in the RMH2 – Single Family Residential District.
   (B)   Goal. This district is created to preserve and enhance property values
in the county by providing designated distinctive areas in which manufactured
homes, as well as site-built and modular homes, may be situated for residential
dwelling purposes. It is the intent that this district be a desirable permanent
area providing adequate open space, and essentially the same considerations
given to residents of R2 Districts.
   (C)   Use regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All those uses permitted in the R2 District
including manufactured homes.
      (2)   Special uses. Same as R2 District.
   (D)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (E)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.122 RMH4 – SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section are the regulations
in the RMH4 – Single Family Residential District.
   (B)   Goal. This district is created to preserve and enhance property values
in the county by providing designated, distinctive areas in which manufactured
homes, as well as site-built and modular homes, may be situated for residential
dwelling purposes. It is the intent that this district be a desirable permanent
area providing adequate open space, and essentially the same considerations
given to residents of R4 Districts.
   (C)   Use regulations. Building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All those uses permitted in the R4 District
including manufactured homes.
      (2)   Special uses. Same as R4 District.
   (D)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed
   (E)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.123 RMH5 – SINGLE FAMILY ESTATE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section are the regulations
in the RMH5 – Single Family Estate District.
   (B)   Goal. This district is created to preserve and enhance property values
in the county by providing designated distinctive areas in which manufactured
homes, as well as site-built and modular homes, may be situated for residential
dwelling purposes. It is the intent that this district be a desirable permanent
area providing adequate open space, and essentially the same considerations
given to residents of RE5 Districts.
   (C)   Use regulations. Building or premises shall be used only for the
following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All those permitted in the RE5 District including
manufactured homes.
      (2)   Special uses. Same as RE5 District.
   (D)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (E)   Parking regulations. Off-street parking space shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for specific uses set for in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 155.135 B1 – NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the regulations
in the B1 – Neighborhood Shopping District.
   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for any or
a combination of the following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Public buildings;
         (b)   Dwelling units above the first floor and lodging rooms;
         (c)   Banks;
         (d)   Display room for merchandise to be sold at wholesale where
merchandise sold is stored elsewhere;
         (e)   Dressmaking, tailoring, shoe repairing, repair of household
appliances and bicycles, catering, dry cleaning and pressing, and bakery with
sale of bakery products on the premises, and other uses of a similar character,
provided that no use permitted in this division (B)(1)(e) shall employ more
than five persons in a single shift on the premises, not including employees
whose principal duties are off the premises or temporary seasonal employees;
         (f)   Automotive service station, provided that the storage of all
fuel shall be below the surface of the ground and provided further that
propane, butane, or similar hydrocarbon products shall not be sold or stored on
the premises;
         (g)   Office and office buildings;
         (h)   Personal service uses including barber shops, beauty parlors,
photographic or artist studios, messengers, taxicabs, newspaper, or
telegraphic, receiving stations, restaurants, and other personal services uses
of similar character;
         (i)   Telephone business offices;
         (j)   Retail store including package liquor stores, provided that in
connection with the store, there shall be no slaughtering of animals or poultry
on the premises, and that no tavern or similar place of entertainment or
amusement shall be permitted;
         (k)   Laundromat;
         (l)   Florist shop or greenhouse;
         (m)   Accessory building and uses incidental to permitted uses which
would be permitted in this classification if conducted as primary uses,
including advertising signs which relate to the business carried on by the
occupant or occupants of the lot; and
         (n)   Billboards and signs not included within division (B)(1)(m)
above, so long as the same are located more than 100 feet from the nearest R
District and are in conformity with height, area, and front and side yard
requirements.
      (2)   Special uses. Motel or tourist home.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (D)   Parking and load regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses as set
forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.136 B2 – COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section are the regulations
in the B2 – Commercial District.
   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for any or
a combination of the following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Any use permitted in the B1 – Neighborhood Shopping District;
         (b)   Billboard, when located at least 50 feet from any R District;
         (c)   Automobile or trailer display and sales when wholly enclosed;
         (d)   Business, commercial, or private school;
         (e)   When located not less than 100 feet from any R District:
            1.   Bowling alley;
            2.   Drive-in restaurant;
            3.   Taverns; and
            4.   Other similar places of entertainment or amusement.
         (f)   Dancing or music academy;
         (g)   Farm implement display or sales room;
         (h)   Frozen food locker;
         (i)   Hotel;
         (j)   Milk distributing station;
         (k)   Motel or tourist home;
         (l)   Public and private storage or parking garages;
         (m)   Radio or television broadcasting station or studio;
         (n)   Theater;
         (o)   Undertaking establishment;
         (p)   Veterinarian or animal hospital, kennels, or riding academy,
providing that no building, kennel, or exercise runway shall be no closer than
100 feet to any R District;
         (q)   Used car sales or storage lot when located at least 50 feet from
any R District;
         (r)   When not employing more than ten persons on the premises and
located more than 100 feet from any front or side lot line in any R District:
            1.   Dyeing and cleaning establishment or laundry;
            2.   Painting, electrical, or plumbing shop;
            3.   Printing shop;
            4.   Tire sales and service, including vulcanizing;
            5.   Upholstering shop not involving furniture manufacturing;
            6.   Gasoline service stations including repairs, but specifically
excluding auto body repair work;
            7.   Any other general service or repair establishment of similar
character; and
            8.   Accessory building or use customarily incidental to the above
uses.
      (2)   Special uses.
         (a)   Drive-in theaters;
         (b)   Outdoor sales lots;
         (c)   Churches;
         (d)   Wholesale establishment;
         (e)   Automotive service center;
         (f)   Warehousing; and
         (g)   Two-family and multiple-family dwelling units.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed; and, in addition, every building or portion thereof
used for dwelling purposes shall comply with the following minimum yard and lot
area requirements:
      (1)   Front yard: 35 feet;
      (2)   Side yards: either yard – 5 feet; aggregate – 12 feet for buildings
under three stories; each yard eight feet for three-story buildings; and
      (3)   Lot area:
         (a)   For one-family, 20,000 square feet;
         (b)   For two-family, 10,000 square feet per family; and
         (c)   For multiple-family dwelling, 5,000 square feet per family.
   (D)   Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set
forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.137 B3 – PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the
regulations in the B3 – Planned Shopping Center District. The district shall be
laid out and developed as a unit according to an approved plan as provided
below in order to accomplish its purpose to provide for modern retail shopping
facilities of integrated design in appropriate locations to serve residential
neighborhoods.
   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the
retail sales of merchandise, services, parking areas, and similar facilities
ordinarily accepted as shopping center uses. No building shall be designed,
constructed, structurally altered or used for dwelling purposes, except to
provide, within the buildings allowed, facilities for a custodian, caretaker,
or watchman employed on the premises.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed; provided, however, that a part of the shopping
center containing a ground floor area of not more than 10,000 square feet may
be erected to a height of six stories or 90 feet when located not less than 150
feet from all property lines and when specifically approved as to arrangement
and design, as specified hereinafter, and provided further that the aggregate
ground area occupied by building shall not exceed 25% of the total area of the
shopping center site.
   (D)   Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking area shall be
provided in the ratio of not less than three square feet of parking area for
each square foot of the floor area, the floor area to be determined as provided
in §§
155.195 through
155.201. Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with requirements for
the B1 – Neighborhood Shopping District prescribed in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
   (E)   Procedure. The owner or owners of a tract of land which comprises
three acres or more may submit to the County Board, by filing with the
Administrative Officer a plan for the use and development of the tract for the
purpose of and meeting the requirements set forth in this section. The plan
shall be accompanied by evidence concerning the feasibility of the project and
its effects on surrounding property and other physical conditions which plan
and supporting evidence shall include each of the following:
      (1)   A site plan defining the areas to be developed for buildings, the
areas to be developed for parking, the location of pedestrian and vehicular
circulation and the points of ingress and egress, including access streets
where required, the location and height of walls, the provisions of spaces for
loading, the location, size and number of signs and adjustments to be made in
relation to abutting land uses and zoning districts;
      (2)   A report on the market to be served, the types and amount of
service needed, general economic justification;
      (3)   A traffic survey prepared by qualified experts indicating the
effect of the proposed shopping center on adjacent streets and also indicating
the anticipated points of origin and direction and the amount of traffic flow
to and from the shopping center; and
      (4)   A statement of financial responsibility to assure construction of
the planned shopping center, including landscaping in accordance with the plan
and the requirements of this section.
   (F)   Review and approval.  
      (1)   Before any action thereon, the proposed planned shopping center
plan, and the petition to establish the same, together with the required
statements and supplementary information shall be referred by the
Administrative Officer to the Board of Appeals for study and report for public
hearing, all of which shall proceed in accordance with and be governed by the
provisions of §
155.025 as if the same were a proposed variation. In no event shall the Board
of Appeals favorably recommend or the County Board approve the plan unless the
approval is accompanied by findings that:
         (a)   The shopping center shall be laid out and developed as a unit in
accordance with an integrated over-all design;
         (b)   The location and arrangement of buildings, parking areas, walks,
lighting, and appurtenant facilities shall be adjusted to the surrounding land
uses, and any part of the shopping center site not used for buildings or other
structures or for parking, loading, or access ways shall be improved with
grass, trees, shrubs, or pedestrian walks;
         (c)   No merchandise, materials, or equipment shall be stored in any
open areas within the shopping center site; nor shall the open spaces be used
for the display, advertising, or sale of merchandise other than for seasonal
exhibits. The intent of this division (F)(1)(c) is that no storage, display, or
advertising of merchandise shall be allowed in the open area of the center
which will constitute a hazard or deteriorate the general aesthetic quality of
the center; and
         (d)   All roads, parking and loading areas, and walks shall be
suitably graded and drained and paved with hard surface material meeting
applicable specifications of the County Superintendent of Highways. Suitable
lighting shall be provided for all facilities operated after sundown.
      (2)   Reasonable additional requirements as to landscaping, lighting,
signs, and other advertising devices, screening, access ways, and building
setbacks may be imposed by the Board of Appeals or County Board for the
protection of adjoining residential property.
   (G)   Delay in construction. In the event that construction of the shopping
center is not begun within two years of the date of approval by the County
Board, the district shall revert to the same classifications of zoning existing
prior to the approval of the B3 District and the zoning regulations of the
prior district shall thereupon be in full force and effect.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
§ 155.150 M1 – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the
regulations in the M1 – Light Industrial District.
   (B)   Use regulations.  A building or premises shall be used only for any or
a combination of the following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Any use permitted in the B2 – Commercial District and without
restriction as to number of employees, other than residential, provided
however, that when 90% or more of a block or tract of land in the M1 District
is vacant or occupied by structures that are of a nonresidential use, then no
new residential units may be permitted within the block or tract;
         (b)   Bottling works;
         (c)   Carting, express, hauling, or storage yard;
         (d)   Contractor’s yard;
         (e)   Coal, coke, or wood yard;
         (f)   Assembly and manufacture from prefabricated parts of household
appliances, electronic products, or the processing or assembling of parts for
production of finished equipment;
         (g)   Laboratories–experimental, film, or testing;
         (h)   Printing, publishing, or engraving;
         (i)   Drive-in theaters;
         (j)   Service industry such as laundry, cleaning, or dyeing
establishment, or similar use;
         (k)   Sporting and athletic equipment manufacture;
         (l)   Motor freight terminal or freight house, or bus garages and
repair shops;
         (m)   Wholesale or distributing establishment or warehouse or
wholesale market;
         (n)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or
treatment of such goods, materials, and products as the following:
            1.   Bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries,
food products–except fish and meat products–sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the
rendering of fats and oils;
            2.   Articles made from previously prepared materials such as:
bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair,
horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stone,
shell, textiles, wax, wire, yarns and the like;
            3.   Musical instruments, toys, novelties, rubber, or metal stamps,
and other small molded rubber products; and
            4.   Fabrication and repair of electric or neon signs or other
commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal products, and the like.
         (o)   Any other industrial and manufacturing plants where the process
of manufacturing or treatment of materials is such that only a nominal amount
of dust, odor, gas, smoke, or noise is emitted and not more than 10% of the lot
or tract is used for the open storage of products, materials, or equipment.
      (2)   Special uses.
         (a)   Bulk storage of refined petroleum products except propane,
butane, and similar hydrocarbon products for distribution, but only after the
location and treatment of the premises have been approved by the State Division
of Fire Prevention as meeting applicable requirements of laws and regulations
relating to inflammable liquids;
         (b)   Stadia; and
         (c)   Places of public assembly.
      (3)   Prohibitive uses. Residential uses other than those developed for
watchmen.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed and, in addition, any building or portion thereof
that may be used for dwelling purposes shall comply with the yard and lot area
requirements for the buildings specified in the B2 – Commercial District.
   (D)   Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set
forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.151 M2 – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The regulations set forth in this section or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the
regulations in the M2 – Heavy Industrial District.
   (B)   Use regulations. Any building or premises may be used for any of the
following purposes.
      (1)   Permitted uses. Any use not in conflict with the law regarding
nuisances or with any resolution, ordinance, or lawful order of the County
Board, or this state, provided they are not identified as requiring a special
use permit.
      (2)   Special uses.
         (a)   Acid manufacture;
         (b)   Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture;
         (c)   Distillation of bones and glue manufacture;
         (d)   Explosives manufacture or storage;
         (e)   Fat rendering and fertilizer manufacture;
         (f)   Petroleum, or its products, refining of propane;
         (g)   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores;
         (h)   Stockyards or slaughter of animals;
         (i)   Bulk storage of propane, butane, or similar hydrocarbon products
for distribution; and
         (j)   Junk yards, but only when the premises upon which the activities
are conducted are wholly enclosed within a building or by a fence not less than
eight feet in height and in which the openings or cracks are less than 15% of
the total area.
      (3)   Prohibitive uses. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or
structurally altered for residential purposes, except for resident watchmen or
caretakers employed on the premises.
   (C)   Height and area regulations. The height and area regulations set forth
in §§
155.183 and
155.184 shall be observed.
   (D)   Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set
forth in §§
155.195 through
155.201.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 155.165 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide realistic
controls for assuring safe and convenient access to the development of
properties that adjoin interchanges and discourage the indiscriminate location
of access points along the intersecting highway.
   (B)   Areas of control. The following interchange development standards
shall apply to all commercial, residential, and industrial development within a
radius of one-half mile of the interchange structure except where area of
control extends inside the corporate limits of a municipality. In such a case,
the municipal regulations shall apply.
   (C)   Setback distance from intersecting highway. Buildings and structures
shall be set back at least 80 feet from the right-of-way line of intersecting
highways, or 160 feet from the centerline, whichever is more restrictive, 100
feet from the freeway right-of-way line and 30 feet from the right-of-way line
of frontage roads and other roads of the internal circulation system. In the
case of unusual changes in alignment of the intersecting highway or unusual
topographical characteristics which would cause undue hardship in the
application of this requirement, a variance for a lesser setback distance from
the intersecting highway may be granted.
   (D)   Limitation of access. The State Department of Transportation has
developed access regulations for particular interchanges based on ramp design
and ramp speed. These regulations shall apply only when they are more
restrictive than the following restrictions. Access from abutting property to
an intersecting highway shall be permitted only at designated access points.
The access shall be located as follows:
      (1)   There shall be no access points located within 700 feet (500 in
urban situations) of the most remote end of taper of any existing or proposed
entrance or exit ramp of an interchange or 700 feet (500 in urban situations)
of median crossovers, or at intervals of less than 700 feet thereafter. A
lesser distance may be permitted upon written approval by the State Department
of Transportation; and
      (2)   To avoid dangerous off-set intersections, public streets along
opposite sides of intersecting highways shall be located either directly
opposite a median strip crossover or separated by at least 300 feet of lateral
distance. A lesser distance may be permitted upon written approval by the State
Department of Transportation.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.166 DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   IR Interchange Residential District. The Interchange Residential
District IR is created to project the residential environment at interchanges
and to prevent conflict between highway traffic and residential access.
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the IR
District, plus any other uses as the governing body may deem to be similar in
nature. All uses shall be subject to property development standards of the
zoning.
         (a)   Single-family residences, including mobile homes and
manufactured homes;
         (b)   Multi-family residences;
         (c)   Accessory buildings, including garages;
         (d)   Home occupation;
         (e)   School, public or private;
         (f)   Public park or recreational facilities; and
         (g)   Signs.
      (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit and are subject to all the applicable requirements and procedures
appearing in the zoning ordinance.
         (a)   Borrow pits to be reclaimed for residential and/or recreational
use;
         (b)   Clinics;
         (c)   Church or temple;
         (d)   Country club or golf course;
         (e)   Fire or police station;
         (f)   Kindergarten, day nursery, day care home (other than as a part
of a school providing other grades);
         (g)   Private swimming pool;
         (h)   Planned unit development;
         (i)   Public water wells, pumping stations, filtration plants,
reservoirs, and storage tanks;
         (j)   Sewage disposal plants; and
         (k)   Transmission lines for gas, oil, electricity, or other utilities
and necessary substation and distribution centers.
   (B)   IB Interchange Business District. The IB District is established to
assure the desirable development of high quality highway user facilities with
their related uses and other commercial enterprises.
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the IB
District plus any other uses as the governing body may deem to be similar in
nature. All uses shall be subject to property development standards found in
this zoning chapter.
         (a)   Highway service facilities such as service stations, truck
stops, motels, restaurants, taverns, drive-in eating places, and similar
establishments;
         (b)   All retail sales and personal service activities that are
conducted entirely within a building; the uses shall be housed in a shopping
center or group of contiguous buildings which are incidental to the retail
sales;
         (c)   Other retail sales establishments such as building supply sales,
new and used car sales, nurseries and garden centers, boat and marina sales,
and mobile and travel trailer sales and rentals;
         (d)   Professional services and offices such as doctors, lawyers,
engineers, and architects;
         (e)   Tourist information centers;
         (f)   Parking facilities;
         (g)   Residential use only when an integral part of a commercial use;
and
         (h)   Accessory uses and structures, including signs.
      (2)   Uses not permitted. The following uses shall not be permitted in
the IB District.
         (a)   Residential uses (unless an integral part of a commercial use);
         (b)   Industrial uses;
         (c)   Drive-in theaters, go-cart tracks, race tracks, and carnivals;
         (d)   Commercial kennels and veterinarians; and
         (e)   Church or temple.
      (3)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit and are subject to all the applicable requirements and procedures
appearing in this chapter:
         (a)   Borrow pits to be reclaimed for residential and/or recreational
use;
         (b)   Outdoor commercial recreational facilities;
         (c)   Private swimming pool;
         (d)   Public water wells, pumping stations, filtration plants,
reservoirs, and storage tanks;
         (e)   Sewage disposal plant;
         (f)   Rental and service of trucks and trailers in combination with
filling or service stations; and
         (g)   Transmission lines for gas, oil, electricity, or other utilities
and all necessary substation and distributing centers.
   (C)   IM Interchange Industrial District. The IM District is established to
accommodate light industrial uses that are relatively “clean” activities, such
as the manufacture and storage of products within entirely enclosed buildings
and which require freeway access and prestige frontage.
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the IM
District, plus any other uses the governing body may deem to be similar in
nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards found
in this chapter.
         (a)   Industrial park;
         (b)   Printing and publishing enterprises;
         (c)   Parcel delivery services;
         (d)   Storage and warehouse facilities;
         (e)   Railroad right-of-way and necessary related uses; and
         (f)   Most production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing,
repair, or storage of materials, goods, or products are permitted, except those
which are of a flammable or explosive nature. These activities shall not be
injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of
emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke dust, toxic materials, odors,
fire, or glare.
      (2)   Uses not permitted. The following uses shall not be permitted in
the IM District:
         (a)   Residential uses;
         (b)   Drive-in theaters, go-cart tracks, race tracks, carnivals,
shooting ranges;
         (c)   Commercial kennels and veterinarian;
         (d)   Church and temple; and
          (e)   Landfills.
      (3)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit and are subject to all the applicable requirements and procedures
appearing in that section of the zoning ordinance of the governing body having
jurisdiction of the area:
         (a)   Borrow pits to be reclaimed for residential and/or recreational
uses;
         (b)   Public water wells, pumping stations, filtration plants,
reservoirs, and storage tanks;
         (c)   Planned unit developments;
         (d)   Sewage disposal plant;
         (e)   Transmission lines for gas, oil, electricity, or other utilities
and necessary substations and distribution centers; and
         (f)   Truck freight terminal.
   (D)   IA Interchange Agriculture District. The IA District is established as
a zone in which agriculture and certain related uses are encouraged as the
proper use of lands best suited for agriculture, thus preventing the admixture
of urban and rural land uses which creates incompatibility and conflict.
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the IA
District plus any other uses the governing body may deem to be similar in
nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards found
in this chapter.
         (a)   General farming, including dairying, livestock, and poultry
raising;
         (b)   Nurseries and greenhouses;
         (c)   Farm dwellings;
         (d)   Conservatory areas and lakes; and
         (e)   Wetland and lakes.
      (2)   Uses not permitted. The following uses shall not be permitted in
the IA District.
         (a)   Residential uses (unless incidental to agricultural activities);
         (b)   Commercial uses;
         (c)   Industrial uses;
         (d)   Drive-in theaters, go-cart tracks, race tracks, carnivals,
shooting ranges;
         (e)   Commercial kennels and veterinarians;
         (f)   Church and temple; and
         (g)   Landfill.
      (3)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit and are subject to all applicable requirements and procedures appearing
in this chapter.
         (a)   Borrow pits to be reclaimed for recreational use;
         (b)   Public water wells, pumping stations, filtration plants,
reservoirs, and storage tanks;
         (c)   Sewage disposal plant;
         (d)   Transmission lines for gas, oil, electricity, or other utilities
and necessary substation and distribution centers; and
         (e)   Signs.
   (E)   Property development standards in IR District. The following property
development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the IR
District.
      (1)   Minimum lot area. A lot on which a dwelling is erected or changed
may not be smaller in area than the prescribed requirements for that
residential district.
      (2)   Minimum lot width and minimum lot depth. All lots in approved
subdivisions shall have the minimum width and depth requirements as prescribed
for that residential district.
      (3)   Ground floor area in square feet per dwelling unit. No dwelling
unit may be established, erected, or changed so that its ground floor area, in
square feet, is less than that prescribed for that residential district.
      (4)   Building height. No main building or structure may be established,
erected, or changed in this IR District so as to have a height greater than
that prescribed for that residential district.
      (5)   Setback distances. All buildings and structures shall be set back
at least 80 feet from the right-of-way line of the intersecting highway, or 160
feet from the centerline, whichever is more restrictive, 30 feet from the local
or internal circulation roads, and 100 feet from the freeway right-of-way. A
variance for lesser setback distance from the intersecting highway or local
road may be granted if the application of this requirement is determined to
cause undue hardship.
      (6)   Yard requirements. All minimum yard requirements shall conform to
those established for that residential district.
      (7)   Screen and sound buffer. A dense compact evergreen planting not
less than eight feet in height within three years and eight feet in width shall
be provided along the rear lot line of lots backing on the intersecting highway
or freeway. This planting strip shall be designated as a “no access” strip and
maintained in an orderly manner.
      (8)   Lot coverage. All buildings on a lot shall not exceed in coverage
the percentage of total lot area as prescribed for that residential district.
      (9)   Off-street parking. The provisions for off-street parking for that
residential district as established in this chapter.
      (10)   Outdoor advertising. All provisions for outdoor advertising for
that residential district as established in this chapter.
      (11)   Underground utilities. All utilities such as electric, telephone,
cable television and other communication cables shall be installed underground
and comply with the National Electrical Code and Chapter 3 of N.F.P.A.,
Standard 501A. The methods of constructions shall be those commonly used by the
utility industry with above ground access points for distribution and
maintenance. All lines shall be installed in compliance with the regulations of
the State Commerce Commission pursuant to the State Public Utilities Act. All
transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to
the public.
   (F)   Property development standards in IB District. The following property
development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the IB
District.
      (1)   Minimum lot area. A lot on which a structure or building is erected
or changed may not be smaller in area than the prescribed requirements for that
commercial district.
      (2)   Minimum lot width and minimum lot depth. All lots in approved
subdivisions shall have the minimum lot width and depth requirements as
prescribed for that commercial district.
      (3)   Ground floor area in square feet per dwelling unit. No building or
structure may be established, erected, or changed so that its ground floor
area, in square feet, is less than that prescribed for that commercial
district.
      (4)   Building height. No main building or structure may be established,
erected, or changed in this IB District so as to have a height greater than
that prescribed for that commercial district.
      (5)   Setback distances. All buildings and structures shall be set back
at least 80 feet from the right-of-way line of the intersecting highway, or 160
feet from the centerline, whichever is more restrictive, 30 feet from the local
or internal circulation roads, and 100 feet from the freeway right-of-way. A
variance for a lesser setback distance from the intersecting highway or local
road may be granted if the application of this requirement is determined to
cause undue hardship.
      (6)   Yard requirements. All minimum yard requirements shall conform to
those established for that commercial district.
      (7)   Screen and sound buffer. A dense compact evergreen planting not
less than eight feet in height within three years, and eight feet in width,
shall be provided along the rear lot line of lots backing on the intersecting
highway or freeway. This planting strip shall be designated as a “no access”
strip and maintained in an orderly manner. All service areas shall be screened
either by fencing or compact planting.
      (8)   Lot coverage. All buildings on a lot shall not exceed in coverage
the percentage of the total lot area as prescribed for that commercial
district.
      (9)   Off-street parking. The provisions for off-street parking for that
commercial district.
      (10)   Outdoor advertising. There shall be no signs, with the exception
of traffic control and directory signs, within 660 feet of the freeway right-
of-way. The following restrictions shall apply to the remainder of the
interchange area plus any other restrictions for outdoor advertising for that
commercial district.
   (G)   Property development standards in IM District. The following
development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the IM
District.
      (1)   Minimum lot area. A lot on which a dwelling is erected or changed
may not be smaller in area than the prescribed requirements for that industrial
district.
      (2)   Minimum lot width and minimum lot depth. All lots in approved
subdivisions shall have the minimum width and depth requirements as prescribed
for that industrial district.
      (3)   Ground floor area in square feet per dwelling unit. No dwelling
unit may be established, erected, or changed so that its ground floor area, in
square feet, is less than that prescribed for that industrial district.
      (4)   Building height. No main building or structure may be established,
erected, or changed in this IM District so as to have a height greater than
that prescribed for that industrial district.
      (5)   Setback distances. All buildings and structures shall be set back
at least 80 feet from the right-of-way line of the intersecting highway, or 160
feet from the centerline, whichever is more restrictive, 30 feet from the local
or internal circulation roads, and 100 feet from the freeway right-of-way. A
variance for a lesser setback distance from the intersecting highway or local
road may be granted by the governing body if the application of this
requirement is determined to cause undue hardship.
      (6)   Yard requirements. All minimum yard requirements shall conform to
those established for that industrial district.
      (7)   Screen and sound buffer. A dense compact evergreen planting not
less than eight feet in width shall be provided along the rear lot line of lots
backing on the intersecting highway or freeway. This planting strip shall be
designated as a “no access” strip and maintained in an orderly manner.
      (8)   Lot coverage. All buildings on a lot shall not exceed in coverage
the percentage of total lot area as prescribed for that industrial district.
      (9)   Off-street parking. The provision for off-street parking for that
industrial district.
      (10)   Outdoor advertising. All provisions for outdoor advertising for
that industrial district.
      (11)   Underground utilities. All utilities such as electric, telephone,
cable television, and other communications cables shall be installed
underground and comply with the National Electrical Code and Chapter 3 of
N.F.P.A., Standard 501A. The methods of construction shall be those commonly
used by the utility industry with above ground access points for distribution
and maintenance. All lines shall be installed in compliance with the
regulations of the State Commerce Commission pursuant to the State Public
Utilities Act. All transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly
or hazardous to the public.
   (H)   Property development standards in IA District. The following property
development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the IA
District.
      (1)   Minimum lot area. A lot on which a structure or building is erected
or changed may not be smaller in area than the prescribed requirements for that
agricultural district.
      (2)   Minimum lot width and minimum lot depth. All lots in approved
subdivisions shall have the minimum width and depth requirements as prescribed
for that agricultural district.
      (3)   Ground floor area in square feet per dwelling unit. No building or
structure may be established, erected, or changed so that its ground floor
area, in square feet, is less than that prescribed for that agricultural
district.
      (4)   Building height. No main building or structure may be established,
erected, or changed in this IA District so as to have a height greater than
prescribed for that agricultural district.
      (5)   Setback distance. All buildings and structures shall be set back at
least 80 feet from the right-of-way line of the intersecting highway, 30 feet
from the local or internal circulation roads, and 100 feet from the freeway
right-of-way. A variance for a lesser setback distance from the intersecting
highway or local road may be granted if the application of this requirement is
determined to cause undue hardship.
      (6)   Yard requirements. All minimum yard requirements shall conform to
those established for that agricultural district.
      (7)   Lot coverage. All buildings on a lot shall not exceed in coverage
the percentage of the total lot area as prescribed for that agricultural
district.
      (8)   Outdoor advertising. There shall be no signs, with the exception of
traffic control and directory signs, within 660 feet of the freeway right-of-
way. The following restrictions shall apply to the remainder of the interchange
area plus any other restrictions for outdoor advertising for that agricultural
district.
         (a)   No sign shall resemble or approximate the size, shape, form, or
color of official traffic control signs, signals, or devices.
         (b)   No sign should be so placed as to obstruct or interfere with the
visibility or effectiveness of an official traffic control sign or signal, or
with the driver’s vision at any access point or intersection.
         (c)   No sign should contain, include, or be composed of any
distracting animated or moving part or parts.
         (d)   No sign should contain, include, or be illuminated by a flashing
light or lights.
         (e)   No sign should contain more than 300 square feet of area.
         (f)   No billboard or other large advertising sign should be located
in the interchange area.
         (g)   No more than two signs in each interchange area should be
allowed for any single business when the signs are located off the premises of
that establishment.
      (9)   Underground facilities. All utilities such as electric, telephone,
cable television, and other communications cables shall be installed
underground and comply with the National Electrical Code and Chapter 3 of
N.F.P.A., Standard 501A. The methods of construction shall be those commonly
used by the utility industry with above-ground access points for distribution
and maintenance. All lines shall be installed in compliance with the
regulations of the State Commerce Commission pursuant to the State Public
Utilities Act. All transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly
or hazardous to the public.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
§ 155.180 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   The County Board may grant a special permit, for the following special
uses in certain district(s), unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
   (B)   Any special use (permit) may include a specified period of time and
may be limited to the applicant or owner, in order, to comply with the intent
of this chapter and to conserve and protect the property and property values in
the neighborhood:
      (1)   Private landing field, or landing strip for aircraft and heliports
owned and operated by the property owner thereof;
      (2)   Cemetery, including animal, or mausoleum;
      (3)   A hospital, clinic, nursing home, sheltered care home, or similar
institutions which may be permitted in a residential district, shall be located
on a site of not less than five acres, shall not occupy more than 10% of the
total lot area, and shall be set back from all yard lines at least two feet for
each foot of building height. A special use permit shall not be available in
the agricultural district;
      (4)   Privately operated community building or recreation field, except
in agricultural and residential districts;
      (5)   A public or government building and public use of any publicly
owned and operated property, except in the agricultural and residential
districts;
      (6)   Radio and television broadcasting tower or station;
      (7)   Mobile home parks, mobile home developments, and travel trailer
camp. (The definition of the term MOBILE HOME shall be expanded, for the
purpose of this section, to also include manufactured homes.)
         (a)   A mobile home park. A mobile home park may be permitted by a
special permit in any residential or business zone on areas topographically or
locationally well suited, when it can be found that the granting of the permit
to allow construction of the mobile home park will not adversely affect public
health, safety, or surrounding property values. Mobile home park facilities
shall comply with the following and any additional requirements as may be
deemed necessary of surrounding areas.
            1.   All appropriate state and county sanitary regulations shall
strictly be observed.
            2.   With the request for zoning shall be submitted a plat showing
the lot sites, streets, utilities, easements, and open spaces.
            3.   The development density will not exceed 14 units per acres and
the minimum lot size for any single unit will be 3,000 square feet.
            4.   Both community water and community sewer shall be provided for
each and every lot in a mobile home park.
            5.   No mobile home shall be parked closer to any street or highway
than the required front yard setback, nor shall any mobile home be parked
closer than 35 feet to any property line, except in the B2 Districts. The
perimeter of the park shall be planted in evergreen shrubs or have constructed
a site-break fence not less than six feet in height; a clearance of not less
than 15 feet shall be maintained between the mobile homes on all sides.
            6.   Service buildings or other facilities for bathing, laundry,
and sanitation shall be provided as required by the state and local health
regulations, except that mobile home sales shall not be considered part of the
service area unless the park is located in a business zone. The services shall
be located at least 35 feet from the side and rear lot lines and shall be
accessible to mobile home spaces by means of the access drives or hard-surfaced
walks.
            7.   A fenced, protected recreation and playground area shall be
established and maintained and shall comprise at least 8% of the total park
area.
            8.   Each lot shall contain a driveway or parking space of
sufficient size to accommodate at least two vehicles on the trailer site.
            9.   All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a hard-surfaced
driveway or access way of not less than 25 feet in width.
            10.   All mobile home parks shall be constructed in accordance with
standards developed for the construction as adopted by the County Board, and no
unit shall be placed on any addition to a mobile home park until streets and
improvements are constructed and have been inspected by the building and health
inspectors of this county.
         (b)   A tourist or trailer camp. A trailer camp may be allowed in any
B or Agriculture Zone, provided that there are at least ten acres in the
proposed development tract, subject to approval of a special permit development
plan, and provided that the following and any additional requirements as may be
deemed necessary for proper development and the protection of surrounding areas
are met.
            1.   All appropriated state and county sanitation regulations shall
be strictly observed.
            2.   Exclusive of all drives, at least 2,000 square feet of lot
area per dwelling shall be provided; no trailer shall be parked closer to the
street or highway than 20 feet to any property line. All the parks shall be
buffered by a planted hedge or site-screened fence constructed around their
perimeter. Clearance of not less than 15 feet shall be maintained between
trailers.
            3.   All trailer spaces shall abut upon a hard-surfaced driveway or
access way of not less than 25 feet in width.
            4.   Service buildings or other facilities for bathing, laundry,
and sanitation shall be provided as required by state and local health
regulations and shall be located at least 35 feet from the side and rear lot
lines and shall be accessible to spaces by means of the access drives or hard-
surfaced walks.
            5.   A protected recreation and playground area shall be
established and maintained.
      (8)   A special permit may be issued by the County Board to operate a
refuse disposal area in any district other than an R District on areas
topographically or locationally well suited, when it can determine that the
operation of a refuse disposal area on the area will not adversely affect
public health, safety, or surrounding property values.
         (a)   In addition to other requirements governing requests or
petitions for such a special use permit, the petitioner shall submit with the
request or petition sufficient information and/or maps concerning the
topography, soil conditions, and availability of water to provide a basis for
making the above mentioned findings.
         (b)   The request or petition for a special use permit shall also
include information concerning the method to be used in disposing of the
refuse; the nature of the refuse to be placed in the area; the approximate
amount of refuse to be disposed of weekly; the plans for operation; the
equipment to be used in the area; and the proposed reclamation of the area.
         (c)   The request or petition and the special use permit shall provide
for the dumping of one or more of the types of refuse enumerated in § 1 of
Article 1 of the County Refuse Ordinance, which are classified as follows; I –
Garbage; II – Combustible rubbish; III – Non-combustible rubbish; IV – Street
rubbish; V – Ashes; VI – Bulky wastes; VII – Construction and demolition
wastes; VIII – Putrescible industrial refuse; IX – Non-putrescible industrial
refuse; and X – Household pets, birds, rodents, and the wastes thereof.
         (d)   The Administrative Officer shall furnish a copy of the petition,
together with a copy of each of the supplementary documents or maps submitted
therewith, to the Director of the County Regional Planning Commission and to
the Director of the County Health Department, who shall submit written
recommendations of approval or denial and their reasons thereof to the Board of
Appeals and to the Zoning Committee of the County Board.
         (e)   In addition to any other conditions and safeguards imposed by
the Board of this county, all these special permits shall contain the following
conditions and safeguards. All refuse disposal operations in the refuse
disposal area for which the permit is granted shall be conducted in compliance
and conformity with all applicable state statutes and county ordinance,
including but not limited to the county refuse ordinance.
         (f)   Any special use permit issued hereunder shall expire two years
from the date of its issuance unless state and county licenses for operation of
a refuse disposal area on the real estate for which the permit is granted are
obtained within that period of time, unless the request or petition and special
permit issued thereafter state otherwise.
      (9)   Except in the agricultural and residential districts, railroad
right-of-way (together with tracks and auxiliary facilities for tracks
operations), passenger stations, freight terminals, switching yards,
classification yards, repair shops, roundhouses, power houses, interlocking
towers, fueling, sanding, and water stations, and other similar facilities not
in existence on the effective date of this chapter;
      (10)   Telephone exchange buildings;
      (11)   Pumping or booster stations along a pipeline or substations along
an electric transmission line; and
      (12)   Automobile graveyards or automobile wrecking yards (junkyards) may
be allowed in any zoning districts except the agricultural and residential
districts.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.181 HEARING.
   Before authorization of any special uses or any of the special uses
delineated in the individual districts, the petition for the special permit
shall be referred to the Board of Appeals for public hearing.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.182 COMPLIANCE.
   Any proposed special use shall otherwise comply with all the regulations set
forth in this chapter for the district in which the use is located.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.183 HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.
   The required height and area regulations for the various districts are
hereby established and set forth as follows:
                                 Minimum
         Minimum Minimum Minimum Side Yard  Minimum                Maximum  Maximum
Zoning   Lot     Lot     Front              Rear    Maximum        Coverage Floor
District Area    Width   Yard    Per  Total Yard    Height 1, 2  3        Area
                                 Side                                       Ratio
                                                Minimum
                        Minimum Minimum Minimum Side Yard  Minimum                Maximum  Maximum
Zoning District         Lot     Lot     Front              Rear    Maximum        Coverage Floor
                        Area    Width   Yard    Per  Total Yard    Height 1, 2  3        Area
                                                Side                                       Ratio

A1 – Agricultural 5   10      190 ft. 50 ft.  50   100   50 ft.  35 ft.         None     None
                        acres                   ft.  ft.
F1 – Floodplain       None    None    50 ft.  100  200   100 ft. 35 ft.         0.20     None
                                                ft.  ft.
R1 – Single Family    1 acre  100 ft. 35 ft.  15   20    50 ft.  35 ft.         0.30     None
Residential                                     ft.  ft.
R4 – Single Family    1 acre  100 ft. 35 ft.  15   30    50 ft.  35 ft.         0.30     None
Residential                                     ft.  ft.
RE5 – Single Family   2 acres 190 ft. 50 ft.  50   100   50 ft.  35 ft.         0.20     None
Estate                                          ft.  ft.
R6 – Multiple Family  1 acre  100 ft. 35 ft.  15   12    50 ft.  35 ft.         0.50     0.60
Residential                                     ft.  ft.
B1 – Neighborhood     1 acre  100 ft. 35 ft.  5    20    20 ft.  35 ft.         None     None
Shopping                                        ft.  ft.
(Adjacent to an R       1 acre  100 ft. 35 ft.  20   20    20 ft.  35 ft.         0.35     0.40
District)                                       ft.  ft.
B2 – Commercial       1 acre  None    35 ft.  5    20    None    45 ft.         None     None
                                                ft.  ft.
(Adjacent to an R       1 acre  None    60 ft.  20   20    20 ft.  45 ft.         0.35     0.40
District)                                       ft.  ft.
B3 – Planned Shopping 3 acres 400 ft. None    None None  None    35 ft.         None     None
Center
(Adjacent to an R       5 acres 400 ft. 60 ft.  50   50    35 ft.  35 ft.         0.35     0.40
District)                                       ft.  ft.
M1 – Light Industrial 1 acre  100 ft. 35 ft.  None None  None    125 ft.5       0.50     0.60
(Adjacent to an R       1 acre  100 ft. 100 ft. 20   40    25 ft.  125 ft.5       0.50     0.60
District)                                       ft.  ft.
M2 – Heavy Industrial 1 acre  100 ft. 35 ft.  None None  None    125 ft.5       0.50     0.80
(Adjacent to an R       1 acre  100 ft. 100 ft. 50   100   25 ft.  125 ft.5       0.50     0.80
District)                                       ft.  ft.
1    Refer to airport zoning restrictions in vicinity of airport.
2    35-foot height shall be considered to be 3 stories, 45-foot height shall be considered to be
4 stories.
3    Maximum coverage refers to that area of a lot covered by a non-porous surface.
4    Whenever a building in an M District adjoins or abuts an R District, within 100 feet
therefrom, the building shall not exceed 45 feet in height unless it is set back 1 foot from the
required side and rear yard line for each foot of additional height above 45 feet.
5    Minimum lot area for A1, Agricultural District is as follows: A lot area as small as one acre
may be permitted within the conditions set forth in § 155.100(C)(1).
*   If in subdivision with a sanitary sewer, or with an approved sanitation system, the lot could
remain 20,000 square feet including any commercial lot on a sanitary sewer.
 
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.184 EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Height.
      (1)   Except in the vicinity of the airport, where airport zoning
regulations apply, the height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to
television and radio towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water
and fire towers, state towers and scenery lots, cooling towers, ornamental
towers and spires, chimneys, grain elevators, elevator bulkheads, silos,
smokestacks, conveyors, and flag poles.
      (2)   Public, semipublic, public utility or public service buildings,
hospitals, institutions, or schools where permitted may be erected to a height
not exceeding 60 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not
exceeding 75 feet, when the required side and rear yards are each increased by
one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height
regulations for the district in which the building is located; provided,
however, that the exceptions shall not be permitted when in conflict with the
adopted Airport Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   No building or structure or any portion thereof shall be erected or
structurally altered so as to be in conflict with the regulations established
in the adopted Airport Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Front yards.
      (1)   When more than 40% of the lots on one side of the street between
two intersecting streets are improved with buildings that have a front yard
different from the required front yard in the district, no building shall
project beyond the average front yard so established; provided, however, that a
front yard depth shall not be required to exceed 50% in excess of the front
yard otherwise required in the district in which the lot is located.
      (2)   On lots having double frontage, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
      (3)   In a residential district, no fence, structure, or planting higher
than three and one-half feet above the established street grades shall be
maintained within 25 feet of any street intersection.
      (4)   An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a
required front yard for a distance of not more than ten feet, but this shall
not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. Covered porches on
buildings erected prior to the adoption of this amendment, extending into
required front yards, shall not be enclosed nor included in computing the front
yard requirements for adjoining buildings.
      (5)   Filling station pumps and pump islands may be located within a
required yard, provided they are not less than 40 feet from the boundary of any
residential district.
      (6)   Off-street parking facilities may be located within the required
front yard of any B or M District but shall not be nearer than 50 feet to any R
District, and no off-street parking shall be permitted in the required front
yard of any R District.
      (7)   Merchandise offered for sale or rent shall not be displayed or
stored in the required front yard.
      (8)   Signs.
         (a)   A freestanding advertising sign relating to the business carried
on by the establishment occupying the lot may be located in the front yard if
the sign is attached to a standard consisting of not more than three poles or
supports, each with a diameter or width of not more than 12 inches, and if no
individual face of the sign exceeds an area of 60 square feet plus one
additional foot for each additional foot of lot frontage over 60 feet measured
along the front lot line.
         (b)   In addition to a freestanding advertising sign, one sign which
projects into the front yard may be attached to the building, provided that no
individual face of the sign exceeds 32 square feet plus one-half square foot
for each additional foot of lot frontage over 32 feet measured along the front
lot line.
         (c)   Where there are no freestanding advertising signs in the front
yard, one sign which projects into the front yard may be attached to the
building, provided that no individual face to the sign exceeds 60 square feet
plus one additional square foot for each individual foot of lot frontage over
60 feet measured along the front lot line.
         (d)   Two or more signs may be mounted on the same standard of a
freestanding advertising sign, provided that the combined areas of the signs do
not exceed the area requirements for a single freestanding sign as provided
herein.
         (e)   Two or more signs which project into the front yard may be
attached to the building, provided that the combined area of the signs do not
exceed the area requirement for a single projecting sign as set forth above,
and provided further, that the signs shall be mounted on one common fixture or
support.
         (f)   Where a lot is occupied by two or more establishments within the
same building, they may jointly erect a sign or signs. Two or more freestanding
advertising signs may be located in the front yard where the lot is occupied by
two or more establishments within the same building, provided that only one
sign shall be erected for each 40 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, and
the area of an individual face of each sign does not exceed 60 square feet, and
provided that there shall be only one sign for each establishment occupying the
lot. Two or more signs which project into the front yards adjoining the street
and are attached to the building shall be permitted on a lot which is occupied
by two or more establishments within the same building, provided that only one
sign shall be erected for each 40 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof, and
the area of the signs does not exceed 32 square feet, and provided that there
shall be only one sign for each establishment occupying the lot.
         (g)   In addition to the signs allowed in or to project into a front
yard as hereinabove provided, the signs shall also be allowed in the side yard
on the street side of a corner lot, subject to the same conditions and
restrictions as those permitted in the front yard.
         (h)   No portion of any sign, exclusive of the standard of a
freestanding sign, shall be less than nine feet above the level of the
sidewalk; or, if there is no sidewalk, the level of the lot line nearest the
sign, except where traffic lights may be obscured, the minimum height shall be
12 feet.
         (i)   No billboard, poster, flag, pennant, streamer, outdoor display
or other advertising device not meeting the requirements above shall be
permitted.
         (j)   Revolving beacons which resemble traffic control devices or
emergency vehicle signs shall not be used. No signs employing exterior,
brilliant, intermittent, rotating, or flashing lights shall be permitted within
50 feet of the boundary of any R District.
      (9)   The minimum width of the lot at the street line shall not be less
than one-half of the required lot width.
   (C)   Side yards.
      (1)   On a corner lot, the width of the yard along the side street shall
not be less than any required front yard on the street, provided, however, that
the buildable width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than 26
feet.
      (2)   Where dwelling units are erected above a commercial establishment,
no side yard is required except when required for the commercial building on
the side of a lot adjoining a residence district.
      (3)   A porte-cochere or canopy may project into a required side yard,
provided every part of the porte-cochere or canopy is unenclosed and not less
than five feet from any side lot line.
      (4)   For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or
multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
      (5)   Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
chapter is less than 50 feet in width, the required side yard may be reduced to
10% of the width of the lot; provided, however, that no side yard be less than
three feet.
   (D)   Rear yards.
      (1)   Where a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half of the alley width may be
considered as part of the required rear yard.
      (2)   Unenclosed parking spaces may occupy not to exceed 90% of the area
of a required rear yard.
      (3)   The ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, and
ornamental features may extend to a distance not to exceed 18 inches into a
rear yard.
      (4)   Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways, and
balconies opening upon fire towers and the ordinary projections of chimneys and
flues into a rear yard may be permitted by the Administrative Officer for a
distance not to exceed five feet when these are so placed as not to obstruct
light and ventilation.
   (E)   Lot area per family. Where a lot of record at the time of the
effective date of this chapter has less area or width than herein required in
the district in which it is located, and the owner of the lot at the time of
the adoption of this chapter does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent
thereto, the lot may nonetheless be used for a one-family dwelling or for any
non-dwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   (F)   Setbacks. The County Board may, upon recommendation of the Zoning
Board of this county, establish setbacks in excess of those setbacks required
by a zone district. The setbacks shall be granted when it is deemed necessary
to protect any existing or proposed street, traffic way, freeway, highway,
drive, or parkway, or any storm or flood runoff channel within the
unincorporated area of the county. The setbacks shall only be valid, however,
after the holding of public hearing as required by law in the township in which
the special setback is proposed. All special setbacks shall be clearly shown on
a map which is displayed in the office of the Zoning Inspector of this county.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
OFF-STREET PARKING, OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES
§ 155.195 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The off-street parking and off-street loading provisions of this subchapter
shall apply as follows.
   (A)   Accessory off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall
be provided as required by the regulations of this subchapter, for all
buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established in each
district, after the effective date of this chapter. However, where a building
permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
provided that construction is begun within six months of the effective date and
diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities in the
amounts required by this chapter for the intended use shall not be required.
   (B)   When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises
shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required
parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required
herein shall be provided for the increase in intensity of use. However, no
building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be required to provide any additional
parking or loading facilities unless and until the aggregate increase in units
of measurement shall equal not less than 15% of the units of measurement
existing upon the effective date of this chapter, in which event parking or
loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for the total increase;
provided, however, that in the case of the expansion or alteration of
residential building, required parking or loading facilities shall be provided
on the basis of the total required units of measurement for the entire capacity
of the buildings.
   (C)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter
be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for the new use.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.196 EXISTING PARKING FACILITIES.
   Accessory off-street parking or loading facilities in existence on the
effective date of this chapter, and located on the same lot as the building or
use served shall not hereafter be reduced below (or if already less than shall
not be further reduced below), the requirements for a similar new building or
use under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.197 PERMISSIVE PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary
establishment of off-street parking or loading facilities (on the same lot as
the establishment it serves) to serve any existing use of land or buildings,
provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design, and
operations of the facilities are adhered to.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.198 DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION.
   For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or use which is in
existence on the effective date of this chapter, which subsequently thereto is
damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other cause, and which is
reconstructed, reestablished, or repaired, off-street parking or loading
facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of the damage or
destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in no case
shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in
excess of those required by this chapter for equivalent new uses or
construction.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.199 CONTROL OF OFF-STREET FACILITIES.
   In cases where parking or loading facilities are permitted on land other
than the zoning lot on which the building or use served is located, the
facilities shall be in the same possession as the lot occupied by the building
or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. The possession may be
either by deed or long-term lease, the minimum term of the lease to be
determined by the Board. The owner of the land on which the parking or loading
facilities are to be located shall be bound by covenants, filed on record in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds, requiring the owner, his or her heirs, and
assignees to maintain the required number of parking and facilities for the
duration of the use served or the lease, whichever shall terminate sooner.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.200 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking facilities for motor vehicles shall be provided in
accordance with regulations set forth hereinafter.
   (A)   Use. Accessory off-street parking facilities required as accessory to
uses listed herein, shall be solely for the parking of passenger automobiles of
patrons, occupants or employees. (When bus transportation is provided for
patrons, occupants, or employees of a specific establishment, additional open
or enclosed off-street parking spaces for each bus to be parked on the premises
shall be provided in accordance with regulations hereafter for access, in
yards, design, and maintenance and area in accordance with size of buses.)
   (B)   Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess
of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
   (C)   Collective provision. Off-street parking facilities for separate uses
may be provided collectively if a total number of spaces so provided is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use, and provided that
all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces, in relation to
the use served, are adhered to. Further, no parking spaces or portion thereof
shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise
authorized by the Board in accordance with procedures set forth herein in the
variance section of this chapter.
   (D)   Area. A required off-street parking space shall be at least ten feet
in width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles,
ramps, columns, or office or work areas. Enclosed parking spaces shall have a
vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
   (E)   Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of a width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to the parking spaces. All off-street
parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement. No driveway across public property at the right-of-way line shall
exceed a width of 25 feet.
   (F)   In yards. Off-street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be located
in any yard except a front yard and a side yard adjoining a street. Enclosed
buildings and carports containing off-street parking spaces shall be subject to
applicable yard requirements.
   (G)   Design and maintenance.
      (1)   Open and enclosed parking spaces.  Accessory parking spaces may be
open to the sky or enclosed in a building.
      (2)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking spaces containing four or
more parking spaces shall be improved with a compacted base and a permanent
wearing surface as approved by the designated engineer.
      (3)   Screening and landscaping. All open parking areas, containing more
than four parking spaces, located less than 40 feet from a property line shall
be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property
situated in a residential district or any institutional premises by a wall,
fence, or densely compact hedge, not less than five feet nor more than eight
feet in height.
      (4)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance, and in a parking area containing 40 or more parking spaces
the light shall be extinguished one-half hour after the close of business,
except as may otherwise be permitted or required by the Board for maintaining
illumination with less candlepower after the time specified above.
      (5)   Repair and services. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in conjunction with any parking facilities. No gasoline
or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any accessory parking facilities
unless the accessory parking facilities are enclosed in a building, in which
case gasoline and motor oil may be sold within the building to the use of the
accessory parking facilities; provided that no sign advertising the sale of
same is visible from outside, and provided further that all gasoline pumps
shall be effectively screened from view from the public way.
   (H)   Location. All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses
erected or established after the effective date of this chapter shall be
located on the same lot as the building or use served. Buildings or uses
existing on the effective date of this chapter which are subsequently altered
or enlarged so as to require the provisions of parking spaces under this
chapter, or new uses established in any business district may be served by
parking facilities located on land other than the lot on which the building or
use served is located, provided that the facilities are within 300 feet walking
distance of a main entrance to the use served.
   (I)   Employee parking. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on
the premises at any one time.
   (J)   Required spaces. Off-street parking spaces accessory to designated
uses shall be provided as follows:
Use Parking Requirement
Use                                                                               Parking
                                                                                  Requirement
(1) Dwelling and lodging uses:
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  three
                                                                                  separate
                                                                                  lodging rooms
   (a) Hotel and apartment hotel                                               and one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  dwelling unit
                                                                                  in an
                                                                                  apartment
                                                                                  hotel
                                                                                  At least two
                                                                                  parking
                                                                                  spaces plus
   (b) Lodging houses                                                          one parking
                                                                                  space for
                                                                                  each lodging
                                                                                  room
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
   (c) Motels, tourist homes, or tourist cabins                                dwelling unit
                                                                                  and one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  sleeping room
                                                                                  At least two
                                                                                  parking
   (d) Multiple-family dwelling                                                spaces for
                                                                                  each dwelling
                                                                                  unit
                                                                                  At least two
                                                                                  parking
                                                                                  spaces for
                                                                                  each dwelling
                                                                                  plus one
                                                                                  additional
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each two
   (e) Single-family dwelling                                                  roomers or
                                                                                  lodgers
                                                                                  accommodated;
                                                                                  but no more
                                                                                  than four
                                                                                  parking
                                                                                  spaces for
                                                                                  each single-
                                                                                  family
                                                                                  dwelling
                                                                                  Automobile
                                                                                  parking
                                                                                  spaces equal
                                                                                  in number to
   (f) Tourist camps or parks                                                  the number of
                                                                                  trailers
                                                                                  permitted
                                                                                  shall be
                                                                                  provided
                                                                                  Two parking
   (g) Two-family dwellings                                                    spaces for
                                                                                  each dwelling
                                                                                  unit
(2) School, institution, auditorium, or other places of assembly uses:
                                                                                  One parking
                                                                                  space shall
                                                                                  be provided
                                                                                  for each six
                                                                                  students,
                                                                                  based upon
   (a) Colleges, junior colleges, and universities                             the maximum
                                                                                  number of
                                                                                  students that
                                                                                  can be
                                                                                  accommodated
                                                                                  in accordance
                                                                                  with design
                                                                                  capacity
                                                                                  One parking
                                                                                  space shall
                                                                                  be provided
                                                                                  for each four
                                                                                  beds, plus
                                                                                  one parking
                                                                                  space for
   (b) Convalescent homes, nursing homes, rest homes, institutions for the careeach two
of the aged and for children, and sanitariums                                     employees,
                                                                                  (other than
                                                                                  staff
                                                                                  doctors) plus
                                                                                  one parking
                                                                                  space for
                                                                                  each doctor
                                                                                  assigned to
                                                                                  the staff
                                                                                  One parking
                                                                                  space shall
                                                                                  be provided
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  three active
   (c) Fraternities, sororities, and dormitories in conjunctions with colleges,members or
junior colleges, and universities                                                 dormitory
                                                                                  residents
                                                                                  plus one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for the
                                                                                  manager
                                                                                  One parking
                                                                                  space for
                                                                                  each six
   (d) Gymnasiums, stadiums, and grandstands                                   seats or for
                                                                                  each 108
                                                                                  inches of
                                                                                  seating space
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each two
                                                                                  hospital beds
                                                                                  plus one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each two
   (e) Hospitals                                                               employees
                                                                                  (other than
                                                                                  doctors) plus
                                                                                  one parking
                                                                                  space for
                                                                                  each doctor
                                                                                  assigned to
                                                                                  the staff
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
   (f) Libraries and museums                                                   for each 800
                                                                                  square foot
                                                                                  of floor area
                                                                                  At least
                                                                                  three parking
                                                                                  spaces for
                                                                                  each
                                                                                  examining or
   (g) Medical and dental clinics                                              treatment
                                                                                  room, plus
                                                                                  one for each
                                                                                  doctor and
                                                                                  employee in
                                                                                  the building
                                                                                  Not less than
                                                                                  the number of
                                                                                  parking
                                                                                  spaces equal
                                                                                  to 30% of the
                                                                                  maximum
   (h) Meeting halls, convention halls, and exhibition halls                   number of
                                                                                  people that
                                                                                  can be
                                                                                  accommodated
                                                                                  in accordance
                                                                                  with design
                                                                                  capacity
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  lodging room
                                                                                  and one
                                                                                  parking space
   (i) Private clubs and lodges                                                for each six
                                                                                  seats in
                                                                                  accordance
                                                                                  with design
                                                                                  capacity of
                                                                                  the main
                                                                                  meeting room
                                                                                  One parking
                                                                                  space shall
                                                                                  be provided
                                                                                  for each two
                                                                                  employees
                                                                                  plus one
                                                                                  space for
                                                                                  each five
   (j) Schools – commercial or trade, music, dance, or business              students
                                                                                  based on the
                                                                                  maximum
                                                                                  number of
                                                                                  students that
                                                                                  can be
                                                                                  accommodated
                                                                                  in accordance
                                                                                  with design
                                                                                  capacity
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  seven
   (k) Schools, high; public or private                                        students in
                                                                                  accordance
                                                                                  with design
                                                                                  capacity of
                                                                                  the building
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each two
                                                                                  persons
                                                                                  employed on
                                                                                  the premises
                                                                                  and an
                                                                                  additional
   (l) School and institutional auditoriums                                    parking space
                                                                                  for each six
                                                                                  seats or for
                                                                                  each108
                                                                                  inches of
                                                                                  seating space
                                                                                  in the main
                                                                                  auditorium or
                                                                                  assembly hall
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
   (m) Schools; nursery, elementary, or junior high; public or private         three faculty
                                                                                  members and
                                                                                  other full-
                                                                                  time
                                                                                  employees
                                                                                  Parking
                                                                                  spaces equal
   (n) Auditoriums (other than incidental to a school), arenas, race tracks of in number to
all kinds, or other places of assembly                                            30% of the
                                                                                  capacity in
                                                                                  persons shall
                                                                                  be provided
(3) Recreational uses – commercial or noncommercial:
                                                                                  At least
                                                                                  seven parking
                                                                                  spaces for
                                                                                  each alley
                                                                                  plus any
                                                                                  additional
   (a) Bowling alleys                                                          spaces as may
                                                                                  be required
                                                                                  herein for
                                                                                  affiliated
                                                                                  uses such as
                                                                                  restaurants
                                                                                  and the like
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  three persons
                                                                                  based upon
                                                                                  the maximum
                                                                                  number of
                                                                                  persons that
                                                                                  can be
   (b) Health salons, swimming pools, skating rinks, and dance halls; commerciaaccommodated
                                                                                  at the same
                                                                                  time in
                                                                                  accordance
                                                                                  with design
                                                                                  capacity and
                                                                                  one parking
                                                                                  space for
                                                                                  each three
                                                                                  employees
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  shall be
                                                                                  provided for
                                                                                  each three
                                                                                  employees,
   (c) Parks, recreation areas, or community centers; private, semi-public, or plus spaces
public                                                                            in adequate
                                                                                  number as
                                                                                  determined by
                                                                                  the County
                                                                                  Board to
                                                                                  serve the
                                                                                  visiting
                                                                                  public
(4) Business, commercial and manufacturing uses:
                                                                                  At least one
   (a) All businesses and commercial establishments except those specified     parking space
hereafter                                                                         for each 300
                                                                                  square feet
                                                                                  of floor area
                                                                                  One parking
                                                                                  space shall
                                                                                  be provided
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  three
                                                                                  employees,
                                                                                  plus one
                                                                                  space for the
                                                                                  owner or
                                                                                  manager, and
                                                                                  in addition,
                                                                                  reservoir
                                                                                  parking
                                                                                  spaces equal
                                                                                  in number to
                                                                                  five times
                                                                                  the maximum
                                                                                  capacity of
   (b) Auto laundries                                                          the auto
                                                                                  laundry for
                                                                                  automobiles
                                                                                  awaiting
                                                                                  entrance to
                                                                                  the auto
                                                                                  laundry shall
                                                                                  be provided.
                                                                                  Maximum
                                                                                  capacity in
                                                                                  this instance
                                                                                  shall mean
                                                                                  the greatest
                                                                                  number of
                                                                                  automobiles
                                                                                  undergoing
                                                                                  some phase of
                                                                                  laundering at
                                                                                  the same time
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
   (c) Automobile service stations                                             employee,
                                                                                  plus two for
                                                                                  each service
                                                                                  stall
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
   (d) Banks                                                                   for each 300
                                                                                  square feet
                                                                                  of floor area
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each two
                                                                                  persons
                                                                                  employed
   (e) Business, professional and administration, or service office buildings  based upon
                                                                                  the designed
                                                                                  maximum
                                                                                  employee
                                                                                  capacity of
                                                                                  the building
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each two
                                                                                  employees, as
                                                                                  related to
                                                                                  the working
                                                                                  period when
                                                                                  the maximum
   (f) Cartage, express, parcel delivery, and freight terminal establishments  number of
                                                                                  persons are
                                                                                  employed on
                                                                                  the premises
                                                                                  and one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  vehicle
                                                                                  maintained on
                                                                                  the premises
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  three persons
                                                                                  based upon
                                                                                  the maximum
   (g) Establishments handling the sale and consumption on the premises of foodnumber of
and refreshment                                                                   persons that
                                                                                  can be
                                                                                  accommodated
                                                                                  at the same
                                                                                  time in
                                                                                  accordance
                                                                                  with design
                                                                                  capacity
                                                                                  At least one
   (h) Furniture and appliance stores, motor vehicle sales, wholesale stores,  parking space
stores for repair of household equipment or furniture                             for each 400
                                                                                  square feet
                                                                                  of floor area
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  three
                                                                                  employees as
   (i) Production, processing, assembly, cleaning, servicing, testing, or      related to
repairing of materials, goods, or products                                        the working
                                                                                  period when
                                                                                  the maximum
                                                                                  number of
                                                                                  persons are
                                                                                  employed on
                                                                                  the premises
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each four
                                                                                  seats up to
   (j) Theaters                                                                400 seats
                                                                                  plus one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each six
                                                                                  seats over
                                                                                  400
                                                                                  At least
                                                                                  eight parking
                                                                                  spaces for
                                                                                  each chapel
                                                                                  or parlor,
   (k) Undertaking establishments and funeral parlor                           plus one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each
                                                                                  funeral
                                                                                  vehicle
                                                                                  maintained on
                                                                                  the premises
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each two
                                                                                  employees, as
                                                                                  related to
   (l) Warehouses, storage, wholesale, and mail order establishments           the working
                                                                                  period when
                                                                                  the maximum
                                                                                  number of
                                                                                  persons are
                                                                                  employed on
                                                                                  the premises
(5) Miscellaneous uses:
                                                                                  Parking
                                                                                  spaces shall
                                                                                  be provided
                                                                                  on the basis
   (a) Planned developments                                                    of the
                                                                                  required
                                                                                  space for
                                                                                  each
                                                                                  individual
                                                                                  use
                                                                                  At least one
                                                                                  parking space
                                                                                  for each two
                                                                                  employees,
                                                                                  plus spaces
   (b) Public utility and public service uses                                  in adequate
                                                                                  number as
                                                                                  determined by
                                                                                  the Board to
                                                                                  serve the
                                                                                  visiting
                                                                                  public
(6) Other uses:
                                                                                  Shall be
                                                                                  provided in
                                                                                  accordance
   Parking spaces for other permitted or special uses not listed above         with
                                                                                  requirements
                                                                                  designated by
                                                                                  the Board
 
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.201 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   There shall be provided, at the time any building is erected or
structurally altered, off-street loading spaces, logically and conveniently
located for bulk pickups and deliveries, of a size and number as to accommodate
the delivery vehicles expected, and accessible to those vehicles even when off-
street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to
be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street
parking space.
   (B)   Where off-street loading spaces are provided, they shall be built in
accordance with the following regulations:
      (1)   All loading spaces shall be located on the same zoning lot as the
use served;
      (2)   All motor vehicle loading spaces, which abut a residential
district, shall be completely screened therefrom by building walls, densely
planted compact hedge, or a uniformly painted solid fence, wall, or any
combination thereof, not less than eight feet in height;
      (3)   No loading space shall be located in a required front or side yard;
      (4)   Off-street loading spaces shall be at least ten feet in width by at
least 25 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall
have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet;
      (5)   Each off-street loading space shall be designed with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street in such a manner as to minimize
interference with traffic movement, but in no case shall a loading space have
an entrance onto a street located within 30 feet of the nearest point of an
intersection of any two streets; and
      (6)   All open off-street loading spaces shall be improved with a compact
base surfaced with an all-weather dustless material as approved by the
engineer.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
ZONING MAPS
§ 155.215 INCORPORATION OF ZONING MAPS.
   The location and boundaries of the districts established in this chapter are
shown upon the following zoning maps, which are hereby incorporated into this
chapter. These zoning maps, together with everything shown thereon and all
amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set
forth and described verbally herein.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.216 TOWNSHIP INDEX MAP.
    This section is to show the township map of the county indicating on which
page various zoning maps may be found.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
§ 155.217 ZONING MAPS.
    This section is to contain 17 zoning maps of the county showing all
district boundaries by township. Maps shall be developed once the text and
general zoning district classifications are agreed to by the County Board and
its Environmental, Education, Health, and Welfare Committee.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
CANNABIS BUSINESSES
§ 155.300 CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in
unincorporated areas of Macon County. No person shall locate, operate, own,
suffer, allow to be operated or aid, abet or assist in the operation within
unincorporated areas of Macon County any of the following:
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization.
(Ord. O-136-01-20, passed 1-9-2020; Ord. O-137-01-21, passed 1-14-2021; Ord. O-
139-01-22, passed 1-13-2022; Ord. O-143-01-23, passed 1-12-2023)
§ 155.301 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the
unincorporated areas of Macon County in violation of the provisions of this
chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to
all available remedies.
(Ord. O-136-01-20, passed 1-9-2020; Ord. O-139-01-22, passed 1-13-2022; Ord. O-
143-01-23, passed 1-12-2023)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation, or agents, employees, or contractors
thereof, who violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or who
resist enforcement of, any provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense; and each week a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. O-95-2-12, passed 2-9-2012)
CHAPTER 156: COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY SITING
Section
   
156.01   Definitions
   
156.02   Applicability
   
156.03   Prohibition
   
156.04   Special use permit application
   
156.05   Design and installation
   
156.06   Operation
   
156.07   Liability insurance and indemnification
   
156.08   Decommissioning and site reclamation plan required
   
156.09   Remedies
   
156.10   Fee schedule and permitting processes
   
156.11   Hearing facilitator
   
156.12   Hearing factors
§ 156.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   APPLICANT. The entity who submits to the county an application for the
siting and operation of any commercial solar energy facility or substation. All
references to applicant in this chapter shall include applicant's successors-
in-interest and assigns, which includes a commercial solar energy facility
permittee (as defined herein).
   COMMERCIAL OPERATION DATE. The calendar date on which the commercial solar
energy facility produces power for commercial sale, not including test power.
   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY or COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Any
device or assembly of devices that is ground installed and uses solar energy
from the sun for generating electricity for the primary purpose of wholesale or
retail sale and not primarily for consumption on the property.
   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY BUILDING PERMIT. A permit necessary for the
commencement of work performed toward the construction, erection or
installation of an approved commercial solar energy facility, substation,
supporting facilities, or operations and maintenance building in connection
with a commercial solar energy facility. A commercial solar energy building
permit may be issued by the county after a commercial solar energy facility has
obtained a special use permit from the County Board and the Director of
Planning and Zoning determines that all conditions, if any, have been satisfied
that are imposed by the special use permit. The commercial solar energy
building permit shall require the applicant to deliver a written "Notice to
Proceed" for the commercial solar energy facility to file with the county prior
to commencement of construction of the commercial solar energy facility. The
term COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION as used in this chapter, includes any site
development work (e.g., demolition, grubbing, grading, excavation, road work,
construction of project-related structures and infrastructure improvements,
etc.) regarding the commercial solar energy facility.
   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY PERMITTEE. An applicant who applies for and
receives a special use permit under this chapter for the siting and operation
of any commercial solar energy facility or substation. All references to a
commercial solar energy facility permittee in this chapter shall include a
commercial solar energy facility permittee's successors-in-interest and
assigns.
   FINANCIAL ASSURANCE or FINANCIAL SECURITY or DECOMMISSION SECURITY.
Assurance from a credit worthy party, examples of which include a surety bond
(e.g., performance and payment bond), trust instrument, cash escrow, or
irrevocable letter of credit.
   NOTICE TO PROCEED. A written document, named as such, stating that the
applicant expresses an intent to commence construction activities on a
commercial solar energy facility and identifying the date on which the
construction activities are scheduled to commence.
   NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is not a participating
property.
   NONPARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on nonparticipating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for
a permit to develop the commercial solar energy facility is filed with the
county.
   OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING. Any one or more of the following buildings that
is existing and occupied on the date that the application for a permit to
develop the commercial solar energy facility is filed with the county: a
school, place of worship, day care facility, public library, or community
center.
   OPERATOR. The person or entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of a commercial solar energy facility, including any third-party
subcontractors. The operator must be a qualified solar power professional. All
references to operator in the chapter shall include operator's successors-in-
interest and assigns.
   OWNER. The person or entity or entities with an equity interest in a
commercial solar energy facility, including their respective successors-in-
interest and assigns. The owner does not mean: (i) the property owner from whom
land is leased for locating a commercial solar energy facility (unless the
property owner has an equity interest in a commercial solar energy facility);
or (ii) any person holding a security interest in a commercial solar energy
facility solely to secure an extension of credit, or a person foreclosing on
such security interest, provided that after foreclosure, such person seeks to
sell a commercial solar energy facility at the earliest practicable date. This
definition includes the definition of facility owner as defined in 55 ILCS 5/5-
12020.
   PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is the subject of a written
agreement between a facility owner and the owner of the real property that
provides the facility owner an easement, option, lease, or license to use the
real property for the purpose of constructing a commercial solar energy
facility or supporting facilities. PARTICIPATING PROPERTY also includes real
property that is owned by a facility owner for the purpose of constructing a
commercial solar energy facility or supporting facilities.
   PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on participating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for
a permit to develop the commercial solar energy facility is filed with the
county.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A qualified individual who is licensed as a
professional engineer in any state in the United States. Where a structural
engineer is required to take some action under terms of this chapter, a
professional engineer may serve as the structural engineer if he or she has the
appropriate structural engineering certification.
   PROTECTED LANDS. Real property that is subject to a permanent conservation
right consistent with the Real Property Conservation Rights Act or registered
or designated as a nature preserve, buffer, or land and water reserve under the
Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act.
   PUBLIC CONSERVATION LANDS. Land owned in fee title by county, state or
federal agencies and managed specifically for conservation purposes, including
but not limited to county, state and federal parks, state and federal wildlife
management areas, state scientific and natural areas, and federal wildlife
refuges and waterfowl protection areas. Public conservation lands do not
include private lands upon which conservation easements have been sold to
government agencies or non-profit conservation organizations. Public
conservation lands also do not include private lands for which the owners have
entered into contractual relationships with government or non-profit
conservation organizations for conservation purposes.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit approved by the County Board, after a public
hearing, allowing a particular use at a specified location subject to
compliance with certain specified special conditions as may be required by the
County Board.
   SUBSTATION. The apparatus that collects and connects the electrical
collection system of the commercial solar energy facility and increases the
voltage for connection with the utility's transmission lines.
2023 S-10
   SUPPORTING FACILITIES. The transmission lines, substations, access roads,
storage containers, and equipment associated with the generation and storage of
electricity by the commercial solar energy facility.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter governs the siting of commercial solar energy facilities and
substations that generate electricity to be sold to wholesale or retail
markets.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.03 PROHIBITION.
   No commercial solar energy facility or substation governed by this chapter
shall be constructed, erected, installed, or located within the county, unless
prior siting approval has been obtained for each individual commercial solar
energy facility or for a group of commercial solar energy facilities under a
joint siting application pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.04 SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   To obtain siting approval, the applicant must first submit a special
use permit application to the county.
   (B)   The special use permit application shall contain or be accompanied by
the following information:
      (1)   A commercial solar energy facility summary, including, to the
extent available:
         (a)   A general description of the project, including:
            1.   Its approximate overall name plate generating capacity;
            2.   The potential equipment manufacturer(s);
            3.   Type(s) of solar panels, cells and modules;
            4.   The number of solar panels, cells and modules;
            5.   The maximum height of the solar panels at full tilt;
            6.   The number of substations;
            7.   A project site plan, project phasing plan and project
construction timeline plan; and
            8.   The general location of the project; and
         (b)   A description of the applicant, owner and operator, including
their respective business structures.
      (2)   The name(s), address(es), and phone number(s) of the applicant(s),
owner and operator, and all property owner(s), if known, and documentation
demonstrating land ownership or legal control of the property;
      (3)   A site plan for the commercial solar energy facility showing the
planned location of solar panels, including legal descriptions for each site,
participating and non-participating residences, occupied community buildings,
parcel boundary lines (including identification of adjoining properties),
setback lines, public access roads and turnout locations, substation(s),
operations and maintenance buildings, electrical cabling to the substation(s),
ancillary equipment, third party transmission lines, the location of any
wetlands, flood plain, drainage structures including surface ditches and
subsurface drainage lines, underground mines, scenic and natural areas within
1,500 feet of the proposed commercial solar energy facility, and the layout of
all structures within the geographical boundaries of any applicable setback;
      (4)   A proposed decommissioning plan for the commercial solar energy
facility;
      (5)   All required studies, reports, certifications, and approvals
demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (6)   An Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) executed between
the applicant and the Illinois Department of Agriculture;
      (7)   The topographic map shall include the commercial solar energy
facility site and the surrounding area;
      (8)   Any other information normally required by the county as part of
its permitting requirements for siting buildings or other structures;
      (9)   Waivers from the setback requirements executed by the occupied
community building owners and/or the non-participating property owners bearing
a file stamp from the County Recorder of Deeds Office confirming that the
waiver was recorded against title to the affected real property;
      (10)   Results and recommendations from the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources obtained through the Ecological Compliance Assessment Tool or
a comparable successor tool;
      (11)   Results of any United States Fish and Wildlife Service's
Information for Planning and Consulting Environmental Review or a comparable
successor tool that is consistent with any applicable United States Fish and
Wildlife Service's solar wildlife guidelines;
      (12)   Information demonstrating that the commercial solar energy
facility will avoid protected lands; and
      (13)   Any other information requested by the county or the county
consultants that is necessary to evaluate the siting application and operation
of the commercial solar energy facility and to demonstrate that the commercial
solar energy facility meets each of the regulations in this chapter, including
the special use permit standards set forth below.
   (C)   Material changes to the application are not permitted once the notice
of the public hearing has been published, unless requested or permitted by the
county.
   (D)   The applicant shall submit 12 copies of the special use permit
application to the county, and at least one copy in electronic format.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.05 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Design safety certification.
      (1)   Commercial solar energy facilities shall conform to applicable
industry standards, including those of the American National Standards
Institute ("ANSI"). Applicants shall submit certificates of design compliance
that equipment manufacturers have obtained from Underwriters Laboratories
("UL"), or an equivalent third party. All solar panels, cells and modules;
solar panel mounts and racking, including any helical piles, ground screws,
ballasts, or other anchoring systems shall be new equipment commercially
available; no used or experimental equipment shall be used without the approval
of a variance by the County Board.
      (2)   Following the granting of siting approval under this chapter, a
structural engineer shall certify, as part of the commercial solar energy
facility building permit application process, that the design of the commercial
solar energy facility is within accepted professional standards, given local
soil, subsurface and climate conditions.
   (B)   Electrical components. All electrical components of the commercial
solar energy facility shall conform to applicable local, state, and national
codes, and relevant national and international standards (e.g. ANSI and
International Electrical Commission).
   (C)   Height. No component of a solar panel, cell or modules may exceed 20
feet in height above the ground at full tilt.
   (D)   Aesthetics and lighting.
      (1)   Vegetative screening. A vegetative screen shall be provided for any
part of the commercial solar energy facility that is visible to non-
participating residences. The landscaping screen shall be located between the
required fencing and the property line of the participating parcel upon which
the facility sits. The vegetative screening shall include a continuous line of
native evergreen foliage and/or native shrubs and/or native trees and/or any
existing wooded area and/or plantings of tall native grasses and other native
flowering plants.
      (2)   Lighting. If lighting is provided at the commercial solar energy
facility, lighting shall be shielded and downcast such that the light does not
spill onto the adjacent parcel.
      (3)   Intra-project power and communication lines. All power lines used
to collect power and all communication lines shall be buried underground at a
depth in accordance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement until
same reach the property line or a substation adjacent to the property line.
   (E)   Fencing. A fence of at least six feet and not more than 25 feet in
height shall enclose and secure the commercial solar energy facility.
   (F)   Warnings.
      (1)   A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed
at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
      (2)   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, plastic
sleeves, reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires
and along the guy wires up to a height of 15 feet from the ground.
   (G)   Setback requirements.
      (1)   The commercial solar energy facility shall be sited as follows,
with setback distances measured from the nearest edge of any component of the
facility:
         (a)   Occupied community buildings and dwellings on nonparticipating
properties. One hundred fifty feet to the nearest point on the outside wall of
the structure.
         (b)   Nonparticipating residences. One hundred fifty feet to the
nearest point on the outside wall of the structure.
         (c)   Boundary lines of participating property. None.
         (d)   Boundary lines of nonparticipating property. Fifty feet to the
nearest point on the property line of the nonparticipating property.
         (e)   Public road rights-of-way. Fifty feet the nearest edge of the
public road right-of-way.
      (2)   The setback requirements for nonparticipating properties may be
waived by the written consent of the owner(s) of each affected nonparticipating
property.
      (3)   The applicant does not need to obtain a variance from the county
upon waiver by the property owner of any of the above setback requirements. Any
waiver of any of the above setback requirements shall run with the land and be
recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of the county.
   (H)   Compliance with additional regulations. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to preempt other applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
   (I)   Use of public roads.
      (1)   An applicant proposing to use any county, municipality, township or
village road(s), for the purpose of transporting commercial solar energy
facility or substation parts and/or equipment for construction, operation, or
maintenance of the commercial solar energy facility or substation(s), shall:
         (a)   Identify all such public roads; and
         (b)   Obtain applicable weight and size permits from relevant
government agencies prior to construction.
      (2)   To the extent an applicant must obtain a weight or size permit from
the county, municipality, township or village, the applicant shall:
         (a)   Conduct a pre-construction baseline survey to determine existing
road conditions for assessing potential future damage; and
         (b)   Any proposed public roads that will be used for construction
purposes shall be identified and approved in writing by the respective Road
District Commissioner and the county engineer prior to the granting of the
special use permit. Traffic for construction purposes shall be limited to these
roads. All overweight and/or oversized loads to be transported on public roads
may require a permit from the respective highway authority. Any road damage
caused by the transport of the facility's equipment, the installation,
maintenance, or removal, must be completely repaired to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Road District Commissioner and the county engineer. The
Road District Commissioner and county engineer may choose to require either
remediation of road repair upon completion of the community solar energy
facility or are authorized to collect fees for overweight and/or oversized load
permits. Further, financial assurance in an amount to be fixed by the Road
District Commissioner to ensure the road district or the county that future
repairs are completed to their reasonable satisfaction shall be provided.
Applicant shall submit a draft form of said financial assurance with
application for special use permit.
         (c)   Enter into a road use agreement with the county and each
affected road district that includes the following provisions, at a minimum:
            1.   Project layout map;
            2.   Transportation impact analysis;
            3.   Pre-construction plans;
            4.   Project traffic map;
            5.   Project scope of repairs;
            6.   Post-construction repairs;
            7.   Insurance; and
            8.   Financial security in forms and amounts acceptable to the
county.
         (d)   The road use agreement shall require applicant to be responsible
for the reasonable cost of improving roads used to construct commercial solar
energy facility and the reasonable cost of repairing roads used by the facility
owner during construction of the community solar energy facility so that those
roads are in a condition that is safe for the driving public after the
completion of the commercial solar energy facility construction. Roadways
improved in preparation for and during the construction of the community solar
energy facility shall be repaired and restored to the improved condition at the
reasonable cost of the developer if the roadways have degraded or were damaged
as a result of construction-related activities.
      (3)   All repairs and improvements to public roads and roadway
appurtenances shall be subject to the prior approval of the county before being
made and shall also be subject to inspection and acceptance by the county after
such repairs and improvements are completed. The county's road use agreement,
and any further agreements contemplated therein, regarding the maintenance and
repair of public roads and highways, must be approved by the County Board prior
to the Board's approval of any commercial solar energy facility building permit
applications related to the construction of the proposed commercial solar
energy facility.
   (J)   Site assessment. To ensure that the subsurface conditions of the site
will provide proper support for the commercial solar energy facility and soil
restoration, the applicant, at its expense, shall provide soil and geotechnical
boring reports to the county engineer as part of its commercial solar energy
facility building permit. The applicant shall follow the guidelines for
conservation practices impact mitigation submitted by the County Soil and Water
Conservation District (or equivalent regulatory agency). Also, the applicant
shall submit grading plans for the proposed substations for review and comment
by the County Soil and Water Conservation District prior to the issuance of any
commercial solar energy facility building permit for the construction of said
substations.
   (K)   Noise levels. Noise levels from commercial solar energy facilities
shall be in compliance with applicable Illinois Pollution Control Board (IPCB)
regulations. The applicant shall submit manufacturer's sound power level
characteristics and other relevant data regarding noise characteristics
necessary for a competent noise analysis. The applicant, through the use of a
qualified professional, shall appropriately demonstrate compliance with the
applicable noise requirements in its special use permit application.
   (L)   Agricultural impact mitigation. Pursuant to 505 ILCS 147/15(a), the
applicant, at its expense, shall enter into an Agricultural Impact Mitigation
Agreement with the Illinois Department of Agriculture prior to any public
hearing required before a siting decision on the commercial solar energy
facility application. All impacted agricultural land, whether impacted during
construction, operation, or decommissioning activities, must, at a minimum, be
remediated by the applicant pursuant to the terms of the Agricultural Impact
Mitigation Agreement with the Illinois Department of Agriculture. The applicant
shall submit the executed Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement to the
county as part of the special use permit application.
   (M)   As-built map and plans. Within 60 calendar days of completion of
construction of the commercial solar energy facility, the applicant or operator
shall deliver "as-built" maps, site plan and engineering plans for the
commercial solar energy facility that have been signed and stamped by a
professional engineer and a licensed surveyor.
   (N)   Engineer's certificate. The commercial solar energy facility
engineer's certificate shall be completed by a structural engineer registered
in the State of Illinois or by a professional engineer with a certification
from a structural engineer registered in the State of Illinois and shall
certify that the specific soils and subsurface conditions at the site can
support the apparatus, given local soil, subsurface and climate conditions. The
commercial solar energy facility engineer's certificate shall be a public
record and shall be submitted as part of the special use permit application.
   (O)   Conformance with approved application and plans. The applicant shall
construct and operate the commercial solar energy facility in substantial
conformance with the construction plans contained in a county- approved
submitted special use permit application(s), conditions placed upon the
operation of the facility, this chapter and all applicable state, federal and
local laws and regulations.
   (P)   Additional terms and conditions.
      (1)   All technical submissions as defined in the Professional
Engineering Practice Act of 1989 (225 ILCS 325/4(w)) and contained in the
special use permit application shall be prepared and signed by an Illinois
Professional Engineer (or structural engineer) for the relevant discipline.
      (2)   The county may retain a qualified, independent code inspector or
professional engineer both to make appropriate inspections of the commercial
solar energy facility during and after construction and to consult with the
county to confirm that the construction, substantial repair, replacement,
repowering and/or decommissioning of the commercial solar energy facility is
performed in compliance with applicable electrical and building codes. The cost
and fees so incurred by the county in retaining said inspector or engineer
shall be promptly reimbursed by the applicant of the commercial solar energy
facility.
      (3)   The special use permit granted to the applicant shall bind and
inure to the benefit of the applicant, its successors-in-interest and assigns.
If any provision in this chapter, or conditions placed upon the operation of
the commercial solar energy facility is held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect any other provision of this chapter that can be given effect without the
invalid provision and, to this end, the provisions in this chapter are
severable.
      (4)   The applicant shall provide an executed road use agreement between
the applicant and the appropriate governing road and highway jurisdictions or
the Illinois Department of Transportation, to the county showing approved
entrances prior to the issuance of any commercial solar energy facility
building permit.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.06 OPERATION.
   (A)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Annual report. The applicant must submit on an annual basis on the
anniversary date of the special use permit application, an operation and
maintenance report to the county. The report shall contain the following
information: (i) a general description of any physical repairs, replacements or
modifications) to the commercial solar energy facility and/or its
infrastructure; (ii) complaints pertaining to setbacks, noise, appearance,
safety, lighting and use of any public roads received by the applicant
concerning the commercial solar energy facility and the resolution of such
complaints; (iii) calls for emergency sendees; (iv) status of liability
insurance; and (v) a general summary of service calls to the commercial solar
energy facility. Failure to provide the annual report shall be considered a
material violation of this chapter and subject to §
156.09.
      (2)   Re-certification. Any physical modification to the commercial solar
energy facility that alters the mechanical load, mechanical load path, or major
electrical components shall require re-certification under this chapter. Like-
kind replacements and modifications that are made in the ordinary course of
operations, including expected repairs and warranty items, shall not require
re-certification. Prior to making any physical modification (other than a like-
kind replacement or other modifications made in the ordinary course of
operations), the applicant shall confer with a relevant third-party certifying
entity identified in the Design and Safety Certification section of this
chapter to determine whether the physical modification requires re-
certification.
   (B)   Coordination with emergency responders.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit to the local emergency responders a copy
of the site plan, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Standard Operating
Guidelines (SOGs), and any amendments to such documents, for the commercial
solar energy facility so that the local law enforcement, fire protection
district and rescue units, emergency medical service providers and emergency
management service providers that have jurisdiction over each tower site may
evaluate and coordinate their emergency response plans with the applicant of
the commercial solar energy facility.
      (2)   The applicant, at its expense, shall provide annual training for,
and the necessary equipment to, the operator and local emergency response
authorities and their personnel so that they can properly respond to a
potential emergency at the commercial solar energy facility.
      (3)   The applicant and the operator shall cooperate with all local
emergency responders to develop an emergency response plan. The plan shall
include, at a minimum, 24-hour contact information (names, titles, email
addresses, cell phone numbers) for the applicant and the operator and at least
three designated commercial solar energy facility representatives (a primary
representative with two alternate representatives, each of whom are on-call "24
hours per day / 7 days per week / 365 days per year"). Any change in the
designated commercial solar energy facility representative or his/her contact
information shall be promptly communicated to the county. The content of the
emergency response plan, including the 24-hour contact information, shall be
reviewed and updated on an annual basis.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall alleviate the need to comply with all
other applicable life safety, fire / emergency laws and regulations.
   (C)   Water, sewer, materials handling, storage and disposal.
      (1)   All solid wastes related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the commercial solar energy facility shall be removed from the
site promptly and disposed of in accordance with all federal, state and local
laws.
      (2)   All hazardous materials related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the commercial solar energy facility shall be handled, stored,
transported and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state and
federal laws.
      (3)   The commercial solar energy facility shall comply with existing
septic and well regulations as required by the County Health Department and the
State of Illinois Department of Public Health.
   (D)   Signage. Signage regulations are to be consistent with ANSI standards.
A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed at the
base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations, and at all entrances to
the commercial solar energy facility.
   (E)   Drainage systems. The applicant, at its expense, will repair, in a
prompt and timely manner, all waterways, drainage ditches, agricultural
drainage systems, field tiles, or any other private and public infrastructure
improvements damaged during construction, maintenance and operation phases of
the commercial solar energy facility in accordance with the Agricultural Impact
Mitigation Agreement.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Commencing with the issuance of a commercial solar energy facility
building permit, the applicant shall maintain a current general comprehensive
liability policy and automobile liability coverage covering bodily injury,
death and illness, and property damage with limits of at least $5,000,000 per
occurrence and in the aggregate; and, shall further maintain the above-stated
lines of insurance from delivery of the Notice to Proceed by the applicant for
the commercial solar energy facility, in coverage amounts of at least
$5,000,000 per occurrence and $20,000,000 in the aggregate during the life of
the commercial solar energy facility. The applicant shall file the original
certificate of insurance upon commencement of project construction prior to the
issuance of a commercial solar energy facility building permit, corresponding
policies and endorsements to be provided within 60 days of issuance, and at
each subsequent renewal, at least annually thereafter.
   (B)   The applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the county and
its officers, appointed and elected officials, employees, attorneys, engineers
and agents (collectively and individually, the "Indemnified Parties") from and
against any and all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages,
injuries, costs, expenses and liabilities whatsoever, including reasonable
attorney's fees relating to or arising out of the issuance of the special use
permit or the construction, operation, maintenance and removal of the
commercial solar energy facility including, without limitation, liability for
property damage or personal injury (including death or illness), whether said
liability is premised on contract or on tort (including without limitation
strict liability or negligence) or any acts or omissions of the applicant, the
owner or the operator under this chapter or the special use permit, except to
the extent any such claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages,
injuries, costs, expenses and liabilities arise from the negligence or
intentional acts of such indemnified parties. This general indemnification
shall not be construed as limiting or qualifying the county's other
indemnification rights available under the law.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.08 DECOMMISSIONING AND SITE RECLAMATION PLAN REQUIRED.
   Applicant (or owner, if different from applicant) must submit a
decommissioning plan with cost estimation to the county as part of the siting
application and provide testimony supporting the calculation of costs provided
in said plan during the public hearing on the application. Prior to receiving
any building permit for the commercial solar energy facility, the applicant or
owner shall provide a decommissioning agreement and post the required financial
assurances for the benefit of the county. The decommissioning agreement and
financial assurances shall comply with 55 ILCS 5/5-12020. Periodically, and as
required by the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement, the owner must update
the decommissioning plan, cost estimations and provide updated financial
assurances to the benefit of the county.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.09 REMEDIES.
   (A)   The applicant's failure to materially comply with any of the
provisions under the special use permit, any conditions imposed on the project,
and/or failure to comply with any law or regulation shall be a default and
shall be grounds for revocation of the special use permit by the County Board.
   (B)   Prior to implementation of the applicable county procedures for the
resolution of default(s), the County Board must first provide written notice to
the applicant and operator, setting forth the alleged default(s) and provide an
opportunity for the applicant or the operator to cure the default(s) within a
30 calendar day period from the date of the notice. Should the applicant
commence the cure within that 30-day cure period, and diligently pursues a
cure, then the applicant shall receive an additional 60 days to continue to
pursue the cure before the county pursues procedures for the resolution of
default. If the default relates to a life safety issue or interference with
local, government public safety (police, fire, emergency medical services,
emergency management services, 911 dispatch) communications, the applicant or
the operator shall take all necessary and available commercial measures to
immediately cure the default. If the applicant or operator cannot cure the
default(s) or resolve the alleged default(s) within the cure period, then
applicable county ordinance provisions addressing the resolution of such
default(s) shall govern.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.10 FEE SCHEDULE AND PERMITTING PROCESSES.
   (A)   Application fees.
      (1)   Prior to processing any application for a commercial solar energy
facility, the applicant must submit a certified check to the county for the
application fee equal to $           per megawatt (mW) of proposed nameplate
capacity, up to a maximum fee of $           . These funds shall be placed in
an FDIC insured account and will be used to cover the county's cost incurred in
processing the application.
      (2)   Should the actual costs to the county exceed the submitted
application fee, the applicant shall be responsible for those additional costs
and shall remit additional funds to the county within 15 days of receipt of a
request from the county. No hearings on an application shall be conducted nor
final decisions rendered on an application if there are application fees due to
the county.
      (3)   Any unused amounts of the application fee shall be refunded to the
applicant within six months of the County Board rendering a final decision on
the matter, unless any pending litigation, disputes or negotiations involving
the county exist regarding the commercial solar energy facility, in which case
any amounts owed to the applicant shall be refunded within six months of the
conclusion of the litigation, disputes or negotiations. An applicant may
request any unused application fee be applied toward the building permit fees
for the facility.
   (B)   Building permit fees. Prior to the issuance of building permits, the
building permit applicant must deposit a building permit fee equating to
$          per megawatt (mW) of nameplate capacity. If the total nameplate
capacity is less than 1 mW, the building permit fee shall be reduced pro rata.
   (C)   All costs to be paid by applicant or owner. In addition to all fees
noted above, the applicant or owner shall pay all costs incurred by the county,
including but not limited to, those costs associated with all offices, boards
and commissions of the county, and third-party costs incurred by the county.
This includes, but is not limited to, the direct or indirect costs associated
with the hearing, permitting, operations, inspections, decommissioning,
litigation, disputes, and/or negotiations.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.11 HEARING FACILITATOR.
   (A)   The county may engage the services of a hearing facilitator. The
hearing facilitator shall be an independent contractor who shall conduct a
hearing in accordance with all applicable rules of the Board and the county but
has no adjudicatory responsibility other than ruling on requests for
continuances, procedural matters, admissibility of evidence and the propriety
of any arguments.
   (B)   The hearing facilitator shall be an attorney, licensed to practice in
the State of Illinois. The applicant shall reimburse the county for the fees
and costs charged by the facilitator.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
§ 156.12 HEARING FACTORS.
   (A)   The County Board may approve a commercial solar energy facility
special use permit application, if it finds the evidence complies with state
and federal law and regulations, and with the standards of this zoning code
including the factors listed below. The factors below are applied as a
balancing test, not individual requirements to be met.
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the commercial solar
energy facility will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, morals, comfort or general welfare;
      (2)   The commercial solar energy facility will not be injurious to the
uses and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values of
surrounding properties;
      (3)   The establishment of the commercial solar energy facility will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding
properties;
      (4)   Adequate public utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or will be provided;
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
      (6)   The proposed commercial solar energy facility is not contrary to
the objectives of the current comprehensive plan of the county (if any); and
      (7)   The commercial solar energy facility shall, in all other respects,
conform to the applicable regulations of this chapter and the zoning district
in which it is located (if a zoning ordinance is in effect), except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified pursuant to the recommendations
of and approved by the County Board.
   (B)   Special use permit conditions and restrictions. The County Board may
stipulate conditions, guarantees and restrictions, upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the commercial solar
energy facility as are deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   Revocation.
      (1)   In any case where a special use permit has been approved for a
commercial solar energy facility, the applicant shall apply for a commercial
solar energy facility building permit from the county and all other permits
required by other government or regulatory agencies to commence construction,
and commence and actively pursue construction of the project within 36 months
from the date of the granting of the special use permit. If the applicant fails
to apply for a commercial solar energy facility building permit from the county
and all other permits required by other government or regulatory agencies prior
to construction and/or fails to commence and actively pursue construction of
the project within the 36 month period, then without further action by the
County Board, the special use permit authorizing the construction and operation
of the commercial solar energy facility shall be automatically revoked and
void. Upon written request supported by evidence that the applicant has
diligently pursued issuance of all necessary government and regulatory permits
for the project required to commence construction and that any delay in
commencement of construction of the project is due to conditions out of his/
her/its control, the County Board, in its sole discretion, may extend the above
36-month period by passage of an ordinance that amends the special use permit.
      (2)   The special use permit shall be subject to revocation if the
applicant dissolves or ceases to do business, abandons the commercial solar
energy facility or the commercial solar energy facility ceases to operate for
more than 12 consecutive months for any reason.
      (3)   Subject to the provisions of §
156.09, a special use permit may be revoked by the County Board if the
commercial solar energy facility is not constructed, installed and/or operated
in substantial conformance with the county-approved project plans, the
regulations of this chapter, and the stipulated special use permit conditions
and restrictions.
   (D)   Transferability; owner or commercial solar energy facility permittee.
The applicant shall provide written notification to the County Board at least
30 days prior to any change in ownership of a commercial solar energy facility
of any such change in ownership. The phrase "change in ownership of a
commercial solar energy facility" includes any kind of assignment, sale, lease,
transfer or other conveyance of ownership or operating control of the
applicant, the commercial solar energy facility or any portion thereof. The
applicant or successors-in-interest or assignees of the special use permit, as
applicable, shall remain liable for compliance with all conditions,
restrictions and obligations contained in the special use permit, the
provisions of this chapter and applicable county, state and federal laws.
   (E)   Modification. Any modification of a commercial solar energy facility
that alters or changes the essential character or operation of the commercial
solar energy facility in a way not intended at the time the special use permit
was granted, or as subsequently amended, shall require a new special use
permit. The applicant or authorized representative, shall apply for an amended
special use permit prior to any modification of the commercial solar energy
facility.
   (F)   Permit effective date. The special use permit shall become effective
upon approval of the ordinance by the County Board.
(Ord. O-146-05-23, passed 5-11-2023)
CHAPTER 157: BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS (BESS) SITING
Section
   
157.01   Authority
   
157.02   Purpose
   
157.03   Definitions
   
157.04   Applicability
   
157.05   Prohibition
   
157.06   General requirements
   
157.07   Special use permit application
   
157.08   Design and installation
   
157.09   Operation
   
157.10   Liability insurance and indemnification
   
157.11   Decommissioning
   
157.12   Hearing facilitator
   
157.13   Hearing factors
   
157.14   Fee schedule and permitting processes
   
157.15   Defaults and remedies
   
157.16   Interpretation
§ 157.01 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 5/5-12001 of the Illinois
Counties Code (55 ILCS 5/5-12001), which authorizes Macon County to adopt
zoning provisions that advance and protect the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, and general welfare of the community.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.02 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to advance and protect the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, and general welfare of Macon County and its residents by
creating regulations for the installation and use of battery energy storage
systems (BESS), with the following objectives:
   (A)   To provide a regulatory scheme for the designation of properties
suitable for the location, construction, and operation of any BESS;
   249
   (B)   To ensure compatible land uses in the vicinity of the areas affected
by any BESS;
   (C)   To mitigate the impacts of any BESS on environmental resources such as
important agricultural lands, forests, wetlands, wildlife, and other protected
lands and resources; and
   (D)   To create synergy between BESS development and other goals of Macon
County and its comprehensive plan.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANSI. The American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. The entity who submits to the county a special use permit
application for the siting and operation of any battery energy storage system
(BESS).
   AUTHORIZED AGENT. Personnel authorized by the County Board.
   BATTERY(IES). A single cell or a group of cells connected together
electrically in series, in parallel, or a combination of both, which can
charge, discharge, and store energy electrochemically or otherwise. For the
purposes of this chapter, BATTERIES utilized in consumer products are excluded
from these requirements.
   BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. An electronic system that protects
energy storage systems from operating outside their safe operating parameters
and disconnects electrical power to the energy storage system or places it in a
safe condition if potentially hazardous temperatures or other conditions are
detected.
   BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM(S) (BESS). An energy storage system that can
store and deploy generated energy, typically a group of batteries that charge
(i.e., collect energy) and store electrical energy from the grid or energy
generation facility and then discharge that energy at a later time to provide
electricity or other grid services when needed. BESS generally consist of
batteries, battery storage containers, racking systems, on-site switchyards,
inverters, associated interconnection transmission lines, and supervisory
control and data acquisition systems.
      (1)   TIER 1. An energy storage system that has an aggregate energy
capacity less than or equal to 600 kWh (kilowatt hours) and, if in a room or
enclosed area, consists of only a single energy storage system technology,
which is a rechargeable BESS used to provide standby or emergency power and/or
uninterruptable power supply, load shedding, load sharing, or similar
capabilities relating to the energy consumed by a residence on site, farm
operation on site, or other business on site.
      (2)   TIER 2. An energy storage system that has an aggregate energy
capacity greater than 600 kWh (kilowatt hours) or is comprised of more than one
battery storage system technology in a room or enclosed area.
   CAPABILITY. The ability, knowledge, experience, resources, and financial
viability to complete the project.
   CELL. The basic electrochemical unit, characterized by an anode and a
cathode, used to receive, store, and deliver electrical energy.
   COMMISSIONING. The systematic process that provides documented confirmation
that a BESS functions according to the intended design criteria and complies
with applicable code requirements.
   DECOMMISSIONING. To return the property or site back to its pre-installation
state or better as approved by a decommissioning plan entered into with the
county.
   DEDICATED-USE BUILDING. A building that is built for the primary purpose of
housing BESS equipment, and complies with the following:
      (1)   The building’s only use is battery energy storage, energy
generation, and other electrical grid-related operations.
      (2)   No other occupancy types are permitted in the building.
      (3)   Occupants in the rooms and areas containing a BESS are limited to
personnel that operate, maintain, service, test, and repair the BESS and other
energy systems.
      (4)   Administrative and support personnel are permitted in areas within
the buildings that do not contain a BESS, provided the following:
         (a)   The areas do not occupy more than 10% of the building area of
the story in which they are located.
         (b)   A means of egress is provided from the administrative and
support use areas to the public way that does not require occupants to traverse
through areas containing a BESS or other energy system equipment.
   DISTANCE. The extent or amount of space between points, measured in the unit
of feet and on a level plane.
   ELECTRIC GRIP OPERATOR. A company that owns and maintains the infrastructure
used to transmit electricity at voltages above 69 kV.
   ENERGY CODE. The Illinois Power Agency Act (20 ILCS 3855/1-1 et seq.), as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
   FINANCIAL ASSURANCE. Reasonable assurance from a credit worthy party
satisfactory to the county, and in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit,
that any and all damages due to construction, operation, maintenance, and/or
commissioning related to the BESS project will be repaired and/or that the
project will be fully decommissioned.
   FIRE CODE. The Fire Code as adopted by the State of Illinois, as currently
in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
   HEARING FACILITATOR. A hearing facilitator, not affiliated with any pro-BESS
or anti-BESS group, which the county may unilaterally engage the services of to
preside over any required hearings resulting from an application related to the
siting of a BESS.
   LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A qualified individual who is licensed as a
professional engineer in the State of Illinois.
   LICENSED STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A qualified individual who is licensed as a
structural engineer in the State of Illinois.
   LIKE-KIND REPLACEMENT. A BESS or associated equipment which meets or exceeds
the standards and specifications of the BESS or equipment being replaced and
complies with the applicable terms and conditions of this chapter.
   LOCAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE/UTILITY. An organization or company that
transmits electricity at or below 69kV and distributes electricity to customers
within its respective service territory.
   MIDCONTINENT INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATORS (MISO). An interstate electric
grid operator for the central United States that facilitates the wholesale
buying and selling of electricity within its operational territory through
partnerships with various independent electric grid operators.
   NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED TESTING LABORATORY (NRTL). A United States Department
of Labor designation recognizing a private sector organization to perform
certification for certain products to ensure that they meet the requirements of
both the construction and general industry Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) electrical standards.
   NEC. The National Electric Code.
   NFPA. The National Fire Protection Association.
   NON-PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Any property that is not a participating
property.
   NON-PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. Any residence located on non-participating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that a special use
permit application is filed with the county.
   OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING. Any one or more of the following buildings that
is existing and occupied on the date that a special use permit application is
filed with the county: a school, place of worship, day care facility, public
library, or community center.
   OPERATING PERMIT. A permit that must be issued (according to approval by the
County’s Zoning Administrator) after the construction of any BESS is
substantially complete and prior to the commercial operation date of the BESS,
in order to store and sell energy.
   OPERATOR. The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the BESS and associated equipment, including any third-party
subcontractors.
   OWNER. An entity with an equity interest in the BESS, including respective
successors and assignees, or an entity that becomes an owner through
foreclosure. OWNER does not mean the property owner from which land is leased
for locating the BESS unless the property owner has an equity interest in the
BESS, or any person holding a security interest in the BESS solely to secure an
extension of credit.
   PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. A BESS host property or any real property that is
the subject of a written agreement that provides the BESS owner an easement,
option, lease, or license to use the real property for the purpose of
constructing a BESS or associated equipment/supporting facilities on the
property.
   PRIMARY STRUCTURE. For each property, the structure that one or more persons
occupy the majority of time on that property for either business or personal
reasons, including, but not limited to, structures such as residences,
commercial buildings, hospitals, churches, day care facilities, schools, and
agricultural buildings/structures.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit approved by the County Board, after public
hearing on a complete written application, allowing a particular use at a
specified location subject to compliance with certain specified special
conditions as may be required by the County Board.
   UNDERWRITERS LABORATORIES (UL). An independent safety and testing
organization that provides globally recognized safety listings certifications
and criteria for both individual components and integrated systems.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.04 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to any BESS permitted,
installed, or modified in the county after the effective date of this chapter.
Any BESS connected or integrated into a commercial solar energy facility or
commercial wind energy facility shall be governed by the requirements of all
applicable solar or wind ordinances.
   (B)   Modifications to, retrofits, or replacements of an existing BESS that
increase the total designed discharge duration or power rating shall be subject
to this chapter. Any BESS that intends to modify, retrofit, or replace any
existing equipment which increases the designed discharge duration or power
rating must apply for an amended special use permit prior to modifying,
retrofitting, or replacing the equipment.
   (C)   Tier 1 BESS. Tier 1 BESS are permitted in all zoning districts. Tier 1
BESS must apply for and be issued a building permit prior to installation/
construction. Prior to operation of any Tier 1 BESS, a safety inspection must
be completed at the owner’s expense and performed by a contractor selected by
the county. Tier 1 BESS are subject to the requirements of this chapter only as
specifically stated herein.
   (D)   
      (1)   Tier 2 BESS. Tier 2 BESS are only permitted in agricultural or
industrial-zoned districts. Tier 2 BESS must apply for and be issued a special
use permit, a building permit prior to construction, and an operating permit
prior to commercial operation. Tier 2 BESS are subject to all requirements of
this chapter except as specifically stated herein.
      (2)   Tier 2 BESS are not permitted either by special use permit or
otherwise within a tax advantaged district including but not limited to a tax
increment finance district or enterprise zone.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.05 PROHIBITION.
   No BESS governed by this chapter shall be transported, constructed, erected,
installed, located, or operated within the county, unless:
   (A)   A special use permit has been granted by the County Board and a
building permit has been issued for each individual BESS or for a group of BESS
under a joint siting application pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   All road use agreements and decommissioning agreements have been
entered into with each applicable governmental agency and all required
financial assurances have been posted and provided to the county/applicable
governmental agency.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Following the granting of a special use permit by the County Board,
and compliance with any and all conditions is met, the applicant is eligible to
apply for a building permit(s) for the project.
   (B)   An interconnection agreement must be completed with MISO and/or the
electric grid operator, and the local electric cooperative/utility in whose
service territory the project is located prior to the issuance of any building
permit(s).
   (C)   Actual on-site construction must commence within one year of the
granting of a special use permit; if not completed or otherwise, any permit(s)
previously issued will no longer be valid.
   (D)   The failure to obtain the required building permit(s) or other permit
(s) shall be a violation of this chapter. A building permit shall be issued
only after an application is submitted for the building permit and approval has
been granted by the county’s Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.07 SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   An applicant must submit a special use permit application to the
County Zoning Office for review, public hearing, and recommendation by the
county’s Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-12009.5.
Approval or denial of all applications shall be made by the County Board.
   (B)   Material changes to the application are not permitted once the notice
of public hearing has been published, unless requested or otherwise permitted
by the county.
   (C)   Ten paper copies and one electronic copy of the application must be
submitted to the county’s Zoning Office.
   (D)   Financial assurance in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit to
assure the construction, installation and completion of the project or
improvements. Such financial assurance (irrevocable letter of credit) shall be
provided by the applicant prior to application of and issuance of a building
permit for the BESS and shall be in such amount as is determined to be 110% of
the estimated project cost.
   (E)   The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following
information:
      (1)   A site plan for the BESS showing the planned location of the BESS
and all related components, including legal descriptions for each site,
participating and nonparticipating residences, primary structures, occupied
community buildings, parcel boundary lines (including identification of
adjoining properties), setback lines and layout of all structures within the
geographical boundaries of any applicable setback, public and private access
roads and turnout locations, railroad mainline and/or proposed railroad siding
(s), the location of any construction staging areas including concrete batch
plants, substation(s), operations and maintenance buildings, ancillary
equipment, electrical cabling to substation(s) and/or energy generation
facility, guy lines and anchor bases, any above or below ground transmission
lines, third party transmission lines, the location of any wetlands, flood
plain, drainage structures (including surface ditches and subsurface drainage
features and a drain tile survey), active or abandoned water/oil/natural gas/or
any other type of wells and boreholes, lakes, ponds, streams, archaeological
sites, underground mines, and scenic and natural areas within 1,500 feet of the
proposed project.
      (2)   A project summary, including, to the extent available:
         (a)   A general description of the project, including, but not limited
to:
            1.   The approximate total power capacity, energy capacity, and
discharge duration of the BESS.
            2.   The type(s) of battery(ies) used and their potential
manufacturer(s).
            3.   A preliminary equipment specification sheet that documents the
proposed BESS components, inverters and associated electrical equipment to be
installed.
            4.   The maximum height of any battery storage container, racking
system, or dedicated-use building.
            5.   An electrical diagram detailing the BESS layout, associated
components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all NEC compliant
disconnects and over current devices.
            6.   A project site plan, project phasing plan, and project
construction plan.
            7.   The general location of the project.
         (b)   A description of the applicant, owner(s), and operator,
including their respective business structures.
         (c)   The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the applicant, owner
(s), and operator, and all property owners who have signed a lease agreement;
and information as to whether the applicant is acting for itself or as an
agent, alter ego, or representative of a principal and the name and address of
the principal; whether the applicant is a corporation and of all stockholders
or shareholders owning any interest in excess of 20% of all of the outstanding
stock or shares of the corporation; whether the applicant, or its principal, is
a business or entity doing business under an assumed name, and if so, the name
and residence of all actual owners of the business or entity; whether the
applicant, or its principal, is a partnership, joint venture, syndicate or
unincorporated voluntary association, and if so, the names and addresses of all
partners or members of the partnership, joint venture, syndicate or
unincorporated voluntary association.
         (d)   Prior to filing an application with the county, the applicant
must hold an in-person, public meeting at a location within the township of the
planned BESS, or if no sufficient location is available within the township, a
location in the county to inform the public of the proposed BESS project. In
its application, applicant shall provide sufficient documentation showing that
a public meeting has been held and that all landowners and residents within one
and one-half miles of the project footprint and within the project footprint
have been properly notified of the public meeting.
         (e)   Individual inventory designations for each BESS and substation
for reference in building permits.
         (f)   All required studies, reports, certifications, waivers, and
approvals demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (g)   A proposed decommissioning plan.
         (h)   An Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) executed
between the applicant and the Illinois Department of Agriculture, if available.
         (i)   Results and recommendations from the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR) obtained through the Ecological Compliance Assessment
Tool (EcoCAT) or a comparable successor tool.
         (j)   Results of any United States Fishing and Wildlife Service’s
Information for Planning and Consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool that is consistent with applicable United States Fish and
Wildlife Service Energy Development wildlife guidelines.
         (k)   Information demonstrating the BESS will avoid protected lands.
         (l)   An electrical diagram detailing the BESS layout, associated
components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all NEC compliant
disconnects and over current devices.
         (m)   A preliminary equipment specification sheet that documents the
proposed BESS components, inverters, and associated electrical equipment to be
installed. A final equipment specification sheet shall be submitted prior to
the issuance of any building permit.
         (n)   A fire safety compliance plan documenting and verifying that the
BESS and its associated equipment, controls, and safety systems are in
compliance with all state and federal codes.
         (o)   An operation and maintenance manual which describes continuing
BESS maintenance and property upkeep, as well as design, construction,
installation, testing, and commissioning information which meets all
requirements set forth in this chapter.
         (p)   Erosion and sediment control, storm water, and effluent
management plans, prepared to Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA)
and Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) standards, if applicable,
and to such standards as may be established by the county.
         (q)   A noise modeling report demonstrating compliance with Illinois
Pollution Control Board (IPCB) standards.
         (r)   A preliminary emergency management plan.
         (s)   A drain tile survey.
         (t)   If applicable, any waivers from setback requirements executed by
occupied community building owners and/or non-participating property owners,
bearing a file stamp from the County Recorder’s , confirming the waiver has
been recorded against the title to the affected real property.
         (u)   Sufficient documentation that the applicant, owner, company, and
parent company have the capability to complete the BESS project as proposed.
         (v)   Any good neighbor plan, property value guarantee plan, or other
financial incentive plans associated with the proposed project, and a copy of
such plan(s).
         (w)   Any other information normally required by the ZBA as part of
its permitting requirements.
         (x)   Any other information requested by the ZBA or county consultants
necessary to evaluate the application and proposed project, and to demonstrate
that the proposed project meets all applicable regulations.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.08 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Setbacks. Setbacks shall be:
      (1)   Two hundred feet from the parcel line;
      (2)   Two hundred feet from any public right-of-way; and
      (3)   Five hundred feet from any non-participating residential structure
or occupied community building.
   (B)   Height. BESS and its associated equipment, including containers,
racking systems, and dedicated-use buildings, shall be restricted to 35 feet in
height.
   (C)   Fencing requirements. BESS and its associated equipment shall be
enclosed by a fence at least ten feet in height with a locking gate to prevent
unauthorized access unless housed in a dedicated-use building.
   (D)   Screening and visibility. BESS shall have views minimized from all
residences and adjacent properties using architectural features, earth berms,
landscaping, or other screening methods.
   (E)   Safety.
      (1)   Emergency management. Applicant shall submit a preliminary
emergency management plan as part of its application for a special use permit.
Applicant shall submit a final emergency management plan with its building
permit application, which must be approved by the county prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
      (2)   System certification. Any BESS and its associated equipment shall
be listed by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory to meet or exceed UL
1973, UL 9540(A), UL 1741SA, and IEEE 1547 (current standard for BESS and
equipment) or approved equivalent, with subcomponents also meeting nationally
recognized standards, certified under the applicable electrical, building, and
fire prevention codes as required.
      (3)   Furthermore, field evaluation by an approved testing laboratory for
compliance with UL 9540 and NFPA 855 (or approved equivalent) and applicable
codes, regulations, and safety standards may be used to meet system
certification requirements.
      (4)   All electrical components of any BESS shall conform to applicable
local, state, and national codes and to relevant national and international
standards (e.g., ANSI and International Electrical Commission). Utility lines
connecting to energy sources, substations, and the like, shall be placed
underground where practical. All electrical wire and lines connecting a BESS to
another BESS or substation must be installed no less than six feet deep. The
owner/operator of the BESS shall be a member of J.U.L.I.E. (Joint Utility
Locating Information for Excavators) and follow its rules and regulations.
During the installation and before wires and lines are covered, there must be
an inspection for compliance by an independent inspector chosen by the county
and paid for by the owner/operator.
If there is damage to any battery component(s), the damaged material(s) must be
segregated from other batteries to halt any potential thermal runaway.
   (F)   Signage.
      (1)   All signage shall be made with letters and numbers at least three
inches in height with a light reflective surface. Faded/damaged/missing signs
shall be replaced when necessary for the duration of BESS site operations.
      (2)   Warning signs concerning voltage must be placed at all entrances of
the BESS.
      (3)   An emergency sign listing the 9-1-1 address shall be placed and
maintained by the owner/operator at the entrance to each BESS access road from
a public road. A sign or posting no more than four square feet in area shall be
placed, and maintained, with a toll-free telephone number answered by a live
operator 24 hours a day seven days per week, for emergency calls.
      (4)   A non-emergency phone number for the operator shall also be
displayed for informational inquiries.
      (5)   These phone numbers shall remain active with all calls being voice
recorded for verification purposes and with comments and complaints logged and
reported to the County Zoning Office on a monthly basis.
      (6)   The recorded calls shall be maintained for at least 12 months.
      (7)   Current phone numbers shall be maintained. Local agency response
shall be reimbursed by the project owner(s).
      (8)   Upon completion of the construction of an approved BESS project, a
reasonable visible sign to warn people to not approach while operating must be
placed at the entrance of each access road.
      (9)   Warning signs identifying underground wire locations shall be
placed at all road crossings, creek, waterway, and ditch crossings, and all
underground wire locations shall be GPS mapped and given to the local GIS
Office and J.U.L.I.E. (Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators).
   (G)   Lighting. Lighting of the BESS shall comply with the provisions/
guidance provided by the International Dark-Sky Association and shall be
limited to that minimally required for safety and operational purposes and
shall be reasonably shielded and downcast from all residences and adjacent
properties.
   (H)   Vegetation and tree cutting.
      (1)   Areas within 20 feet on each side of a BESS shall be cleared of
combustible vegetation and other combustible growth.
      (2)   Noxious weeds and other invasive plant species shall be eliminated
and strictly controlled during the construction, operation, and decommissioning
of the entire BESS site. This is pursuant to the Illinois Noxious Weed Law, 505
ILCS 100/1-24. The list of noxious weeds are found in Illinois Exotic Weeds
Act, 525 ILCS 10/3. In addition, Amaranthus tuberculatus (commonly known as
“waterhemp”) shall be proactively controlled at all times.
   (I)   Noise. Noise generated from the BESS, components, and associated
ancillary equipment shall not exceed Illinois Pollution Control Board (IPCB)
limits.
   (J)   Site access.
      (1)   BESS shall be maintained in good working order and in accordance
with industry standards. Site access shall be maintained, including snow
removal at a level acceptable to the local fire department and, if applicable,
the local ambulance district.
      (2)   BESS, components, and associated ancillary equipment shall have
required working space clearances, and electrical circuitry shall be within
weatherproof enclosures marked with the environmental rating suitable for
exposure in compliance with NFPA 70E.
   (K)   Agriculture damage repair. All damages to waterways, drainage ditches,
field tiles, or any other infrastructures caused by the construction,
maintenance, operation, or decommissioning of the BESS must be completely
repaired or replaced to an acceptable state within a reasonable amount of time
determined by the property owner. All investigation and repairs shall be in
accordance with applicable law. If the BESS is within a drainage district
organized pursuant to Illinois law, the BESS shall adhere to all requirements
of the drainage district. Prior to receipt of building permit(s) for the BESS,
the owner shall provide proof of consultation with any applicable drainage
district. Prior to receipt of an operating permit the owner shall provide proof
of compliance with all drainage district requirements.
   (L)   Water usage and water wells.
      (1)   Prior to application for the special use permit, the applicant
shall perform an investigation to determine the existing of any water wells on
the parcel hosting the BESS. Any water well that is discovered or otherwise
known to exist within in the parcel hosting the BESS shall be mapped on the
site plans and reported to the Macon County Environmental Services Office, the
Illinois State Geological Survey, and the Macon County Zoning Office within
three business days of its discovery. Any wells on the parcel must be filled
according to local, state and federal law and/or regulation prior to the
commissioning or operations of the BESS site. The utilization of any
underground publicly used aquifer at the BESS site is prohibited
      (2)   During operation the emergency water supply available to the BESS
for providing fire suppression shall be 150% of the estimated capacity
necessary for controlling a fire at the BESS. Prior to the issuance of a
building permit, the BESS owner and the county shall confer and agree upon any
required infrastructure improvements necessary to provide adequate emergency
response or fire suppression (such as water supply volume and pressure). If any
infrastructure improvements are required, the BESS owner shall be responsible
for any costs necessary for such improvements. The BESS owner and county shall
memorialize such requirements in the form of a written agreement prior to the
issuance of any building permit(s) related to the BESS.
   (M)   Use of public roads. An applicant, owner, or operator proposing to use
any county, municipality, township, or village roads for the purpose of
transporting BESS or substation parts and/or equipment for construction,
operation, or maintenance of the BESS or substation/supporting facilities
shall:
      (1)   In its special use permit application identify all such public
roads intended for use including a site layout plan showing the applicable BESS
sites, public road network used, access road entrances, underground collection
system and power transformer sites. The application and construction shall
include multiple points of access for emergency response purposes. All access
points shall be sufficient to accommodate firefighting vehicles.
      (2)   Identify all public agencies involved.
      (3)   Enter into a road use agreement with each of the affected
jurisdictions and relevant government agencies prior to the receipt of a
building permit.
      (4)   Obtain applicable weight and size permits from relevant government
agencies prior to construction and/or maintenance activities.
      (5)   To the extent an applicant, owner, or operator must obtain a weight
or size permit from the local agency of jurisdiction, the legal agreement
shall:
         (a)   Provide a pre-construction and/or pre-maintenance baseline
survey to determine existing road conditions and right of way conditions and
assess for potential future damage;
         (b)   Identify necessary heavy and oversized equipment and materials
over roads which may in certain cases be in excess of the design limits of the
roads;
         (c)   Widen, modify and/or improve roads including culverts, bridges,
road shoulders and other related fixtures to permit such equipment and
materials to pass;
         (d)   Outline exact routes intended for construction and/or
maintenance use;
         (e)   Detail maintenance responsibility and method of reimbursement if
it is deemed the responsibility of a local governmental entity;
         (f)   Expectations of the local governmental entity when road
reconstruction is involved;
         (g)   Easement on private property will be the sole responsibility of
the applicant, owner, or operator;
         (h)   Outline of time schedule including any and all provisions during
seasonal road postings;
         (i)   Outline any and all permits required for entrance off the public
roads;
         (j)   Provide financial assurance in the form of a sufficient cash
escrow to be held by the County Treasurer’s Office for the purpose of repairing
any damage to public roads caused by constructing, operating, or maintaining
the BESS and its included equipment. This estimate will be determined by a
licensed Illinois professional engineer chosen by the county and paid for by
the applicant, owner, or operator;
         (k)   Provide county’s Zoning Office with a signed copy of any
agreements pertaining to the use of public roads prior to the issuance of a
building permit; and
         (l)   Identify any special issues which may affect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
   (N)   Utility lines and electrical circuitry. All on-site utility lines
shall be placed underground to the extent feasible and as permitted by the
serving utility, with the exception of the main service connection at the
utility company right-of-way and any new interconnection equipment, including
without limitation any poles, with new easements and right-of-way.
   (O)   Compliance.
      (1)   BESS must comply with site assessment that is intended to protect
agricultural soils.
      (2)   BESS developer(s) shall be required to initiate a natural resource
review consultation with the IDNR (Illinois Department of Natural Resources)
through the Department’s online, Ecological Compliance Assessment Tool (EcoCAT)
program. Areas reviewed through this process will be reviewed for endangered
species and wetlands. The cost of the EcoCAT consultation will be borne by the
developer(s).
      (3)   BESS are subject to the State of Illinois storm water management
regulations, erosion and sediment control provisions if adopted, and NPDES
permit requirements.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.09 OPERATION.
   (A)   Operating permit. An operating permit shall be obtained from the
county prior to start of the commercial operation of any BESS.
   (B)   Ownership changes. If the owner or operator of a BESS changes, a new
operating permit fee shall be paid to the county for the county’s evaluation of
the change in ownership. The successor owner or operator must assume in writing
all obligations of the original BESS special use permit (including conditions),
building permit, operating permit, site plan approval, road use agreements,
decommissioning agreements, and any other agreements entered into with the
county. The successor owner or operator of the BESS shall notify the county’s
Zoning Administrator in writing of the ownership or operator change and written
proof that it has assumed all obligations required by this chapter within 30
days of the ownership or operator change. The BESS operating permit and all
other permits/approvals for the BESS shall be void if the new owner or operator
fails to fulfill these requirements. Reinstatement of a void special use
permit, building permit, or operating permit shall be subject to the same
review and approval processes for new applications under this chapter.
   (C)   Maintenance/annual report. The owner or operator of any BESS must
submit, on an annual basis on or before February 1 of each calendar year
following its commercial operation date, a report to the County Zoning
Administrator containing the following information: (i) a general description
of any physical repairs, replacements, or modifications to the BESS and/or its
infrastructure; (ii) complaints pertaining to setbacks, noise, appearance,
safety, lighting, and use of any public roads received by the owner or
operation concerning the BESS and the resolution of such complaints; (iii)
calls for emergency services; (iv) status of liability insurance; and (v) a
general summary of service calls to the BESS facility. In addition to the
annual report, the owner or operator of any BESS must also furnish such report
upon direct request by the county. Failure to provide the annual report or
report directly requested by the county (within 30 days) shall be considered a
material violation of this chapter subject to the remedies provision of this
chapter.
   (D)   Coordination with emergency management agencies.
      (1)   The applicant, owner, or operator shall submit to any local
emergency management agency (EMA) a copy of the site plan. In addition to the
site plan, a plan pertaining to the planning, response, recovery, and
mitigation of any natural or manmade hazard that may affect the BESS
development must be negotiated.
      (2)   Owner or operator shall cooperate with the local fire department/
adjacent fire departments/districts/EMA to develop an emergency response plan.
In addition, at no cost to the local fire departments, the owner or operator
shall provide to the local fire department/adjacent fire departments/districts/
EMA, any and all specialized and necessary rescue or retrieval equipment
occasioned by the use of the particular BESS being used at the project (i.e.,
fire retardant, tanks, respirators, and the like). All equipment shall become
of the property of the emergency response agency.
      (3)   As part of its special use permit application, the applicant must
submit an emergency management plan.
      (4)   Nothing in this chapter shall alleviate the need to comply with all
other applicable fire laws and regulations.
      (5)   The applicant, owner, or operator shall annually coordinate with
the local emergency response agencies and the Macon County Emergency Management
Agency, situational onsite training and practice drills.
   (E)   Materials handling, storage, and disposal.
      (1)   All solid and liquid wastes related to the construction, operation,
and maintenance of the BESS shall be removed from the site promptly and
disposed of in accordance with all federal, state, and local laws.
      (2)   A list of all hazardous solids and/or liquids that may be used on
site shall be provided to the local fire departments and adjacent fire
departments/districts/EMA, and the County Zoning Administrator All hazardous
materials both liquid and solid related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the BESS shall be handled, stored, transported, and disposed of
in accordance with all applicable laws.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.10 LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The owner or operator of the BESS shall maintain a current general
liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage with limits of at
least $10,000,000 per occurrence and $40,000,000 in the aggregate, with an
annual certificate of insurance being provided to the County Zoning Office,
with the county being added as an additional insured, with the designation of
primary and non-contributory.
   (B)   The applicant shall promptly increase such liability insurance if such
amount is increased in the BESS ordinance and the applicant is notified in
writing of same by the county. The applicant shall provide evidence of such
increased insurance to the County Zoning Office.
   (C)   Insurance coverage shall be maintained without interruption from the
date of permitting through the lifetime of the BESS project. Certificates of
insurance acceptable to the county and in compliance with this chapter shall be
filed with the county prior to the commencement of any work on the BESS and
thereafter upon renewal or replacement of each required policy of insurance.
These certificates and the insurance policies required under this chapter shall
contain a provision that coverages afforded under the policies shall not be
cancelled or allowed to expire until at least 60 days’ written notice has been
given to the county.
   (D)   The applicant shall also, to the fullest extent permitted by law,
indemnify, and hold the county, its employees, board members, and agents
harmless for any action due to or arising out of the construction, maintenance,
decommissioning, deconstruction, and/or operation of the BESS, including the
payment of any attorney’s fee and costs arising out of any action due to or
arising out of the construction, maintenance, decommissioning, and/or operation
of the BESS.
   (E)   The applicant, owner and/or operator of the BESS shall defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the county and its officers, appointed and elected
officials, employees, attorneys, engineers and agents (collectively and
individually, the “indemnified parties”) from and against any and all claims,
demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses,
and liabilities whatsoever, including attorney’s fees relating to or arising
out of the issuance of the special use permit, other permits, or the
construction, operation, maintenance and removal of the BESS and affiliated
equipment, including, without limitation, liability for property damage or
personal injury (including death or illness), whether the liability is premised
on contract or on tort (including without limitation strict liability or
negligence) or any acts or omissions of the applicant, owner, or operator under
this chapter or the special use permit/other permits, except to the extent any
such claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries,
costs, expenses and liabilities arise from the negligence or intentional acts
of such indemnified parties. This general indemnification shall not be
construed as limiting or qualifying the county’s other indemnification rights
available under the law.
   (F)   After the effective date of this chapter, no proposed BESS, as defined
in this chapter and within the county’s jurisdiction, shall proceed with
construction until it has been submitted to and approved by the County Board
and/or its authorized agent in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.11 DECOMMISSIONING.
   Decommissioning will apply to all BESS projects and its equipment/
components. Prior to receiving special use permit approval, the applicant and/
or owner/operator must enter into and agree upon a decommissioning plan and
decommissioning agreement with the county that ensures the BESS project will be
properly decommissioned upon the end of project life or facility abandonment.
   (A)   Decommissioning plan. The applicant shall submit with its special use
application a proposed decommissioning plan that includes the following:
      (1)   The anticipated life expectancy of the BESS project;
      (2)   The funding method(s), for the decommissioning and restoration of
the project site to its original, natural condition prior to the BESS
development;
      (3)   The method of ensuring that funds will be available for
decommissioning and restoration;
      (4)   Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local,
state, and federal waste disposal regulations;
      (5)   The manner in which the site will be restored, including a
description of how any changes to the surrounding areas and other systems
adjacent to the BESS, such as, but not limited to, structural elements,
building penetrations, means of egress, and required fire detection suppression
systems, will be protected during decommissioning, and confirmed as being
acceptable after the system is removed; and
      (6)   A listing of any contingencies for removing an intact operational
energy storage system from service, and for removing an energy storage system
from service that has been damaged by a fire or other event.
      (7)   Prior to receiving a special use permit under this chapter, the
county, the applicant, owner, and/or operator must agree to a written
decommissioning agreement that ensures the BESS project is properly
decommissioned and deconstructed upon the end of project life or facility
abandonment.
      (8)   If the site is damaged or nonfunctioning for any reason, the BESS
project operator shall notify the County Zoning Office within 24 hours and then
shall have six months to bring the project back to its operational capacity. If
for any reason the BESS is not operational or able to store or manage
electricity after six months, the operator/owner shall have six months to
complete decommissioning of the BESS and its equipment.
      (9)   In the event of abandonment of the project or its equipment/
components, the project site property owner/leaseholder shall bear ownership of
the BESS and all of its equipment/components located on the property. The
property owner of the project site shall bear the decommissioning costs in
excess of any funds the county is able to access to ensure proper
decommissioning of the project.
      (10)   In the event of bankruptcy or similar financial default of the
BESS project, the county shall use the decommissioning funds to the greatest
extent possible. There may remain unresolved site issues beyond the scope of
the county’s ability to fund the decommissioning of the BESS. To the extent the
financial assurance provided to the county is insufficient to fund the complete
decommissioning of the BESS, the property owner, the BESS owner, any parent
entity of the BESS owner, any person or entity holding a greater than 20%
interest in the BESS or parent entity of the BESS, any financial creditor or
any other person/entity holding an equity interest in the BESS shall be
responsible for the decommissioning costs of the BESS. Prior to receipt of a
building permit, the above responsible entities shall execute an agreement with
the county agreeing to fund the decommissioning of the BESS should the
decommissioning financial assurance provided to the county be insufficient to
fund the complete decommissioning of the BESS.
      (11)   A provision that the terms of the decommissioning agreement shall
be binding upon the applicant and any of their successors, assigns, or heirs.
      (12)   The county may sell any salvage material to reduce the county’s
expenses related to decommissioning of any project site and shall be granted
access to each site to affect or complete decommissioning. The county may, but
is not required to, allow a reduction of the decommissioning financial
assurance in an amount equal to the salvage value of the BESS.
      (13)   The plan shall include provisions for removal of all structures,
BESS, transmission equipment, buildings, fences, cabling, debris, foundations,
and physical material pertaining to the project, including the cost for
disposal of all materials associated with the BESS. The plan shall also include
provisions for restoration of soil and vegetation and a plan ensuring financial
resources will be available to fully decommission the site.
      (14)   All solid and liquid wastes shall be disposed of in accordance
with all local, state, and federal laws.
      (15)   All hazardous materials shall be handled, stored, transported, and
disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws.
EMA and HAZMAT officials shall be notified of the handling, storage,
transportation, and disposal of any and all hazardous materials.
   (B)   Decommissioning fund.
      (1)   The cost estimate of decommissioning will be completed by a
licensed Illinois professional engineer chosen by the county at the applicant’s
expense. Payment for the engineer’s fee and any other third-party costs to
prepare decommissioning cost estimates or negotiate decommissioning agreement
(s) is not included in the initial application fee.
      (2)   The decommissioning cost estimate will be reviewed at a minimum
every three years, by the county’s chosen Illinois licensed professional
engineer, and revised, if necessary, at the owner/operator’s expense. The
review and revised agreement are subject to the approval of the County Board.
      (3)   The county reserves the right to require more frequent
decommissioning estimates and cash escrow requirements based on changing
economic conditions.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the project lifespan or when the project has
failed to be commercially operable for greater than six months, the BESS
project’s owner/operator shall notify the County Zoning Office and then has 12
months from the date of notification to decommission the site(s).
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.12 HEARING FACILITATOR.
   (A)   The county may engage the services of a hearing facilitator. The
hearing facilitator shall be an independent contractor who shall conduct a
hearing in accordance with all applicable rules of the ZBA and the county but
has no adjudicatory responsibility other than ruling on requests for
continuances, procedural matters, admissibility of evidence, and the propriety
of any arguments.
   (B)   The hearing facilitator shall be an attorney, licensed to practice in
the State of Illinois. The applicant shall reimburse the county for fees and
costs charged by the hearing facilitator.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.13 HEARING FACTORS.
   (A)   The County Board may approve a BESS special use permit application if
it finds the evidence complies with federal and state law/regulations and with
the standards of the county’s zoning code and this chapter, including the
factors listed below. The following factors are applied as a balancing test,
not individual requirements to be met.
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the BESS will not
be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or
general welfare;
      (2)   The BESS will not be injurious to the uses and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values of surrounding properties;
      (3)   The establishment of the BESS will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of the surrounding properties;
      (4)   Adequate public utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or will be provided;
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
      (6)   The proposed BESS is not contrary to the objectives of the current
comprehensive plan of the county; and
      (7)   The BESS shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable
regulations of this chapter and the zoning district in which it is located,
except as such regulations may, in each instance, be modified pursuant to the
recommendations of and approved by the County Board.
   (B)   The County Board may also stipulate conditions, guarantees and
restrictions, upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance,
operation, and other aspects of the BESS as are deemed necessary for the
protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards
and requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.14 FEE SCHEDULE AND PERMITTING PROCESSES.
   (A)   Application fees.
      (1)   Prior to processing any special use permit application for a BESS,
the applicant must submit a certified check to the county for the application
fee equal to $2,500 per megawatt (MW) of proposed nameplate capacity, up to a
maximum fee of $250,000. If the total nameplate capacity is below one MW, the
application fee shall be reduced pro rata based on kilowatt (kW) capacity.
These funds shall be placed in an FDIC insured account and will be used to
cover the county’s cost incurred in processing the application.
      (2)   Should the actual costs to the county exceed the submitted
application fee, the applicant shall be responsible for those additional costs
and shall remit additional funds to the county within 15 days of receipt of a
request from the county. No hearings on an application shall be conducted nor
final decisions rendered on an application if there are application fees due to
the county.
      (3)   Any unused amounts of the application fee shall be refunded to the
applicant within six months of the County Board rendering a final decision on
the matter, unless any pending litigation, disputes or negotiations involving
the county exist regarding the BESS, in which case any amounts owed to the
applicant shall be refunded within six months of the conclusion of the
litigation, disputes or negotiations. An applicant may request any unused
application fee be applied toward building permit fees for the facility.
   (B)   Building permit fees. Building permit fees shall be based on the total
construction cost of the BESS project. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit, applicant must deposit a building permit fee equating to $7.50 per
$1,000 of construction cost. With its building permit application, applicant
must provide to the County Zoning Administrator an affidavit showing the total
construction cost. If requested, an itemized affidavit of construction costs
shall also be provided to the County Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Operating permit fees. Applicant shall pay to the county an operating
permit fee of $2,500 per megawatt (MW). If the total nameplate capacity is
below one MW, the operating permit fee shall be reduced pro rata based on
kilowatt (kW) capacity. Applicant or owner/operator shall not begin commercial
operation until such time as the operating permit fee has been paid. If the
owner/operator of the BESS changes, a new operating permit fee shall be paid to
the county for the county’s evaluation of ownership or operator.
   (D)   All costs paid by applicant/owner. In addition to all fees noted
above, the applicant or owner shall pay all costs incurred by the county,
including but not limited to, those costs associated with all offices, boards
and commissions of the county, and third-party costs incurred by the county.
This includes, but is not limited to, the direct or indirect costs associated
with the hearing, permitting, operations, inspections, decommissioning,
litigation, disputes, and/or negotiations.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.15 DEFAULTS AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any BESS declared to be unsafe by the county by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, damage, or abandonment is
hereby declared a public safety issue and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Failure by the applicant, owner, or operator to comply with any
provisions of this chapter, provisions under the special use permit, other
permits, any conditions imposed on the project, and/or failure to comply with
any law or regulation shall constitute a default under this chapter and shall
be grounds for revocation of any special use permit or other permits granted by
the County Board or the county.
   (C)   Prior to implementation of the existing county procedures for the
resolution of such default(s), the appropriate county body shall first provide
written notice to the owner and operator, setting forth the alleged default(s).
The written notice shall provide the owner and operator a reasonable time
period, not to exceed 30 days, for good faith negotiations to resolve the
alleged default(s).
   (D)   If the county determines that the parties cannot resolve the alleged
defaults within the good faith negotiation period, the county shall make
application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with
this chapter or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure
compliance with this chapter.
   (E)   Any violation of this chapter shall be an offense punishable by a fine
of $1,000. Each violation shall be a separate offense. Each day a violation
occurs or continues shall be a separate offense, subject to a $1,000 fine for
each additional day the violation is not corrected. A court may set any
additional and appropriate per day fine for each day the infraction exists or
until such infraction is remedied. It is the goal of this chapter to promote
structural safety to protect the public. The court has the authority to set any
additional appropriate fines and will consider the nature of the offense, the
degree of public safety involved, and the efforts of the county and responsible
owner or applicant to resolve quickly and safely any and all infractions. It is
the intent that any dispute between the parties be resolved promptly and where
possible by informal discussions as outlined elsewhere in this chapter.
   (F)   After the effective date of this chapter, any persons who, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any land, or project developer, located within
the territorial jurisdiction of this chapter, thereafter, proceeds with
development of a BESS prior to being approved under the terms of this chapter
shall be fined as stated herein.
   (G)   The county reserves the right to hire outside counsel to enforce this
chapter or determine compliance with this chapter. The owner/operator is liable
for payment of reasonable attorney’s fees in this regard.
   (H)   Nothing herein shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the applicant, owner, or operator responsible for the project.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
§ 157.16 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety, and
general welfare of the county. These regulations are not intended to repeal,
abrogate, annual, or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws
of the county nor conflict with and laws of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. O-157-03-25, passed 3-13-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   BONDS
      
II.   AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
      
III.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: BONDS
 
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
O-64-10-06 10-12-2006  Authorizing the issuance of collateralized single-family
                       mortgage revenue bonds
O-70-3-08  3-13-2008   Authorizing the issuance of collateralized single-family
                       mortgage revenue bonds
O-79-11-09 11-12-2009  Authorizing the issuance of collateralized single-family
                       mortgage revenue bonds
 
TABLE II: AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
 
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
O-54-5-12-05 5-12-2005   Authorizing intergovernmental cooperation agreement
                         for the joint issuance of revenue bonds
O-94-11-11   11-10-2011  Authorizing intergovernmental cooperation agreement
                         for the joint issuance of revenue bonds
                         Approving intergovernmental agreement between the
O-98-10-12   10-11-2012  County of Macon with Dewitt, Ford, Iroquois,
                         Livingston and Mclean Counties for rural
                         transportation
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No.    Date Passed Description
O-101-11-12 11-8-2012   Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Comcast for a
                        cable communications system
O-103-2-13  2-14-2013   Granting a non-exclusive franchise to NewWave
                        Communications for a communications system
O-141-10-22 10-13-2022  Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Comcast for a
                        cable communications system
                       
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cite Code Section
ILCS Cite                      Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01                 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02                 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03                 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04                 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.08                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09                 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.10                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11                 10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                    10.04
                               33.03 ;
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.           91.44;
                               116.44
5 ILCS 175-101 et seq.         10.02
5 ILCS 315/3                   33.02
10 ILCS 5/1-3                  33.02
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4                33.02
10 ILCS 5/9-3                  33.02
20 ILCS 3855/1-1 et seq.       157.03
35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.          32.05
                               32.01;
35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.          32.02;
                               32.04
                               32.01;
35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.          32.02;
                               32.04
35 ILCS 200/21-205             32.07
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.           31.03
50 ILCS 100/1 et seq.          90.01
50 ILCS 205/1 et seq.          97.04
50 ILCS 750/                   30.03
50 ILCS 750//1 et seq.         31.01
50 ILCS 750/15.4               30.01;
                               30.04
50 ILCS 820                    91.06
55 ILCS 5/5-1006.5(a)          32.03
55 ILCS 5/5-1006.5(b)          32.03
55 ILCS 5/5-1006.7             32.01
55 ILCS 5/5-1006.8             32.06
55 ILCS 5/5-1041               151.01;
                               152.01
55 ILCS 5/5-1042               152.01
55 ILCS 5/5-1049               152.01
55 ILCS 5/5-1052               52.99,
                               112.99
55 ILCS 5/5-1062               152.01
55 ILCS 5/5-1063               151.01;
                               152.01
55 ILCS 5/5-1099               90.03
55 ILCS 5/5-1104               152.01
55 ILCS 5/5-1113               10.99
55 ILCS 5/5-1115               91.23;
                               116.19
55 ILCS 5/5-1118               90.03
55 ILCS 5/5-8006               50.99
55 ILCS 5/5-12001              157.01
55 ILCS 5/5-12009.5            157.07
55 ILCS 5/5-12003              152.01
                               153.01;
55 ILCS 5/5-12020              153.08;
                               156.01;
                               156.08
55 ILCS 5/5-15001 et seq.      152.01
55 ILCS 5/5-15016              52.01
65 ILCS 5/                     10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2                10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                151.01
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12             151.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2              151.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8              151.01
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2              151.01
70 ILCS 31.05/3.01 et seq.     50.20
105 ILCS 5.17-2.11             32.01
210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.         151.07
220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.       113.03;
                               155.005
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)           31.03
220 ILCS 5/21-401              31.03
220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)        31.03
220 ILCS 5/21-801              31.03
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)           31.03
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)    31.03
220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)           31.03
225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.          112.02
225 ILCS 325/4(w)   153.05; 156.05
225 ILCS 605/3                 96.24;
                               96.28
225 ILCS 605/3.2               96.24
235 ILCS 5/                    114.02
235 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.       114.03
235 ILCS 7/1-1 et seq.         114.99
410 ILCS 54/1                  112.01
410 ILCS 625/3.6               95.01
415 ILCS 5/                    50.22
415 ILCS 5/1                   52.02
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.           51.16;
                               51.17
415 ILCS 5/3.05                52.02
415 ILCS 5/3.58                52.02
415 ILCS 5/3.59                52.02
415 ILCS 5/3.60                52.02
415 ILCS 5/3.62                52.02
415 ILCS 5/14.2                52.01
415 ILCS 5/14.3                52.01
                               51.15;
415 ILCS 5/39.2                51.18;
                               51.20
415 ILCS 5/43                  152.01
415 ILCS 5/56-56.7             112.34
415 ILCS 10/1 et seq.          50.24
415 ILCS 20/1 et seq.          50.24
415 ILCS 55/1                  52.02
505 ILCS 100/1-24              157.08
505 ILCS 147/15(a)             153.05;
                               156.05
525 ILCS 10/3                  157.08
510 ILCS 5/2.18                96.28
510 ILCS 5/8                96.05
510 ILCS 5/9                   96.20
510 ILCS 5/9-5/24              96.04
510 ILCS 5/11                  96.21
510 ILCS 5/13                  96.06
                               96.03;
                               96.07 -
510 ILCS 5/24                  96.11;
                               96.14 -
                               96.16
510 ILCS 70/3                  96.12
510 ILCS 70/3.01               96.13
625 ILCS 5/1-188               10.02
625 ILCS 5/11-601              70.01
625 ILCS 5/11-604              70.01
625 ILCS 5/12-602              94.07
625 ILCS 5/15-301 et seq.      70.02
625 ILCS 5/18a-200             71.01
625 ILCS 5/18a-300, subs. (10) 71.01
625 ILCS 5/18a-302             71.01
625 ILCS 5/28-1(a)—(a)(12)   114.41
625 ILCS 5/28-13               114.41
720 ILCS 5/12-10               112.30
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.       91.25;
                               154.225
765 ILCS 205/2                 151.08
820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.         33.01 
820 ILCS 192/1 et seq.         33.05
820 ILCS 192/15(p)             33.05
                               
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.     Date Passed Code Section
G-34-6-83    6-14-1983   97.01—
                         97.08
                         114.01—
                         114.05;
                         114.20—
G-244-6-84   6-12-1984   114.26;
                         114.40—
                         114.45;
                         114.99
                         113.01—
                         113.06;
                         113.20—
                         113.24;
G-1699-11-97 11- -1997   113.35—
                         113.39;
                         113.50—
                         113.54;
                         113.99;
                         Ch. 113 App. A
G-2669-5-04  5-13-2004   33.02
                         152.01—
                         152.03;
                         152.15—
O-62-9-06    9-14-2006   152.24;
                         152.35—
                         152.49;
                         152.99
—          5-8-2008    150.03
G-4111-6-14  6-12-2014   155.025;
                         155.026
                         50.01—
                         50.06;
G-5757-02-25 2-13-2025   50.20—
                         50.25;
                         50.99
                        
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.       Date Passed Code Section
—            - -         93.01—
                           93.03
0-1-6-83       6-14-1983   97.01—
                           97.08
                           114.01—
                           114.05;
                           114.20—
O-5-6-84       6-12-1984   114.26;
                           114.40—
                           114.45;
                           114.99
                           110.01—
O-8-8-85       8-13-1985   110.06;
                           110.99
O-11-2-86      2-11-1986   32.02
O-12-2-86      2-11-1986   32.05
O-13-2-86      2-11-1986   32.04
O-19-2-89      2-14-1989   70.01
O-20-2-89      2-14-1989   70.01
O-21-3-89      3-14-1989   31.02
O-22-5-89      5-9-1989    31.04
O-23-6-89      6-13-1989   50.20—
                           50.25
                           90.01;
                           90.03;
O-25-11-92     11-10-1992  90.04;
                           90.15—
                           90.18;
                           90.99
O-31-12-95     12-14-1995  51.01
O-32-6-96      6-13-1996   31.01
O-33-6-96      6-13-1996   33.01
O-36-8-96      8-8-1996    114.02;
                           114.46
O-37-10-96     10-10-1996  71.01;
                           Ch. 72 Sched. I
O-38-11-96     11-14-1996  30.01—
                           30.05
O-33-6-97      6-12-1997   33.01
                           52.01—
O-41-2-98      2-11-1998   52.07;
                           52.99
O-33-6-98      6-11-1998   33.01
O-43-6-99      6-10-1999   33.01
O-45-6-00      6-8-2000    33.01
O-47-6-01      6-14-2001   33.01
O-48-6-02      6-13-2002   33.01
                           114.05;
O-5-6-02       6-13-2002   114.22;
                           114.46
O-52-6-03      6-12-2003   33.01
O-53-6-04      6-10-2004   33.01
O-54-5-12-05   5-12-2005   TSO II
O-56-6-05      6-9-2005    33.01
                           90.01;
                           90.03;
O-59-4-13-06   4-13-2006   90.04;
                           90.15—
                           90.18;
                           90.99
O-61-6-06      6-8-2006    33.01
                           50.01—
O-60-6-06      6-8-2006    50.06;
                           50.99
                           154.002—
                           154.008;
                           154.025—
                           154.035;
                           154.050—
                           154.053;
                           154.065;
                           154.066;
                           154.068;
                           154.070—
                           154.073;
O-63-9-06      9-14-2006   154.100—
                           154.102;
                           154.125—
                           154.127;
                           154.155—
                           154.158;
                           154.170—
                           154.177;
                           154.190;
                           154.205—
                           154.208;
                           154.220—
                           154.226
O-64-10-06     10-12-2006  TSO I
                           52.21—
O-65-4-07      4-12-2007   52.31;
                           52.99
O-70-3-08      3-13-2008   TSO I
                           150.01—
                           150.14;
O-71-5-08      5-8-2008    150.25;
                           150.26;
                           150.99
                           154.001—
                           154.008;
                           154.025—
                           154.035;
                           154.050—
                           154.054;
                           154.065—
                           154.073;
                           154.085—
                           154.087;
                           154.100—
                           154.102;
                           154.125—
                           154.127;
O-72-5-08      5-8-2008    154.140;
                           154.141;
                           154.155—
                           154.158;
                           154.170—
                           154.177;
                           154.190;
                           154.205—
                           154.208;
                           154.220—
                           154.226;
                           Ch. 154 App. A,
                           B,
                           C,
                           D
O-73-6-08      6-12-2008   33.01
O-75-9-08      9-11-2008   51.15—
                           51.21
                           96.01 -
O-67-6-07      4-9-2009    96.31;
                           96.99
O-77-6-09      6-11-2009   33.01
                           92.01—
                           92.06;
O-78-11-09     11-12-2009  92.08—
                           92.14;
                           92.99
O-79-11-09     11-12-2009  TSO I
                           90.01—
                           90.04;
O-80-12-09     12-10-2009  90.15—
                           90.19;
                           90.99
                           150.01—
                           150.14;
O-83-3-10      3-11-2010   150.25;
                           150.26;
                           150.99
O-85-5-10      5-13-2010   113.37
O-86-6-10      6-10-2010   33.01
O-88-1-11      1-13-2011   152.15;
                           152.99
O-89-1-11      1-13-2011   32.01
O-91-4-11      4-14-2011   150.09
O-93-6-11      6-9-2011    33.01
O-94-11-11     11-10-2011  TSO II
                           155.001—
                           155.008;
                           155.020—
                           155.030;
                           155.045—
                           155.054;
                           155.065—
                           155.070;
                           155.085;
                           155.100;
                           155.115—
                           155.123;
O-95-2-12      2-9-2012    155.135—
                           155.137;
                           155.150;
                           155.151;
                           155.165;
                           155.166;
                           155.180—
                           155.184;
                           155.195—
                           155.201;
                           155.215—
                           155.217;
                           155.999
O-96-6-12      6-14-2012   33.01
O-98-10-12     10-11-2012  TSO II
O-99-10-12     10-11-2012  34.01
O-100-11-12    11-8-2012   31.03
O-101-11-12    11-8-2012   TSO III
                           150.03;
O-102-2-13     2-14-2013   150.08;
                           150.09
O-103-2-13     2-14-2013   TSO III
O-104-6-13     6-13-2013   33.01
                           90.01;
O-105-7-13     7-11-2013   90.15—
                           90.20
                           150.01—
                           150.14;
O-106-2-14     2-13-2014   150.25;
                           150.26;
                           150.99
O-108-5-14     5-8-2014    31.01
                           54.01—
O-109-5-14     5-8-2014    54.14;
                           54.99
O-111-6-14     6-12-2014   33.01
                           94.01—
O-113-9-14     9-11-2014   94.09;
                           94.99
                           53.01—
O-114-1-15     1-8-2015    53.20;
                           53.99
                           112.01;
                           112.02;
                           112.15—
O-115-1-15     1-8-2015    112.18;
                           112.30—
                           112.40;
                           112.50;
                           112.99
                           52.45—
O-116-1-15     1-8-2015    52.57;
                           52.99
O-117-1-15     1-8-2015    70.02
                           115.01—
O-118-1-15     1-8-2015    115.17;
                           115.99;
                           Ch. 115, App. A
O-120-6-15     6-11-2015   33.01
                           115.04,
                           115.07,
O-121-04-16    4-14-2016   115.10,
                           115.11,
                           Ch. 115, App. A
O-122-06-16    6-9-2016    33.01
O-124-11-16    11-10-2016  95.01
O-124-03-17    3-9-2017    33.03
                           151.01—
O-125-03-17    3-9-2017    151.13;
                           151.99
O-126-04-17    4-27-2017   32.03
O-127-06-17    6-8-2017    33.01
O-130-06-18    6-14-2018   33.01
O-131-09-18    9-13-2018   155.008
                           91.01 —
                           91.06,
                           91.20 —
                           91.26,
                           91.40 —
O-132-11-18    11-8-2018   91.55,
                           91.65 —
                           91.68,
                           91.80 —
                           91.83,
                           91.99
O-133-11-18  11-8-2018   52.27,
                           52.28
                           152.01—
                           152.03;
                           152.15—
O-134-12-19    12-12-2019  152.24;
                           152.35—
                           152.49;
                           152.99
O-135-01-20    1-9-2020    32.06
                           155.008;
O-136-01-20    1-9-2020    155.300;
                           155.301
O-137-01-21    1-14-2021   155.300
                           91.06;
                           91.22;
                           91.65;
                           116.01—
                           116.06;
O-138-12-21    12-9-2021   116.15—
                           116.24;
                           116.40—
                           116.54;
                           116.70;
                           116.98;
                           116.99
                           90.01;
O-138-07-21    7-8-2021    90.03;
                           90.05;
                           90.99
O-139-01-22    1-13-2022   155.300,
                           155.301
O-140-06-22    6-9-2022    32.07
O-141-10-22    10-13-2022  TSO III
O-142-12-22    12-5-2022   33.04
O-143-01-23    1-12-2023   155.300,
                           155.301
O-146-05-23    5-11-2023   156.01—
                           156.12
O-147-05-23    5-11-2023   153.01—
                           153.13
O-148-11-23    11-9-2023   96.17
O-149-12-23    12-14-2023  33.05
O-151-05-24    5-9-2024    97.01—
                           97.08
                           116.01—
                           116.06;
                           116.15—
                           116.24;
O-155-10-24    10-10-2024  116.40—
                           116.54;
                           116.70;
                           116.98;
                           116.99
                           91.01—
                           91.06;
                           91.20—
                           91.26;
                           91.40—
O-156-10-24    10-10-2024  91.55;
                           91.65—
                           91.68;
                           91.80—
                           91.82; 91.98;
                           91.99
O-157-03-25    3-13-2025   157.01—157.17
                          
 
